NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that they had signed a contract to fly two U.S. Mars Oxident Experiment (MOX) instruments on the Russian Mars '94 Mission. The contract had a potential value of $1.5 million. The Mars '94 Mission, scheduled to be launched in November 1994, would deploy small landing stations and penetrators and carry instruments to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars. (NASA Release 93-62)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
NASA announced that starting in January 1994, the NASA Science Internet (NSI) would connect research sites in the United States with Russia's Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow.  Nine additional Russian space-related institutions were to be connected through what is called the Russian Space Science Internet (RSSI). (NASA Release 93-196)
A Russian would-be cosmonaut, now in the United States pursuing a doctorate in space policy at American University in Washington, was in Houston for three months on a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts prepare for flights in U.S. spaceships in 1993 and 1995. (LA Times, June 7/93)
Writing in the Christian Science Monitor, James Oberg, a professional space engineer and a specialist on Russian aerospace, hailed the success of Russia's manned Space Station, Mir. He noted that the Mir, launched in 1986, had been continuously occupied since mid-1989 by successive teams of cosmonauts.
The Russian foreign ministry announced that Russia had fully suspended a $359 million contract to sell India rocket engines and the technology needed to make them. (RTw, Aug 4/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
Motorola Inc. announced yesterday that it had contracted with a Russian firm, Khrunichev Enterprises, to launch 21 of the satellites needed for Motorola's proposed $3.37 billion Iridlum communications network. The Iridium project, scheduled to begin operating in 1998, required various government approvals and a definitive financing agreement before it could go forward. (B Sun, Feb 4/93;  WSJ, Feb 4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI, Feb 21/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth on Monday after 189 days in space. The two cosmonauts made four space walks during their stay on the orbiting Space Station Mir and carried out a variety of experiments. (AP, Feb 1/93)
In a Time magazine essay, Dennis Overbye advocated cooperating with the Russians in building the new Space Station. He suggested  that the inclusion of Russia would breathe new life into the tired Space-Station project.  At the very least, he advocated that the Space Station go into a high-inclination orbit so that Russian spacecraft could visit from the Baikonur spaceport and perhaps perform rescue operations. (Time, Jul 19/93)
Russia's Mir Space Station celebrated its seventh anniversary in orbit on February 20. The Mir has given Russian cosmonauts much experience with extended periods in space. About half-dozen cosmonauts have made multiple flights and spent a total of more than a year in orbit. (AP, Feb 19/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
A Deutsche Aerospace AG (DASA) executive called on Europe and the United states to cooperate in setting quotas for launches of Russia's Proton booster rocket until such time as market economy conditions prevailed in Russia. Werner Heinzmann, president of DASA's space systems group, told a news conference that currently the Proton costs only a fraction of a Western launcher because of the value of the rouble. (RTw, June 10/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA announced that it had received a request from Russian physicians treating victims of the recent emergency in Moscow for medical assistance from U.S. clinicians.  The medical consultations were to use a previously established U.S./Russian satellite telemedicine program known as "Spacebridge to Moscow." NASA first became involved in satellite telemedicine programs in the 1970s when a NASA satellite was used for medical consultation and health care delivery to remote sites in Alaska. (NASA Release 93-183)
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the United States and Russia planned a joint mission to Mars in October of 1994. According to the report, the Russian Space Agency and NASA signed an agreement on the Mars-94 project late last year. Scientific equipment on board a Russian space craft would include two small landers with probes for analyzing the Martian surface and atmosphere. The oxidization capability of the Martian soil would also be measured, Tass said. (RTw, Apr 4/93)
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
Space-agency officials from the United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan agreed to invite Russia to join them in building an international Space Station that would be the world's largest collaborative science project. (WSJ, Dec 7/93; B Sun, Dec 7/93; TTw, Dec 6/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
India announced that it would develop powerful rocket technology that it said it had been denied as a result of an accord between Washington and Russia. In that accord, Russia agreed to sell some rockets to India but, bowing to  U. S. pressure, agreed not to provide India with the accompanying technology. (NY Times, Jul 18/93)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
A senior NASA official who asked not to be named said that the agency was seriously considering attaching Space Station Freedom modules to Russia's Mir Space Station and helping refurbish the seven-year-old facility. NASA was also actively looking at combining Freedom with the next-generation Mir Station, which Moscow said it planned to launch around 1996. (Defense Daily, Aug 26/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts orbiting the earth since July  have been forced to extend their stay on the Mir Space Station by 49 days because of a delay in sending a relief craft, a space agency officials announced. (RTW, Oct 16/93)
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said that Russia would start selling foreign countries space technology without the machinery to launch nuclear missiles. Chernomyrdin spoke before leaving Moscow for an official visit to the United States that had been set for June but cancelled after a dispute with Washington over rocket technology sales to India.
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
Roald Sagdeev, director of the Space Research Institute in Moscow from 1973-1988 and now professor of physics at the University of Maryland, and Michael Nacht, dean of the school of public affairs at the university, argued in a New York Times article that NASA should solicit Russian design help and begin plans to modify the Space Station's orbit so that it could be reached by launch vehicles from both the Kennedy Space Center and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The authors also noted that a University of Maryland study commissioned by NASA found that a wider use of Russian technology could reduce costs by up to a billion dollars a year after the station was operational. (NY Times, June 26/93)
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
Two Russia cosmonauts training for a U.S. Shuttle flight said that they were eager to try out America's spaceship. The two cosmonauts had two and one-half years of space experience between them. (AP, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 10/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Three cosmonauts, including one Frenchman, landed in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan after a successful mission aboard the Russian Space Station Mir.  The 22-day Russian-French mission was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan July  1 on board a Soyuz TM-17 craft and two days later docked with Mir. (UPI, Jul 22/93; AP, Jul 22/93)
Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)
The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)
Moscow held its first international aerospace show in Moscow.  As many as 200 foreign aerospace companies and 250 enterprises from all over the former Soviet Union took part in the show, the largest event of its kind ever held in Russia.  Russian military space equipment was on show for the first time. (UPI, Aug 31/93; LA Times, Sept 1/93)
According to news reports, Russia was scheduled to launch an Israeli-made communications satellite in 1995. This was the first such agreement between the two countries. (AP, Apr 21/93)
Russian scientists on the Mir spaceship were scheduled to begin an experiment that involved using a mirror to reflect sunlight down to earth. In the experiment, a 65-foot-diameter disk of aluminum-coated plastic film would be unfurled in space. The experiment would test the possibility of illuminating areas on the Earth with light equivalent to that of several moons. Scientists agree on the need for environmental studies to access the possible effect of such a practice. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; NY Times, Jan 12/97; W Times, Feb 3/93; AP, Feb 3/93; USA Today, Feb 4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA Times, Feb 4/93)
The European Space agency, eager to boost its cooperation with Russia, said that it was studying the joint development of a new generation of space vehicles. Jean-Jacques Dorian, Director of Policy Planning, told journalists on the eve of Moscow's first aerospace show that the agency had contracts worth millions of dollars with a number of Russian firms. (RTw, Aug 30/93)
Science reported that NASA had agreed that NASA and Russian scientists would cooperate in several research projects aboard the Russian Space Station Mir in 1994. The joint effort would be part of a scientific exchange signed by the United States and Russia last July. (Science, May 28/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
The United States and Russia appeared to be nearing a compromise in a dispute over a proposed Russian sale of rocket engines and associated technology to India. Under the expected compromise, Washington would allow Moscow to sell the rocket engines to India but halt the transfer of some associated technology that initially was to be a key part of the deal. The technology was meant to give India the capability to manufacture its own ballistic missile engines, which could be used for either military or commercial space launch vehicles. (AP, Jul 13/93; W Post, Jul 14/93; UPI, Jul 14/93)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
The Washington Times reported that a group of five investors, headed by retired Navy Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, had signed a joint venture agreement with Russia's Association for the Conversion of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles. The group planed to use Russian missiles to put satellites into low orbits to transmit telephone calls or computer data or carry out scientific experiments. (W Times, May 4/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)
A Soyuz spacecraft with a Russian-French crew docked successfully with the Mir-1 orbiting Space Station on July 3. (RTw, July  3/93)
The military's plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit were criticized by the governing council of the American Astronomical Society and some other scientists. Council members were concerned because experience with previous Russian reactors had shown that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt x-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." Society officials noted that they were not opposing the mission or the use of nuclear reactors in space; rather they were asking that the test be conducted at higher levels, which would presumably be safer.
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
The  Washington Times reported that the former Soviet military had welcomed the U.S. decision to scrap most of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev called the decision a "reasonable decision" and said that "it seems there's no reason to raise the possibility again" of putting weapons in space. (W Times, May 18/93)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA and the Russian State Committee for the Defense Branches of industry signed a memorandum of understanding in Moscow to cooperate in eight areas of fundamental aeronautical sciences.  The agreement called for cooperative activities in the following areas: transition and turbulence, composite structures and materials, chemically reacting flows, thermal protection system materials, environmental concerns in aviation, hypersonic technologies, experimental test facilities, and advanced aerospace materials. (NASA Release 93-22)
Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)
The United States and Russia reached a last-minute agreement on the sale of rocket engines and related technology  to India.  The deal would allow some of the rocket engines to be transferred to India but would limit the transfer of technology and would not impose any sanctions on Russia, (Reuters, Jul 16/93; APn, Jul 17/93
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency (ESA) have invited Russia to help them build a new Space Station, according to an announcement by the ESA. (RTW, Oct 18/93; NASA Release N93-650)
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
Russia agreed to help build a U.S. atom smasher in Waxahachie, Texas. Russian scientists would be involved in the design, engineering, and production of two of the Collider's booster accelerators in addition to its experimental detectors. According to the terms of the agreement, which could add $100 million to the Russian economy and save the U.S. a similar amount, Russia would provide Russian hardware at half price. (WSJ, Jan 7/93; USA Today, Jan 7/93)
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
A Washington Times editorial questioned the wisdom of the space partnership between Russia and the United States, finding significant problems with the agreement. First, should the Russian fascists come to power, the United States would have provided a hostile government with very detailed insights into the state of our advanced technologies. Second, the writer charged, the United States was being tricked into purchasing obsolete equipment for the joint station; third, Russia's space launch base, called Baikonur, was reported to be badly decayed; and, fourth, there were issues of crew safety--two fires were known to have taken place in similar modules of Russian Space Stations and the Russians had not provided complete details of these events.
