Russian television on the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed various Russian space flights. The correspondent said that much was known about Salyut flights 1, 6, and 7 but nothing had been publicized about Salyut 2, 3, and 5 missions. It developed that the flight engineers for these missions were military cosmonauts and that they involved Almaz orbital reconnaissance stations. The Almaz hulls were launched as Salyuts, the first unsuccessfully in 1973 and two more in 1974 and 1976. A cosmonaut who flew on one of these, V.V. Gorbatko, was quoted as saying that the initial intention was to arm the Almaz station but the one on which he flew had reconnaissance equipment only. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 30/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
At Russia's request, the Federal Aviation Administration was about to launch a sweeping inspection of Russia's airlines and air safety controls. The review resulted from three serious air crashes in Russia during the year and dire warnings of the dangers of Russian air travel. (W Post, Aug 27/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
The International Space Station was entering a decisive six-month period in which governments in the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada were poised to sign the final industrial contracts and intergovernmental accords needed to build the facility. Barring unforeseen developments, the European Space Agency would be unable to commit itself to the Space Station before November 1995, when its member governments' ministers were scheduled to convene. Other remaining hurdles were the signing of the prime contract for Station hardware between NASA and the Boeing Company; the conclusion of a smaller contract between the Canadian Space Agency and Spar Aerospace; a final round of negotiations bringing Russia into full Station partnership; and an agreement among the partners on who would contribute what to the Station's upkeep and the apportioning of access to the Station's limited electricity and other resources. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Partner met in Paris with officials of the Russian Federation for the first time to discuss steps to implement the decision to bring Russia into the Space Station partnership. The resulting joint statement referred to Russia's planned contribution, enhancing Station capabilities, needed changes to the legal framework of the 1988 agreements to include Russia, and a schedule to complete negotiations, beginning with an April meeting. (NASA Editor's Note N94-23)
Rene Pellat, head of the French space organization CNES, said that both the Mars 94 and Mars 96 proposed Russian missions with large international participation were to be postponed by at least two years because of Russia's economic difficulties. (W Times, May 15/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar arrived in Russia to begin their yearlong training. The training was to stress physical conditioning, essential for long-duration space flights in order to counter bone and muscle deterioration. The astronauts were to wear Russian space suits bearing both Russian and U.S. flags. (AP, Feb 24/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia had launched the Kosmos-2290 military satellite from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. (W Times, Aug 30/94)
Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)
In order to carry out a complex docking experiment that involved detaching the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir and then redocking using automatic systems, the three cosmonauts aboard the Russian Space Station would remain in space an additional day. The operation was carried out successfully on November 2. On November 4, the German scientist and two cosmonauts returned to Earth. (Reuters, Nov 2/94; Phoenix Gazette, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; UP, Nov 4/94)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
Russia again postponed the launch of the Spektr research module, scheduled to rendezvous with Space Station Mir in December. Itar-Tass news agency reported that the launch had been postponed until May 1995. (Itar-Tass, Nov 17/94)
France planned on its next manned mission to Russian Space Station Mir in January 1996 to use an advanced Aerospatiale system called Alice 2 to improve knowledge of fluid behavior in microgravity conditions for use in materials processing. (AvWk, Dec 12/94)
Franklin Chang-Diaz, a Costa Rican immigrant to the United States, addressed the National Hispanic University mathematics and science convocation in San Jose to tell Hispanic students how he became the first Hispanic in space. He flew with the NASA five-person crew with Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev on Shuttle Discovery in February. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 22/94)
The General Accounting Office issued a report to the Congress stating that Russian participation in the U.S. Space Station project would add nearly $400 million to the Station's cost as well as $1.4 billion for other NASA programs that supported the Station, instead of saving that amount, as had been predicted. (Reuters, Aug 2/94; P Inq, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 3/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
NASA announced names of members of the crew of Atlantis for its mission in mid-1995 to perform the first docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. Robert L. Gibson was to command the 10-day mission, which was to include a Spacelab module. (NASA Release 94-90; H Chron, Jun 4/94; H Post, Jun 4/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
Interfax news agency reported that following unsuccessful talks with Kazakhstan about extending the use of its traditional base at Baikonur, Russia planned to launch a post-Soviet space ship in 1996 from its own territory, using the rocket complex at the city Svobodny-18 in the northeastern Amur region. (Reuters, May 5/94)
Russian cosmonauts Vasily Tsibliyev and Alexander Serebrov on the Soyuz TM-17 landed safely and without incident after six months in the Mir station, although the module had collided with Mir before descent. They were replaced by two cosmonauts, including Valery Polyakov, due to stay a record-breaking 14 months in space, to break the record 366 days set by Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov in 1988--1989. (Reuters, Jan 14/94)
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
The United States and Ukraine signed a five-year civil space agreement the week of November 21, which established direct cooperation between NASA and the Ukrainian National Space Agency and created the legal basis for bilateral scientific cooperation. The agreement, which provided for cooperation in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, biomedical sciences and biotechnology, and space research and technology, was described as "almost exactly the same" as the 1992 agreement with Russia. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that a Russian spaceship manned by a Russian and a Kazakh cosmonaut had docked with Mir. (H Post, Jul 4/94)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
The Russian embassy in Washington announced that during Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin's visit to the United States the week of June 20, an agreement on joint space exploration was scheduled to be signed. (Reuters, Jun 20/94; USA Today, Jun 21/94; AP, Jun 21/94
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts on Mir had completed the first in a series of U.S. experiments using NASA's Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS). SAMS was activated October 4 to collect vibration data in preparation for future chemistry and physics experiments. (NASA Release 94-168)
A Russian television program, "Science Today," commented on the roles of the Russian Energiya-Buran and the U.S. Space Shuttle systems in reducing the costs of placing payloads in space. In this connection the program promoted the potential of the Russian-Ukrainian project "Maks" based on an existing aircraft, the Mriya. The Russian Maks program was commended by G. Le. Lozino-Lozinskiy, general designer of the "Molniya" and British Aerospace agreed it was necessary to begin building winged transport systems with the Maks and presented the Maks system to the European Space Agency. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 29/94)
NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station, Wilbur C. Trafton, said he expected Russia to participate in the Space Station partnership in accordance with the agreement reached in 1993. Such participation was scheduled to allow the project to be completed in June 2002 instead of 2003 and save $2 billion. If Russia should withdraw from participation, backup plans existed. (AP, Feb 18/94; Reuters, Feb 18/94)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
A feature article, accompanied by photographs of Mount Rainier and of the newly exploding Russian volcano taken from the radar images brought back by Space Shuttle Endeavour, commended the extraordinary quality of NASA's Spaceborne Imaging Radar. It discussed the process by which more than 500 sites were reviewed and gave particular attention to efforts to further define ancient Ubar, buried beneath desert sand. (Newsday, Nov 15/94)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)
Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)
In discussing the training of two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William Saxe, NASA's representative in Moscow, was quoted as saying that when the astronauts arrived in February, they were refused maps or phone books of Star City, their training center, because these were considered top secret. However, the astronauts were not denied entrance to any of the buildings. The astronauts were not to begin training with Russian cosmonauts until the fall. (NY Times, Aug 21/94)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)
NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
NASA announced the appointment of astronaut Ronald M. Sega as Director of Operations, Russia in charge of NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, near Moscow. His assignment was to support training and preparations of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City. (NASA Release 94-182)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)
A congressional report, based on a House Subcommittee on Space tour of the European and Russian space communities, said Europeans were tired of U.S. changes in the International Space Station project and uncertain about U.S. plans to take Russia in as a full partner. The report also expressed concern about how well Russia could support its part of the Space Station agreement. (AP, Mar 23/94)
NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)
U.S. astronauts and Russian cosmonauts met at the 10th congress of the Association of Space Explorers that opened in Moscow. Participants stressed the importance of space cooperation now that the space race was over. The conference theme was devoted to protecting Earth's ecology. (AP, Aug 9/94)
After an unsuccessful attempt to link with the Mir Space Station, an unmanned Progress M-24 Russian cargo craft was scheduled to try again on August 30. A Russian spokesman said the docking mechanism of the Progress appeared too sensitive for the Mir's vibrations. The attempt of Progress to dock August 30 again was unsuccessful. However, on September 1 a Russian cosmonaut successfully docked the unmanned supply ship. (AP, Aug 29/94; Reuters, Aug 29/94; C Trib, Aug 31/94; UP, Sep 2/94; NY Times, Sep 3/94; W Post, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 3/94; P Inq, Sep 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
As part of the Administration's efforts to gain congressional support for NASA's International Space Station project, NASA was considering removal of the Russian Salyut Functional Cargo Block (FGB) vehicle from the redesigned configuration. If the FGB were removed, which some key members of Congress wanted in order to reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA might replace it with Lockheed's Bus-1. Following the March International Space Station System Design Review, international partners and White House advisers, including members of the presidential panel reviewed the Station redesign and, in general, seemed favorably disposed to the Station. The panel was headed by Charles Vest, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (AvWk, Apr 11/94)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)
During a visit to Cape Canaveral with his crewmates, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Titov familiarized himself with the Spacehab module that was scheduled to be carried on his Shuttle flight in February 1995. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)
NASA announced that it, a team of U.S. aircraft and engine manufacturers, and the Russian aircraft firm, Tupolev Design Bureau, planned to use a Russian Tu-144 supersonic transport as a flying testbed for conducting flight research on high-speed enabling technologies. Included in the U.S. team were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, General Electric, and Pratt and Whitney. (NASA Release 94-143; Antelope Valley Press, Sep 1/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that two Russian cosmonauts had returned to Earth near Arkalyk, Kazakhstan, after nearly six months on board Space Station Mir. They left behind a colleague who intended to break the current record of 366 consecutive days spent in space by remaining on Mir 429 days. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; AP, Jul 9/94)
NASA's Office of Space Communications announced the installation of a Video Teleconference System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, to expand video teleconferencing coverage to Russia. The installation supplemented the university's existing video teleconferencing capabilities with the Russian Institute of Space Research in Moscow. The new facility allowed NASA scientists and engineers to work directly with Soviet researchers. (NASA Release 94-28)
Victor Blagov, deputy head of Russian space missions, said that the six cosmonauts on the aging Mir Space Station would have to ration electricity for several months after the craft's solar batteries were unexpectedly drained. Problems first appeared on October 11 after a powerful piece of electrical equipment suddenly sprang to life, shutting down part of the Station and running down four of the six batteries. Four other solar batteries could not be put aboard Mir until the middle of 1995. (Reuters, Oct 25/94)
From Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russia launched one of its Gorizont communications satellites for the U.S. firm Rimsat, putting it into orbit at about 22,300 miles above Earth. This was the second launch of a Russian spacecraft for Rimsat. The Gorizont went into orbit over Malaysia, with AllAsia Sat of Manila as its first customer. (UP, May 20/1994)
An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)
NASA announced that the first set of solar array modules for the International Space Station program were to be shipped from the United States to Russia at the end of May. The modules were prototypes of flight units to be delivered in September to be incorporated into advanced solar arrays for use on Russia's Space Station Mir. (NASA Release 94-79; UP, May 23/94)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
An editorial in a major space journal urged that the European Space Agency (ESA) not abandon its Columbus space station module program, despite a redesign of the Freedom station in favor of a U.S./Russian station core. This threat, due to funding crises in Germany and Italy, would jeopardize one of ESA's own justifications for existence. While ESA's near-term strategy is to maintain Columbus and increase ESA's participation in the station, its long-term strategy is for an advanced crew transfer spacecraft for station operations--a major European technological development. The U.S., Russia, Japan and Europe all need this new vehicle. Launched by Ariane-5, it should be ready around 2005-2007, after Columbus in 2001. Further, European managers rightly stressed that the station program should make better use of Ariane 5 for resupply as well as launches, but costs now 30 percent over budget must be reduced. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
The media reported that Pratt & Whitney and Rockwell International were negotiating a potential $1 billion deal with Russian aircraft manufacturer Ilyushin to produce jetliners. The project could involve the initial purchase of 20 aircraft by Aeroflot Russian International Airlines and create $1 billion in U.S. exports. Pratt & Whitney would provide the engines and Rockwell would provide the avionics The Il-96M is a four-engine wide-body craft that carries 300 passengers. (P Inq, Jan 22/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
Russia inherited the Soviet Union's ambitions in space but lacked its main launch pads. Russian President Boris Yeltsin in a visit to his Kazakh counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, hoped to sign a 30-year lease on the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The outcome was a 20-year lease with an option to renew for 10 more years, and an annual payment of about $115 million. However, should this effort proved unsuccessful, Russia was developing other sites. Russian space scientists considered the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Far North unsuitable for manned flights, but Colonel General Vladimir Ivanov told the Itar-Tass news agency that Russia planned to build a major new space center in the Far East at Svobodny, north of Blagoveshchensk. (LA Times, Mar 28/94; Reuters, Mar 28/94; W Post, Mar 29/94)
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
Three cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station Mir celebrated the eighth anniversary of the Soviet Union's launch of Mir in 1986. (AP, Feb 20/94; W Times, Feb 21/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.
Russian Military Space Forces official Sergei Gorbunov said that Russia had decided to develop a new giant booster rocket that was to have a reusable first stage and burn a special, safer low-pollution fuel mixture. The rocket, Angara-24, would be appropriate for a new Far Eastern launch site if Russia decided to build it as an alternative to the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The booster was to be tested in 1998 and the first launch was planned for 2000. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported from Moscow that nine Russian women went into training for long-haul space flights by starting a four-month stint of lying with their heads below their feet. The Institute of Medicobiological Problem was in charge of the experiment, which simulated lengthy space flights aboard the Mir Space Station. One woman was to be selected to fly on Mir in November. (Reuters, Feb 18/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94)
One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronaut Kenneth D. Cameron to manage NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, and at the Russian control center at Kaliningrad. (NASA Release 94-27)
Russia's Interfax news agency reported that the previous week a fire had destroyed a control facility at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Experts stated, however, that launches would not be affected. (AP, Mar 15/94)
NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)
Space News reported on the financial and other difficulties confronting the Russian space program. Few of the staff of the Russian Space Agency (RSA) were receiving pay checks; many space workers were on unpaid leave and other scientists and engineers had left RSA; unlike NASA, RSA had oversight responsibility but did not manage space projects, leading to power struggles with companies engaged in space work and with the military with whom RSA must negotiate such matters as rental fees for using military facilities for launches. (SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
