The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
Russia launched a satellite carrying two monkeys and a collection of insects, snails, and plants. The satellite Bion-11 launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Moscow. The Russian Space Agency planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the animal “crew.”(Reuters, “Russia Launches Satellite with Monkeys, Insects,” 24 December 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russia’s work on the orbiting laboratory’s nerve center. Without Russia’s contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, “Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station,” Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
A delegation from the U. S. Congress traveled to Russia to meet with Russian Space Agency officials. Representatives Jerry Lewis (R-CA) and F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), members of the subcommittee in charge of NASA’s funding⎯the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies⎯led the contingent. Their goal was to keep intact the coalition of countries dedicated to making the International Space Station (ISS) a reality. Faced with Russian insistence that the planned space station connect with the Russian space station Mir, the U.S. lawmakers warned Russian officials not to pursue radical changes in the plans for the space station. Sensenbrenner noted that obstinacy on the part of the Russians might result in the coalition’s building the ISS without Russian involvement.(Ben Lannotta, “Congress to Russia: Drop Mir–Station Link Idea,” Space News, 15–21 January 1996, 3, 20.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
The Russian-built Tu-144LL supersonic passenger jet, which U.S. and Russian aerospace industries and NASA had modified for commercial purposes, performed well in its first test flight after refurbishment. The aircraft took off from the Zhukovsky Airfield south of Moscow. During the Tu-144LL flight, researchers studied the impact of excessive speeds on the aircraft’s internal and exterior surfaces, engine temperature, and handling. The aircraft’s body, constructed primarily from light aluminum alloy, held up well during the initial test. The Tu-144LL project supported NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, which had begun in 1990, to encourage the development of technologies supporting supersonic commercial travel. The Boeing Company had led the U.S. industry involvement in the project, with support from McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Rockwell International Corporation, Pratt & Whitney, and General Electric Company. The project’s aim was to prepare flight-research facilities to adapt to market demands of the future. Aviation experts predicted that a commercial market for advanced supersonic transport would evolve early in the 21st century.(NASA, “First Flight of U.S.-Russian Supersonic Testbed Scheduled for Nov. 29,” news release N96-78, 26 November 1996; “Russian Tu-144LL SST Joint NASA Flying Laboratory—Flight November 29, 1996,” http://nix.larc.nasa.gov/info;jsessionid=1f4kro1asktqm?id=EC96-43859-2&orgid=7 (accessed 1 August 2007).)
