NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
EarthWatch Inc. of Longmont, Colorado, launched into orbit Early Bird 1, the first private spy satellite. The launch, which took place in Russia, ended government domination of space spying. According to EarthWatch, Early Bird 1 had the capability to track objects on Earth as small as 10-feet (3-meters) long. The company also reported that “customers were lining up to buy images.” Customers for Early Bird 1 services included public interest groups, planning to track military movement and arms control measures, and foreign governments, without the resources to launch their own satellites. Because Early Bird 1 was an American-produced satellite, the U.S. federal government retained the right to switch it off during wartime, as well as the right to filter images sold to foreign customers. Experts predicted that the security and privacy questions surrounding the first private spy satellite would take years to sort out. However, they also surmised that Early Bird 1 was only the first in the wave of satellites that private industry would launch during the coming decade.(William J. Broad, “First Civilian Spy Satellite Soars into Space, Launched in Russia by a U.S. Company,” New York Times, 25 December 1997; Reuters, “1st Civilian Spy Satellite Launched in Russia,” 26 December 1997.)
A relief crew of two Russian cosmonauts, Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov, arrived at Mir to begin repair work on the damaged space station. On 25 June 1997, Mir had suffered its worst accident, when a robotic supply craft attempting to dock pierced the exterior of one of its research modules. The arriving crew, carrying tools and equipment, also had difficulty docking. As Soyuz approached Mir, its autonomic docking system failed, forcing Solovyev to override the system and pull Soyuz back. Solovyev then successfully docked the relief vehicle using manual controls. The crew planned to repair Mir’s failing oxygen-generating system, before reconnecting the damaged research module to the rest of the station. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency stressed that Mir had sufficient oxygen reserves in the event that the oxygen generator failed altogether. After repairing the oxygen system and the research module, the new crew planned to make as many as six spacewalks to repair the external damage caused by the June collision. Cosmonaut Solovyev brought significant experience to the mission; he had resided on Mir during four earlier missions, spending a total of 456 days in space. NASA planned for British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to remain on Mir, although the Russian Space Agency was replacing its crew aboard the space station.(Baltimore Sun (MD), “Relief Team Reaches Crippled Mir Space Station,” 8 August 1997; Reuters, “Two Cosmonauts Blast Off on Mission To Repair Mir,” 6 August 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Rocket To Repair Station,” 6 August 1997; Reuters, “New Crew Faces Hydra of Woes on Mir Space Station,” 5 August 1997.)
The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the craft’s docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progress’s docking tempered Russia’s celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, “Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn,” 5 March 1997; Reuters, “Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking,” 4 March 1996; Reuters, “Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag” 6 March 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russia’s many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, “Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails,” Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, “Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch,” 20 May 1997.)
NASA reported that one of the two monkeys sent into space aboard the Russian Bion-11 flight in December 1996 had died upon completing postmission tests in Moscow. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that they would investigate the death. According to observers, both monkeys aboard the mission returned to Earth alert and active. The purpose of the flight was to investigate further the effects of spaceflight on the musculoskeletal system.(Associated Press, “Russian Space Monkey Multik Dies,” 12 January 1997; NASA, “Monkey Dies After Completing 14-Day Bion Mission,” news release 97-8, 9 January 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
Mir’s crew had to abandon a German-built robotic camera called the Inspector, which Russian space officials had hoped would capture precise images of the holes in the Spektr module, made when the a cargo craft crashed into Mir in June 1997. The camera had failed immediately after its launch, diverting from its planned course. After attempting for several hours to redirect the Inspector, the crew made plans to change Mir’s orbit, to avoid a collision with the unruly robot. The malfunctioning Inspector was the latest in the long string of accidents and malfunctions that had forced the three Russian-American crew members aboard Mir to spend nearly as much time on maintenance as on scientific research.(Reuters, “Mir To Abandon Robot Space Camera After Failure,” 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Robot Fails, Floats Free Near Mir,” 18 December 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheed’s capital resources with Intersputnik’s rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europe⎯burgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, “Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture,” Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, “Lockheed Planning Russia Venture,” 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, “Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
NASA announced the promotion of Gretchen W. McClain to the position of Acting Director of Space Station Requirements. As Director, McClain took over responsibility for establishing policy and standards for the ISS, as NASA continued to plan for the space station, with ongoing support from the Russian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, Japan, and Canada.(NASA, “NASA Names Acting Space Station Director,” news release, 97-15, 23 January 1997.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, who had spent more than six months aboard Mir in 1996, received the Order of Friendship Medal from Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin in a ceremony at the Kremlin. The medal was the highest honor available to a non-Russian citizen.(NASA, “Astronaut Shannon Lucid Receives Russian Order of Friendship Medal,” news release 97-103, 19 May 1997.)
Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov conducted an “internal” spacewalk, entering the damaged Spektr module of Mir. Once inside the darkened module damaged by the June 1997 cargo craft collision, the men found floating space debris. Seven bags and a refrigerator door were among the items banging around inside the Spektr module. After securing the debris, the cosmonauts went to work installing new solar-panel cables to restore full power to Mir. The cosmonauts, who were wearing bulky spacesuits, performed the 6-hour spacewalk inside a cramped module. Although the men became exhausted before they could finish the repair work, the arduous exercise had boosted the station’s power supply by 30 percent. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the cosmonauts to conduct another repair operation during the following days.(David Hoffman, “A Partial Repair Gives Mir a Power Boost,” Washington Post, 21 October 1997; Associated Press, “A Spacewalk of Surprises Aboard Mir,” 21 October 1997.)
A Russian cargo spacecraft docked without incident at the Mir space station, using the craft’s automatic pilot to complete the maneuver. It was the first successful docking after two previous failed attempts, one of which had resulted in the crash that seriously damaged Mir. To address the earlier problem, the Russian Space Agency had reconfigured the mathematical formula guiding the procedure. The Progress M-36 cargo craft carried a backup computer for the space station. Mir’s crew planned to unload the more than 6,000 pounds (2,700 kilograms) of cargo in the days following the delightfully uneventful docking.(Washington Post, “Cargo Ship Docks with Space Station,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Successful Docking Gives Mir a Life in Morale,” 8 October 1997; Reuters, “Mir Crew To Unload Cargo After Text-Book Docking,” 8 October 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, “Spacewalk,” USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, “Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task,” Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
Mir cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov engaged in a 6-hour spacewalk, successfully dismantling a damaged solar panel so that Mir’s crew could install a replacement panel. The Russian Space Agency nearly called off the spacewalk when Solovyev discovered a problem with the radio-monitoring system on his spacesuit, just as the men prepared to leave the station. Although the crew’s attempts to repair the monitoring system were unsuccessful, Russian Mission Control eventually decided to proceed with the spacewalk. The cosmonauts worked effectively, communicating with Russian space officials only periodically. This was Solovyev’s fourth spacewalk during his tenure on Mir, confirming his status as the world’s most experienced spacewalker, with more than a dozen spacewalks to his credit. While the cosmonauts worked outside Mir, U.S. astronaut David A. Wolf monitored their progress from inside.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 November 1997.)
As the two cosmonauts worked to repair the failing Mir space station, President Boris N. Yeltsin allowed the Russian government to borrow US$100 million from foreign banks, giving the Russian Space Agency an infusion of capital. Yeltsin announced the decision after touring the construction facilities where Russia planned to build its contributions to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency’s cash-flow problems had resulted in construction delays and failure to meet deadlines, postponing the completion of the entire ISS.(Associated Press, “Government Will Borrow $100 Million for Space Agency,” 9 August 1997.)
Two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, returned to Earth after spending more than six months aboard the Mir space station. The New York Times echoed the feelings of many in the space community, calling the six months the Russians had spent in space, “six of the least glorious months in the history of manned space flight.” During their departure from Mir, Tsibliyev and Lazutkin continued to experience the same type of problem that had characterized their tenure on board the space station. The two cosmonauts, scheduled to disengage from Mir in the Soyuz spacecraft and then to circle the space station, cancelled the exercise because of concern that the two spacecraft would collide. After the cosmonauts landed in the desert of Kazakhstan, Tsibliyev recounted to an international press corps the difficult mission that he and Lazutkin had endured aboard Mir, remarking that the two cosmonauts should not become the scapegoats for Russia’s problems in space. The collision
The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research center’s energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the country’s piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradov’s success.(Associated Press, “2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission,” 6 August 1997.)
Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agency’s support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled “Space Flight Has a Price.” Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Kara’s crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, “Mir⎯the Movie,” 5 November 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
Vladimir Lobachyov, head of Russian Mission Control, explained to reporters that the collision of the robotic cargo craft Progress with the Mir space station had probably punctured one of the space station’s solar batteries, damaging Mir’s power supply. The crew of the damaged Mir turned the space station to face directly toward the Sun, so that Mir would get the jolt of energy necessary to boost its solar-power supply.(Reuters, “Mir Crew Turns to Sun To Help Damaged Space Station,” 26 June 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
Mir’s main computer failed during a cargo craft docking, setting the Russian space station adrift. The malfunction postponed a planned spacewalk to begin repairs to Mir, forcing the crew to turn its attention to reorienting the space station toward the Sun. The crew shut down most of Mir’s operating systems to conserve power.(Shannon Tangonan, “Computer Shutdown Sends Mir Adrift,” USA Today, 19 August 1997; Michael Specter, “Computer Failure on the Mir Sends It Out of Control,” New York Times, 19 August 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
Professional and amateur astronomers in northern China and in the eastern reaches of Russia witnessed the near-simultaneous occurrence of a total solar eclipse and an unimpeded view of Comet Hale-Bopp. According to news reports, tens of thousands of people crowded city streets and braved freezing temperatures to observe the spectacle, many using pieces of smoked glass to protect their eyes. Mohe County in China’s northern tip had banned the use of smoke-producing stoves and other heating devices, to keep the air as clear as possible for the view. Chinese television stations broadcast the event, only the third time in recorded history when a full eclipse and the passing of a nearby comet had occurred simultaneously.(Associated Press, “Comet, Eclipse Dazzle Chinese, Russians,” 10 March 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
