A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, “Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan,” 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches,” 6 July 1999.)
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, “Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan,” 18 July 1999. 210)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
Celebrating the anniversary of the flight of Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin presented state medals to several dozen cosmonauts and space officials during a Cosmonaut’s Day ceremony. Yeltsin briefly praised Mir’s achievements in his remarks at the Kremlin, but when Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev presented him with a model of the new ISS, Yeltsin asked Koptev whether Mir would stay aloft. Koptev responded in the affirmative, but explained during a press conference afterward that private investors had not yet produced funds for Mir’s continued operation. Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, a lawmaker and former cosmonaut, called on Russians to contribute money to a charity formed to keep Mir in orbit.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 12 April 1999.)
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, “Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes,” 4 October 1999.)
Kazakhstan partially lifted its ban on launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, permitting a Russian Progress cargo spacecraft to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Kazakhstan had agreed to permit the Progress launch after receiving Russia’s promise to pay a US$115 million fee for the use of the launch facility. Russia had agreed to pay US$50 million in cash by November 1999 and US$65 million in goods by 2000. Kazakhstan’s launch ban on Proton-K rockets remained in effect.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan Lifts Space Ban, Russian Launch Cleared,” 14 July 1999; Associated Press, “Russia- Kazakhstan-Space,” 14 July 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency signed a cooperative agreement with Russian arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, “intended to raise Russia’s earnings on the world market and help it develop space hardware.” Russia had earned only US$800 million, compared to the United States’ US$50 billion, in commercial satellite launches during 1998. Rosvooruzheniye hoped the deal would help Russia break into the international space markets.(CNN.com, “Russia’s Space Agency, Arms Exporter Sign Cooperation Deal,” 25 February 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz booster launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome 450 miles (724 kilometers) north of Moscow, carrying German, French, and Swedish research devices. In selecting the launch location, Russia was attempting to increase its use of the Plesetsk launch facility because of its problems continuing to launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia had rented the Baikonur launch facility from Kazakhstan.(Reuters, “Russian Rocket Blasts Off from Plesetsk Cosmodrome,” 9 September 1999. 220)
GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
After having agreed in June 1998 to abandon the space station within a year, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov issued a decree to keep Mir in space for three more years, using private funds, so that Russia could dedicate its insufficient space budget to its ISS commitments. The decree reportedly mentioned that Russian and foreign contractors and investors would develop a plan allowing Mir to remain in orbit without using ISS-allocated funds.(Peter N. Spotts, “Saving Mir: At What Cost to New Space Station? Russians Decree That They Will Keep Aging Orbital Outpost Raises Questions in U.S. About Their Ability To Fund International Project,” Christian Science Monitor, 25 January 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency’s “space mirror” failed to unfurl properly at the Mir space station, and Russia officially terminated the experiment. Crew attached the mirror to a cargo spacecraft filled with trash, sending it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. Engineers had intended the 83-foot (25-meter) mirror to “work like an artificial [M]oon,” acting as a prototype for larger mirrors that “could illuminate [S]un-starved northern cities through the long Arctic nights and spotlight disaster areas.” The experiment’s failure was a “big disappointment” for the Russian Space Agency, which had hoped to display “its ability to conduct pioneering, ambitious projects despite a lack of funds.”(Vladimir Isachenkov for the Associated Press, “Russia-Space Mirror,” 5 February 1999.)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, “Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean,” 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, “Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESA’s Working Methods,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russia’s commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstan’s foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and French cosmonaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré replaced scientific equipment on Mir’s exterior during a planned 5-hour spacewalk that went overtime. The pair overcame “numerous technical blips,” to complete the French portion of the tasks and most of the Russian portion. Malfunctions in their spacesuits’ ventilation systems delayed both men in leaving the station. Other problems included equipment failure during a simulated repair to an imaginary hole on Mir’s superstructure; an unsuccessful attempt to retrieve data from a pollution study in process around the station; and the failure to install a new Russian-sponsored experiment to measure cosmic rays. Cosmonauts succeeded in other tasks during the spacewalk, including the recuperation of a French-sponsored test and the installation on the station’s hull of comet technology designed to gather space dust for analysis. Haigneré was on his second mission to Mir, but this was his first spacewalk.(Agence France-Presse, “Cosmonauts Struggle Through Grueling Space Walk Program,” 19 April 1999.)
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haigneré of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, “U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961⎯September 30, 2000,” in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, “Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban,” 1 September 1999.)
Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russia’s Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASA’s Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS “years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia.” Colladay said that Trafton’s background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him “particularly well suited to lead ILS.”(Lockheed Martin, “Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services,” news release, 26 March 1999,” http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
Interfax news agency reported that Russia had agreed to pay Kazakhstan US$400,000 in damages following the 27 October crash of a Proton rocket during its launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. After reaching an agreement on compensation, Kazakhstan had lifted its launch ban for all Russian launches except the Proton rocket.(Associated Press, “Russia-Kazakstan-Rockets,” 19 November 1999.)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
Two Russian cosmonauts carried out a successful 51⁄2-hour spacewalk outside Mir, installing equipment and opening the antenna that they had failed to unfold properly in a previous spacewalk. Russian space officials said that the spacewalk was most likely the last to occur at Mir. This was the seventh spacewalk for Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and the eighth spacewalk for Flight Engineer Sergei V. Avdeyev, who had spent a record-making, cumulative total of 717 days in space.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Make Final Spacewalk,” 28 July 1999.)
The Boeing Company named former cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov as the company’s director for Space and Communications, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, located in Boeing’s Moscow office. With the appointment, Titov became responsible for initiating new business opportunities, working closely with Boeing’s ISS program members and with Russian and Ukrainian partners on the Sea Launch program. A cosmonaut since 1976, Titov had commanded several Soyuz missions, served as a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle missions, and lived aboard Russia’s Mir space station, logging 387 days in space, including nearly 19 hours of extravehicular activity.(The Boeing Company, “Director Space & Communications for Russia and CIS Named,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990615r.html (accessed 8 February 2008).)
Kazakhstan’s Finance Minister, Uraz Dzhandosov, announced that Russia had paid US$12.5 million as a first installment of its debt to Kazakhstan, fulfilling a condition of the agreement between the two countries. Kazakhstan had demanded the payment as part of the terms of lifting the launch ban it had imposed on Russia when a Russian Proton rocket exploded after liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.(Russia Today, “Russia Pays First Part of Baikonur Debt, 12 August 1999. 214)
Kazakhstan imposed a new ban on Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome following the previous day’s crash of a Proton booster rocket, which had malfunctioned shortly after launch. Without naming a figure, Kazakhstan announced that it would require Russia to pay compensation in an amount significantly higher than the fee that Kazakhstan had charged Russia after the 5 July Proton crash. In addition, the Kazakhstan government formed a special commission headed by Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Pavlov to investigate the accident.
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASA’s predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitation⎯partial vacuums in flowing liquids⎯on cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeri’s work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(“Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
