A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan,” 5 September 2000.)
The Netherlands-based MirCorp, the company originally established to keep the Mir space station in orbit for commercial purposes, announced that, following a board meeting during the previous week, the company had decided to “retool the company to work with other Russian space equipment.” The company planned to develop a new orbiter capable of docking with the ISS, to market existing space technologies, such as cargo spacecraft, and to explore commercial projects involving access to a future Russian module on the ISS.
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Emergency rescue personnel from Canada, Russia, and the United States participated in training exercises near St. Petersburg in Russia, where they practiced maneuvers for rescuing astronauts returning to Earth from the ISS. The rescuers practiced searching in water and on land for a module carrying three astronauts, as well as practicing first-aid techniques.(Associated Press, “Russian, U.S. Rescuers Practice Space Rescue,” 16 August 2000.)
Russia successfully launched a Soyuz test rocket equipped with a Fregat accelerator unit able to carry payloads into high orbit, but lost the Fregat unit upon its reentry to Earth. The rocket took off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying only a dummy payload into space, in a test that was part of Russia’s ongoing research into developing vehicles and technologies that would eventually serve the orbiting ISS.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russia Tests, Then Loses Rocket with Union for Higher Orbit,” 9 February 2000. 878 Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Thousands Walk Out on Boeing in Seattle,” 10 February 2000.)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earth’s rotation and the faster movement of Earth’s surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million,” 13 March 2000.)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
Russia launched a Progress supply spacecraft to deliver fuel to the uninhabited Mir space station, which was slipping from orbit. Increased solar flare activity had expanded the atmosphere, creating friction between Mir and the thin gases above Earth and causing the station to descend steadily, ever since its last crew had returned to Earth in June after a 73-day mission. The fuel would enable the station to achieve a higher orbit, preventing it from falling into thicker layers of the atmosphere and burning up. Some Russian politicians had called for disposal of the station, and U.S. space officials had urged the Russian government to dedicate its “scarce space funds” to the ISS. However, MirCorp, a private company based in the Netherlands, had leased time on Mir and agreed to fund the Progress launch, thereby saving the station.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches Progress Cargo Space Ship,” 17 October 2000.)
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agency’s commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezda’s launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: “The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do.” Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: “This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not.” The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, “Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station,” 13 July 2000; USA Today, “Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit,” 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), “Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set,” 11 July 2000; Reuters, “Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln,” 12 July 2000; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS,” 12 July 2000.)
Responding to a 25 January 2000 article in the New York Times, alleging that grants in the mid- 1990s had benefited the Russian civilian agency Biopreparat, NASA’s Office of Inspector General published a report stating that NASA had not followed the U.S. Department of State’s guidelines for administering biotechnology grants to Russia, thereby inadvertently funding germ- warfare laboratories. The Russian government owned 51 percent of Biopreparat, the organization that had conducted most of the Soviet Union’s biological warfare research since the 1970s. At the time of the article’s publication, Biopreparat was continuing to research pathogens that had been included in the Soviet biological warfare program. The Inspector General found that “almost three-fourths of US$1.68 million in NASA grants intended for space biotechnology work found its way to ‘institutions that had been affiliated with Russia’s biological warfare program’.” Therefore, the Inspector General asserted that NASA had not followed the Department of State’s guidelines requiring NASA to “regularly visit and participate in the research it was funding at Russian institutes that had been part of the Soviet biological warfare program.” NASA agreed with the Inspector General’s sole recommendation: to practice “invasive collaboration” in the future, when funding biotechnology research in countries with known or suspected biological weapons programs.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “NASA Oversight of Russian Biotechnology Research 1994–1997” (NASA report no. G-00-07, Washington, DC, 13 October 2000), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-00- 007.pdf (accessed 8 April 2008); Frank Morring Jr., “NASA Seen Funding Russian Germ-Warfare Labs Through Lax Oversight,” Aerospace Daily, 18 October 2000.)
Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the craft’s orbit as “decayed,” and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as “effectively lost.” EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, “Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure,” Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
Russian space officials announced a decision to alter plans for the Enterprise module of the ISS, which the company RSC Energia was building in conjunction with the U.S. company SPACEHAB. In the original plans, the module had been noncommercial, providing docking and cargo space, but in an effort to increase revenue, RSC Energia had revised the plans to allow the module to hold multimedia equipment for various business projects.(Associated Press, “Russia Seeks Space Station Revenue,” 23 August 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
Ground controllers in Russia restored communication with Mir, after they had been unable to contact the uninhabited space station for 24 hours. Spokesperson for Russian Mission Control Valery Lyndin allayed fears that Mir would crash to Earth shortly, announcing that Russia had received no indication that the space station was losing pressure. Mission Control Chief Vladimir A. Solovyov explained that the station’s batteries had lost power and no longer had sufficient energy to communicate with ground controllers. Once ground controllers had identified the problem, they had switched off specific systems to direct more energy to ground communications. Although Mir’s solar panels were recharging the batteries, the cause of the power shortage remained unclear.(Washington Times, “Contact with Mir Restored After Loss of Battery Power: Mission Control Allays Fears of Crash,” 27 December 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report stating that the Russian components for the International Space Station (ISS) did not meet NASA’s standard safety requirements. GAO’s findings were the latest in a long series of controversies, particularly between the United States and Russia, in the international effort to build the space station. Most significant of its safety deficits, the Russian crew module did not have adequate shielding to protect the ISS crew from orbiting space debris. At the time of the report, the Russians were already more than two years behind in delivering the crew module.(Patty Reinhert, “Space Station Safety at Center of Debate,” Houston Chronicle, 17 March 2000; Associated Press, “General Accounting Office Slams Russian Modules,” 17 March 2000.)
The Russian government decided that it could no longer afford to maintain the Mir space station and would destroy it in February 2001 during a controlled descent. The Russian government had previously decided to abandon Mir, but had extended the space station’s time in orbit after the private MirCorp, based in the Netherlands, had leased time on the station, financing its operation. According to the Russian government, a primary factor in its decision to end Mir’s orbit had been increasing skepticism over MirCorp’s continued ability to finance Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia To Dump Mir Space Station,” 16 November 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United States–built GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, “Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit,” Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
A Russian Progress cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying fuel to the uninhabited ISS for use in adjusting the station’s orbit. The craft also carried scientific instruments, linens, and personal-hygiene supplies in preparation for the October arrival of the station’s first permanent crew.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Ship with Supplies for Space Station Launches,” 7 August 2000.)
The first International Space Station (ISS) crew, Expedition I, arrived at the new station where they planned to live for the next four and one-half months. The crew’s Soyuz craft automatically docked at a port on the Zvezda habitation module. The Russian-built, NASA-financed Zarya propulsion-and-storage module, attached to the other end of Zvezda, was loaded with supplies and equipment delivered by recent Shuttle missions. Unless an emergency or breakdown occurred, the multi-hatch Unity module would remain off limits. A Shuttle crew had installed a structural truss on the Unity module in October, and during a mission scheduled for early December, another crew would attach a set of solar arrays to the truss. Without the solar arrays, the station did not have enough power to heat the module properly or to control the dew point, to prevent dangerous condensation. The ISS crew and their U.S. and Russian managers temporarily named the station Alpha, at least for the duration of the Expedition I mission.(William Harwood, “Crew of ‘Alpha’ Males Moves into Space Station: Docking Complete, NASA Chief Allows Name’s Use for Now,” Washington Post, 3 November 2000.)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere, the mission’s main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as “an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity,” thereby improving scientists’ forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.’s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, “Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft,” news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, “Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months,” 16 August 2000.)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russia’s commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rocket’s second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
Russian space experts agreed that the Mir space station was in fine condition to continue orbiting Earth, and the Russian government extended the station’s time in space indefinitely, after the Netherlands-based MirCorp agreed to fund a new mission. Russia’s council of space engineers, known as the Council of Chief Designers, authorized plans to launch a Progress cargo spacecraft, in the middle of October, to deliver fuel and equipment to Mir.(MirCorp, “MirCorp Statement on the Mir Space Station’s Future,” news release, 3 October 2000; Associated Press, “Russian Space Experts Determine Mir Fit To Continue Orbital Flight,” 3 October 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
The Russian government earmarked funds to send two Progress cargo spacecraft to the Mir space station, announcing that it would wait until February 2001 to make a final decision about the station’s fate. Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov had explained that the decision the Russian government had been wavering about for more than a year rested on the availability of private funds to keep the station in orbit. Executives from MirCorp had promised the Russian government that the company would raise between US$100 million and US$170 million by next year, but Russian space officials were skeptical of MirCorp’s ability to meet this commitment. MirCorp had yet to pay the US$10 million it owed Russia for the 17 October launch of a Progress cargo spacecraft delivering fuel to Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Earmarks Funds for Mir,” 26 October 2000.)
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, “Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission,” news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
The government of the People’s Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about China’s top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as “an integral part of the state’s comprehensive development strategy” and stated, “exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind.” The paper provided details of China’s satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined China’s efforts toward international cooperation, notably China’s signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, “China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program,” Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
The first of two Cluster spacecraft launches took place from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. NASA and the European Space Agency had formed a partnership to develop and build the exploration craft, designed to travel around the Earth in a tetrahedral formation, collecting data on solar wind. Space officials planned to launch two additional Cluster craft one month after the first two had entered their orbiting pattern. With four satellites launched and flying in formation, scientists expected to harvest data about the “turbulent battle” raging between Earth’s magnetic field and the solar winds blowing at an estimated rate of 1–2 million miles (1.6–3.2 million kilometers) per hour. Researchers also hoped the new information would help scientists understand other interactions between the Earth and the Sun. Each of the four Cluster spacecraft carried instruments to measure the patterns of electrons and the presence of protons and helium, as well as instruments to monitor the characteristics of electronic fields, solar wind, and plasma waves.(NASA, “New Cluster Mission To Provide Unprecedented Detail about Space Weather,” news release 00-105, 13 July 2000.)
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
