The United States, Russia, and other partners and sponsoring agencies of the ISS released a nine- page document, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers,” defining the partners’ agreed-upon procedures for staffing the ISS. Among the acceptable categories of ISS crew members, the international partners included nonprofessional spaceflight participants, such as American space tourist Dennis A. Tito, who had reportedly paid the Russian Space Agency US$12 to US$20 million to visit the ISS. Tito’s visit had created tension among ISS partners, who hoped that the new agreement would clarify the selection criteria for individuals traveling to the ISS, while continuing to enable space programs to raise funds from nonprofessional space travelers.(ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers”; William Harwood, “NASA Approves Space Visitor Rules,” Washington Post, 1 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “New NASA Policy Opens the Way for More People To Go into Space,” Houston Chronicle, 1 February 2002.)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rocket’s engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, “Foton,” http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri would replace Sergei I. Moschenko as a member of the ISS Expedition 7 crew. Russian officials had proposed the change to the Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, which formally certified and assigned ISS crew, and the panel had formally approved the proposal on 10 October 2002. Kaleri had served three separate missions on the Russian space station Mir between 1992 and 2000. In addition to Kaleri, the Expedition 7 crew would include U.S. astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko.(NASA, “Expedition Five Backup Crewmember Named to Expedition Seven,” news release 02-235, 3 December 2002; NASA, “Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning the Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station” (MOU, Washington, DC, 29 January 1998), Article 11.3, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1998/nasa_russian.html (accessed 5 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency notified NASA that it had abandoned its plan to transport singer Lance Bass of the popular music group ’N Sync to the ISS. Television producers had intended to sponsor Bass, featuring him in a television documentary about his trip to the ISS. However, the sponsors had failed to raise the estimated US$20 million needed to cover the singer’s fare. Therefore, Russian officials had decided to withdraw Bass as a member of the Soyuz crew scheduled to leave for the ISS on 28 October 2002. If the 23-year-old Bass had gone on the Soyuz mission, he would have become the youngest person ever to travel in space, as well as the third space tourist.(Marcia Dunn, “It’s Official: Russia Faxes NASA To Confirm Bass off Space Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESA’s headquarters in Paris to discuss the program’s status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
A Russian Kosmos-3M rocket launched the first Algerian spacecraft, AlSAT-1, from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The Algerian Space Agency (Agence Spatiale Algérienne) had designed the 92-kilogram (202-pound), imaging microsatellite to provide multispectral, medium- resolution images for remote-sensing purposes, particularly the monitoring of natural disasters. The Algerian Space Agency intended AlSAT-1 as the first of five microsatellites for a program called the Disaster Monitoring Constellation.(Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Lancement AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/ lancement.php (accessed 29 October 2008); Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Mission AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/mission.php (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
The Russian Soyuz TM-34 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:27 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)1:27 a.m. (EST). The mission, designated Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight, carried three crew membersCommander Yuri P. Gidzenko of Russia, Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, and South African businessman Mark Shuttleworth. The mission’s main purpose was to deliver a new Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS for use as an emergency lifeboat for the ISS’s permanent three-member crew. In addition, major media noted that Shuttleworth had paid the Russian Space Agency a fee of approximately US$20 million to fly on Soyuz to the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp4/taxi4/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); Houston Chronicle, “Space Tourist No. 2,” 25 April 2002.)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the station’s capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the station’s partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, “Space Station Action Plan Approved,” news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italy’s Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, “Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe,” ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
