The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, “Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces,” Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martin–built Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, “ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V―65 Successes in a Row for Atlas,” news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMC’s purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russia’s GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Korea’s KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, “Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched,” Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, “Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit,” Space News, 29 September 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the world’s cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, “Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes,” 8 December 2003.)
The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
Russia’s Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots,” 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, “Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport,” Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESA’s Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europe’s official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission,” 3 June 2003.)
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russia’s participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew members―Russian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Lu―to save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station,” 11 June 2003; Reuters, “Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station,” 9 June 2003.)
The ISS marked its 1,000th consecutive day of human residency aboard the station. The first crew had arrived 2 November 2000, and since then, seven crews had lived and worked on the ISS. During that time, the living and working area had increased by 6,000 cubic feet (170 cubic meters) to the current area of 15,000 cubic feet (424.8 cubic meters), and ISS partners expected the station would eventually more than double its size. The seven ISS crews, consisting of 10 American and 10 Russian crew members, had conducted 12 spacewalks and had welcomed 11 visiting Space Shuttles, 4 Soyuz taxi crews, and 10 Progress cargo vehicles. Crews had added to the ISS the largest solar arrays ever produced for use in space, the first track-mounted railcar in space, and a science facility described as the most sophisticated space laboratory to date.(NASA, “Milestone Marked in Space1,000 Days of Human Presence on Station,” news release 03-251, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03251_iss1000_days.html (accessed 23 December 2008). 491 William Glanz, “NASA Outlines Cost of Columbia Probe,” Washington Times, 1 August 2003.)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services’ Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earth’s upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as “the world’s smallest space telescope,” with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileo’s telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellites―CubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1―to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tube―the Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSAT―would image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, “Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads,” Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia,” Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Boris Alyoshin and French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin signed an agreement allowing Russian access to the ESA launch complex in French Guiana, beginning in 2006. The agreement provided for the construction of a new launchpad at Kourou for the launching of Russian Soyuz rockets. France agreed to contribute half of the cost of EUR 314 million (US$361 million), with other ESA member states providing the remainder. The agreement also allowed Arianespace to collaborate with the Russian company Starsem to use Soviet-era Soyuz rockets for launching medium-sized payloads, thereby closing a gap in Arianespace’s marketing range.
NASA’s Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles―the United States’ only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend “to make foreign policy,” acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, “NASA Official: Agency Won’t Seek Waiver to Iran Act,” Space News, 20 February 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
On the 35th anniversary of the accident that killed Yuri Gagarin, the Russian daily Komsomolskaya Pravda published extracts of a secret investigation of Russia’s KGB (the Soviet-era Office of State Security) into the cause of the Soviet cosmonaut’s death. Gagarin and his instructor had died on 27 March 1968, during a routine training exercise at the Chkalovsky Air Base outside Moscow. The government had ordered three official investigations, one by the civilian government and two military, but all three had ruled out sabotage. An inspection of Gagarin’s MiG-15 had identified no mechanical failures and investigators had concluded that the fighter “went into a spin after either hitting birds or suddenly swerving to avoid a weather balloon or another aircraft.” The circumstances of his death had since “been cloaked in mystery and rumours that the Communist Party had Gagarin killed because of his love of drink and women.” The KGB’s counterintelligence unit had conducted its own secret investigation, finding that ground staff’s actions had “amounted to a ‘dangerous violation’ of standing instructions,” leading to the death of Gagarin and his instructor.(Ben Aris, “KGB Held Ground Staff To Blame for Gagarin’s Death,” Daily Telegraph (UK), 28 March 2003. 400 Kathy Sawyer, “Columbia’s Last Seconds Recorded,” Washington Post, 28 March 2003)
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
