Reported by Drew Pearson that CIA had warned that Russia “is preparing to launch a man around the moon in 60 days.”
Beginning of the fifth year of the “space age,” being the anniversary of the launching of Sputnik I (1957).
Sputnik IV launched into orbit by U.S.S.R., a 7.1-ton payload, but mission of flight was not announced.
Kaman H—43-B Huskie helicopter flown to claimed altitude record of 25,814 feet by Capt. W. C. McMeen (USAF), bettering Russian record of 24,491 feet established on March 26, 1960.
Sputnik IV, launched on February 4, reentered the Earth’s atmosphere.
Sputnik VIII launched into Earth orbit by U.S.S.R., from which it placed 1,419-pound Venus probe on its course.
In San Bernardino news conference, Gen. Bernard Schriever, U.S. Air Force, said: “I have never felt we were behind Russia in missile development.”
The Soviet Communist Party organ, Pravda, explained why Russian space techniques and the names of spaceship designers were kept secret as follows: “A corrupt capitalist society, by its very nature, is extremely capable of turning the greatest peaceful achievements of mankind into the total means of destruction of mankind. This is why it is risky to open even the smallest loopholes in the world of Soviet rocket technique for the gentlemen who are lagging considerably behind as far as their technique is concerned, but who become militarily agitated and distracted from an honest program of general and complete disarmament and who mumble something about the right of inspection of neighbors’ orchards and storerooms. That is why the wonderful group of heroes who insured the mastering of the cosmos remain nameless until now.”
Russian scientist, K. Florensky, reported in Komsomol Pravda that a comet’s head, not a meteorite or an interplanetary atomic weapon, caused the big explosion that jarred Siberia on June 30, 1908. The blast near the Hunguska River killed 1,500 reindeer, felled trees over an area of 700 square miles, and was recorded on seismographs around the world.
At NASA press conference following President Kennedy’s call to Congress for an accelerated space program, NASA Administrator Webb pointed out that the long-range and difficult task of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth before the end of the decade offered a chance to beat Russia.
U.S.S.R. launched 5-ton Sputnik IV into orbit and recovered dog passenger, the second time this feat was performed.
President Kennedy, in his regular press conference, stated that “no one is more tired than I am” in seeing the United States second to Russia in the space field. “They secured large boosters which have led to their being first in Sputnik, and led to their first putting their men in space. We are, I hope, going to be able to carry out our efforts, with due regard to the problem of the life of the men involved, this year. But we are behind * * * the news will be worse before it is better, and it will be some time before we catch up * *
Dr. Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, told the IAF that Russian radar returns from Venus indicated a value of 149,599,500 kilometers for the astronomical unit. This was a major revision of the value of 149,469,500 kilometers first released by the Russians in March. The Russian value compared with 149,598,820 kilometers obtained by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the figure of 149,597,850 kilometers obtained by Lincoln Laboratory. Disagreement remains on whether Venus day is a 9-to-l 1-earth-day period or 225-earth-day period.
In an article in Ekonomicheskya Gazeta, the economic newspaper of the Soviet Communist Party, Dr. Peter Kapitza, one of Russia’s outstanding physicists, said that Soviet science had been hampered by attempts to judge the validity of scientific theories on the basis of Marxist dialectics. If Soviet scientists had listened to Marxist philosophers in the 1950’s, he said, the Russian achievements in space would have been impossible.
Fifth anniversary of the Space Age, inaugurated with the orbiting of first manmade satellite, sputnik i, by the U.S.S.R. According to the Goddard Satellite Situation Report of October 10, 1962, the first half decade of the Space Age saw the orbiting of 134 satellites, lunar probes, and space probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 26 (6 still in orbit), the U.S. 108 (48 still in orbit). Of U.S. total, nasa orbited 36 (24 still in orbit), dod 72 (24 still in orbit). Two of the nasa launches must also be credited to the nations contributing the experiments or the payload—U.K. for ariel and Canada for alouette. Of the U.S. total, three were manned orbital spacecraft, as were four of the U.S.S.R.’s. Totals for manned space flight—U.S.: 12 orbits, with 19 hrs., 3 min. flight time; U.S.S.R.: 130 orbits, with 192 hrs., 41 min. flight time. October 4: Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to altitude of 106,000 ft. and speed of 3,375 mph (mach 4.91), in 10-min. flight to check out the craft’s adaptive control system. A secondary objective was to further evaluate X-15 performance with ventral fin removed. All flight objectives were achieved.
Reported that Russian Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov were assured membership in the Supreme Soviet. Neither was opposed in election slates and both will represent their home towns. It was also reported that the U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry’s press department had denied the rumor that Russia was preparing to let Western newsmen cover the next Soviet space shot.
U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12, anniversary of the first Soviet space flight, to be a national annual holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics Day m the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginning in April 1932, with the formation of a group to study jet propulsion. Between 1932 and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed 118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
In television interviews in New York, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov denied reports that any Russian cosmonauts had been killed prior to the orbital flight of Gagarin as reported in the American Sress. Titov said he also saw the tiny “fireflies” reported by ohn Glenn.
Dr. Mia G. Masevich, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Astronomical Council, published first serious mention of echo i in a leading non-technical Russian magazine (Ogonyok). Virtually nothing has been said about echo i in the Soviet press since its launch in August 1960, although it has remained in orbit longer than any Soviet satellite and was visible to Soviet citizens.
Analysis of the metal chunk believed to have been part of Soviet satellite sputnik iv showed the object had greater radiation level than any other object previously recovered from space, aec scientists at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (N. Mex.) said one reason for high radiation was that the chunk was analyzed soon after being found, whereas previous objects had not been analyzed until at least three weeks after being found. Radiation expert Dr. Ernest C. Anderson of Los Alamos reported that the object had same sort of radioactivity shown by natural iron meteorites, evidence that the object was part of a spacecraft that had been orbiting for long time above the atmosphere, sputnik iv went into orbit May 15, 1960, and disintegrated September 5, 1962, over the U.S. Los Alamos forwarded 14-lb. chunk to U.S. delegation to U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had kept a 6-lb. slice of the original object for further examination.
Senator Margaret Chase Smith, in a radio interview with Senator Kenneth B. Keating, expressed doubt on the value of space cooperation with the U.S.S.R. A member of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, Sen. Smith said the U.S. had “decided superiority over Russia on really important space development. Russia has the edge over us on thrust power but when it comes to finer scientific space developments and information, we have great superiority over Russia. Perhaps one of our greatest areas of superiority is in the development of miniaturization. I think we could learn something from Russia but there is a question as to just how far we can trust her and what we get in return.”
New York Times reported f'that more than 20 fragments from sputnik iv had been recovered in Wisconsin. Launched May 15, 1960, the Soviet satellite had re-entered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 5, 1962, and disintegrated over Wisconsin.
Japanese Meteorological Observatory reported abnormal atmospheric pressures from a Soviet nuclear blast, apparently one of two recorded also by Uppsala University in Sweden. Japanese agency estimated the strength of the blast at 20 megatons. It said the abnormal pressure lasted from 40 to 100 minutes. Two blasts registered at the seismological institute in Sweden were listed at 19 megatons and 8 megatons. The geodetic institution of the Technological High School at Stockholm, Sweden, registered another gravitational disturbance which may have been a third Russian nuclear test, one which had a force of about 10 megatons. During the past 10 days, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission had announced that the Russians have conducted at least four nuclear tests.
Re-entry and disintegration of sputnik iv reported by Edward A. Hallbach, director of Milwaukee Astronomical Society. Hall-bach and others observed the satellite as it broke into about 24 pieces, most of which fell from orbit toward Green Bay, Wise., area and Lake Michigan. Law officers in a wide area of northern Wisconsin reported seeing flaming objects at about the same time. sputnik iv was launched by U.S.S.R. on May 15, 1960.
In nbc TV interview, Dr. F. J. Krieger, specialist of the rand Corporation on Soviet space affairs, pointed out that the 50th anniversary of the Communist Revolution in Russia was in 1967, and that that year may be the political target date for the accomplishment of a Soviet lunar landing mission.
In opinion poll taken in Ohio Congressional District (23) by Congressman William E. Minshall on whether the U.S. should enter into a cooperative space program with Russia, 47% replied affirmative, 39.6% replied negative, and 13.3% made “no opinion” replies.
Capt. Richard H. Coan (usaf) established a new world’s record for a helicopter distance flight over a closed course, flying an H-43B Huskie 656.258 miles on a 25-mile course near Mono Lake, Calif. Previous record of 625.464 miles had been held by a Russian military helicopter Mi-1 (June 1960).
Dr. Andrei S. Severny, Soviet astronomer who heads the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory whose 102-in. telescope is the largest outside of California, reported a partial theory on cause of solar flares—solar flare convulsion is brought about by a release of the accumulation of magnetic energy. Based on observations of changes in the strong magnetic fields, Dr. Severny’s interpretation of flares is based on technique developed by Dr. Horace D. Babcock and his son at Mount Wilson in California. Skeptical of Severny’s thesis, a colleague of the Babcocks, Dr. Robert Howard, was reported in Russia to challenge the Soviet data.
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead of our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best, ridiculous, and, at worst, deliberate sabotage.”
Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmonauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts. He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of Cdr. Alan Shepard.
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
TV pictures of Soviet Cosmonauts Nikolayev and Popovich orbiting the earth in spacecraft vostok iii and iv were viewed by the public in Russia, Western Europe, England, and the U.S. The pictures were put on videotape or kinescope film during London broadcast for TV viewing in America.
nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center was presented an Award of Honor by the National Safety Council for having logged nearly 4 million working hours without a disabling injury or fatality. During February: Astronaut John Glenn’s orbital space flight produced a great propaganda dividend for the United States, Mr. Edward R. Murrow, Director of the United States Information Agency, said. “The contrast was immediately drawn around the world between the openness, the complete coverage of the flight, compared to the Russian efforts in this area . . . More newspapers normally hostile to the United States had to admit not only the scientific achievement but the fact that we were prepared to let our own people and the rest of the world see the entire operation from beginning to end.”
Bell Aerosystems engineers, John N. Cord and Leonard M. Seale, recommended in paper to the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences meeting in Los Angeles that a U.S. astronaut be landed upon the moon with the means of survival, perhaps for as long as three years, until an Apollo vehicle could be sent to return him to earth. The astronaut could do valuable scientific work and would be on “a very hazardous mission but it would be cheaper, faster, and perhaps the only way to beat Russia.”
Premier Khrushchev claimed that the U.S.S.R. had a new “invulnerable global rocket,” announced the orbiting of cosmos i (the 16th Russian satellite), and stated that the U.S.S.R. would carry out new atmospheric nuclear tests if the U.S. resumes its atmospheric tests. Tass released a news story on the new satellite, giving its orbital data as apogee, 609 mi.; perigee, 135 mi.; period, 96 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equator. A scientific payload included measurements of meteoric impacts, low-energy solar radiation, earth’s radiation belts, cosmic rays, earth’s magnetic field, short-wave radiation from sun and other celestial sources, and atmospheric cloud patterns.
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in achieving manned space flight.
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
Massive celebration in the Kremlin on Soviet Air Force Day as the new Russian space heroes, Cosmonauts Major Andrian Nikolayev and Lt. Colonel Pavel Popovich, were feted. In round of speech making, Premier Nikita Khrushchev welcomed the cosmonauts and their famllies, awarded them “Hero of the Soviet Union” medals, and said: “We are gathering new strength to surprise the world with our discoveries and victories.” He also demanded that the Western Allies get out of Berlin.
In meeting of U.N. Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, U.S. offered to U.S.S.R. a 14-lb. metal chunk, believed to be part of sputnik iv, that had landed in Wisconsin September 5. Soviet delegate to the U.N. Platon D. Morozov rejected the offer, saying “We do not know to whom it belongs.” He said it was not necessary to make dramatic gestures to show that falling satellite fragments could do harm, and charged the U.S. with “dramatic staging” to divert the Committee from Soviet proposals on legal principles for use of outer space. Displaying the chunk following the meeting, U.S. delegate Francis T. P. Plimpton said the object weighed 20 lbs. when it fell from the sky, but U.S. scientists of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had retained a six-lb. piece for further examination.
Chunk of metal, too hot to touch, was discovered in Manitowoc, Wise., street by two policemen. Considered as possibly part of sputnik iv, the 20-lb. object was sent by local members of nationwide Moonwatch tracking network to Moonwatch hq. at Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, Cambridge, Mass., where fragment would be analysed.
Addressing sam’s Aerospace Medicine symposium, Major General C.	H. Mitchell, Vice Commander of afcs, said that the “Russian threat in space is becoming obvious . . . Clearly it is our responsibility as a nation to insure that space is used to benefit all mankind. We can insure this only through development of the ability to conduct military operations in space with maximum effectiveness . . .”
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
Soviet Academician Leonid Sedov denied in interview with Trud that U.S.S.R. had launched other men into orbit besides Majs. Gagarin and Titov. U.S. press had speculated that as many as five Russian cosmonauts had been killed in unsuccessful flights.
National Science Foundation released comprehensive report on “Education and Professional Employment in the USSR” by Nicholas DeWitt of the Harvard Russian Research Center.
In testimony before Senate subcommittee, Federal Communications Commissioner T.A.M. Craven reported that talks with Russian and other representatives had been encouraging on establishment of a global communications satellite system, fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow said that fcc “could live with” the proposed U.S. corporation with stock to be owned by the public and by communications companies. The fcc was, Minow stated, ill equipped to handle a Government-owned system.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview, was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Advisory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council], you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. In view of this recent Russian shot [lunik iv], what is your reaction?” The Vice President replied: “The Administration has submitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the consequences to other vital aspects of our national policy. “The objective of reaching the moon is one aspect or our national space program which will be of great benefit to our country, and I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and, of course, we all know it would be mighty easy to slow that goal down. But I don’t think that either alternative would be helping our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost certainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves to second place. “So, all in all, I think the Administration has submitted a program which we can all embrace and both parties can fully support.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	’
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
U.S.S.R. celebrated the 46th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution with a Moscow parade that featured the first public display of its antimissile missile. Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, Chief of the Soviet General Staff, hailed the weapon on a radio broadcast as capable of destroying “the enemy in the air.” At a reception Premier Khrushchev said: “Before the Revolution Russia was a beggar. Now she has become the Soviet Union and is a king in the land. From the lowest she has become the second country in the world, and in a maximum of seven years we will be first.” (Tanner, NYT, 11/8/63,1)
The April issue of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, included an article by Dr. Robert E. Marshak, entitled “Reexamining the Soviet Scientific Challenge.” In this article, Dr. Marshak, chairman of the Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Rochester, pointed out that Soviet preeminence in space does not necessarily mean that the U.S.S.R. has “achieved a decisive scientific and technological supremacy.” Comparing the “closed” economic and political structure of Soviet Russia with its controlled educational system to the “open” society of the United States, he suggested that the Soviet system was geared to the more tangible results of applied science while the United States had made greater strides in pure science. “Soviet space triumphs are due to an early and precise delineation of a major national goal in applied science and a most detailed and deliberate organization of the wherewithal to achieve it. “. . . I believe that our [the United States’] undoubted leadership in pure science will continue to be nurtured by the openness, freedom, and free enterprise spirit which characterize our society. Our accomplishments in pure science will provide a vast reservoir of ideas for important achievements in applied science, and our innate good sense and good will lead to a voluntary rational measure of coordination and control in those areas which are indispensable for the achievement of our national objectives in applied science. I believe that the Soviet methods of strict supervision and control will lead to numerous short-range breakthroughs in applied science but that the momentum will not be sustained unless there are also significant advances in their pure science. A great improvement in the quality of these achievements will depend upon their ability to fully establish the conditions of scientific freedom which are essential for highly creative work in pure science. “. . . If the Soviet Government comes to realize—and I believe that the Russian scientists already do—that scientific and political freedom go hand in hand and that it is difficult to guarantee scientific freedom without a major liberalization of Soviet society in all its aspects, there is bound to be a great efflorescence of pure science in the Soviet Union. And if a large measure of political freedom is established in the Soviet Union, it is quite likely that we shall be sending our American astronauts together with their Russian counterparts on joint expeditions to the moon and other celestial objects beyond.” {CR, 5/27/63, 9036-38) During April: Air Force launched an Atlas F with a Chrysler-built nose cone on a 5,000-mile flight from Cape Canaveral to the vicinity of Ascension Island in a continuation of the Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System (Abres) test program. The flight, which largely duplicated the initial Abres test of Mar. 1, was described as “highly successful.” (M&R, 5/6/63, 11)
nasa announced it would negotiate with Lear-Siegler, Inc., of Anaheim, Calif., for an extension of the company’s present $3,753,059 contract for design, manufacture, and installation of equipment for testing subsystems of the Saturn V launch vehicle at msfc. The additional work would include design, manufacture, and installation of instrumentation for a dual liquid-hydrogen test position and an acoustical-model test position at msfc. (nasa Release 63-222) World Conference on Space Communications opened in Geneva with delegates from 70 countries present. U.N. Secretary General U Thant was to have addressed the delegates via Telstar communications satellite, but a technical problem prevented the broadcast. Principal purpose of the conference was to reallocate radio frequencies to provide growth room for future satellite communications needs. (NYT, 10/8/63, 16) Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, received Harry E. Salzberg Memorial Medal for his “distinguished contribution to the field of transportation” and became the 1963 Salzberg Lecturer at Syracuse Univ. (Ltr. of Invitation, 4/18/63) Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., would decide during the week whether he would seek the Senate seat now occupied by Sen. Stephen Young (D.-Ohio), according to George Clifford of the Washington Daily News after an interview with C. Leo DeOrsey, adviser to the astronauts. (Clifford, Wash. Daily News, 10/7/63) nana reported Lufthansa sources in Germany claim that U.S.S.R. is farther along on supersonic transport development than either Britain-France or the U.S. Being designed and built by the famous Ilyushin and Tupolev teams, the Russian entry is reported to be in the same speed class as the British-French Concorde— mach 2.2 (1,500 mph)—and carry about the same passenger load of 100, and to land at quite low speeds, probably through the use of variable-sweep wings. First version of the supersonic transport would be a freight carrier, not only because it can be introduced with a lower safety factor than a passenger version but because the increased friction between Soviet Russia and Communist China dictates a fast priority freight system to eastern Russia, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63) Atlas D icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., but exploded shortly after launch, (upi, NYT, 10/8/63, 28) Lewis awarded study contracts totaling $576,000 to General Dynamics/Astronautics and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation to investigate the possibilities of using “flox”—a mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen—as the oxidizer in the Atlas space launch vehicle. Preliminary studies indicate the combination could result in an 88 per cent increase in payloads for 100-mile high orbits, (lrc Release 63-78, Lewis Chronology, 9) Early October: faa Deputy Administrator Gordon M. Bain said that nasa’s studies of a supersonic commercial air transport (scat) were not in accord with faa thinking—that they derived too much from the B-70 work of some years ago and that they recommended the technical desirability of a mach 3 aircraft, while faa leaned toward a mach 2.5 aircraft as the one economically feasible for airline operation. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63,38)
Dr. Glen Wilson, staff member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Missiles and Rochets interview: “Contrary to some published reports, President Johnson is not predisposed to a military emphasis on space. He will judge the requirements of dod and nasa strictly on merit, if his past performance is any measure.” Dr. Wilson recalled Johnson was Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, later was Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences from its inception until he became Vice President. Dr. Wilson stressed that “it must be noted that Johnson was one of the few men on the Hill to recognize the supreme importance of the sputnik i launch, and he instigated an extraordinary session of Senate hearings a few weeks later.” {M&R, 12/23/63, 16)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
County Judge Thaddeus Pruss ruled in Wisconsin that metal particles allegedly from sputnik iv satellite were to be returned to their finder, Thomas Williams, Brown Deer, Wis., said to be first known test case involving space law. ( upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/18/63)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted the Goddard Historical Prize Essay for 1962—“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” by R. Cargill Hall—into the Congressional Record. Chairman Miller pointed out that “in space affairs we cannot afford to be shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 1946-49 be considered in the light of the current discussion on the U.S. space program: “What if the United States had launched a satellite in 1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different? . . . Would not the image of the U.S. in the eyes of the rest of the world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the appearance that we were not the scientific and technological leader in the world ? ... If we would remain free and maintain peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make sure that superior space science and technology are on our side.” Prize historical essay reviewed proposals by the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force’s rand Corp. for for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or military utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition is sponsored annually by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. {CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, president of Cal Tech, said in speech before Spring Recognition Dinner of Miracle Mile Association, Los Angeles: “The United States had put 118 space vehicles into orbit, whereas Russia has only placed 34. We are ahead of Russia on scientific data because of these space probes. “Proof of this is in the papers published by the Soviet Union. There has been very little scientific knowledge gleaned from their reports in the past few years, whereas the United States has given a wealth of information on space problems. “Through these probes we have been able to evaluate the temperature on the planet Venus. Of more important issue to us on Earth is the invaluable aid in predicting our own weather. . . .” (L.A. Herald-Examiner, 3/13/63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the New York section of the aiaa in New York, pointed out that the U.S. maimed space program involves technical requirements “about 20 times the complexity of the Minuteman program.” For this reason, among others, he said leaders of the space program had recognized from the beginning that leadership could be achieved “only through a sustained, steadily accelerating effort.” He quoted Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, speaking on Apr. 26, 1958, when he said that without this big, long-term national commitment “I’d just as soon we didn’t start”; Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1958 telling the House Select Committee studying the Space Act that the biggest problem was “how we can eliminate this lethal and wasteful not-and-cold blowing that has plagued all our missile projects in the past. I think this lack of steady determination and unwavering support over the years has hurt us more than anything”; and Dr. T. Keith Glenn an, nasa’s first Administrator, speaking at the first nasa budget hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “If our space programs are to be run on an off-again, on-again basis, zigging and zagging with the turn of every new year, then we’d better spend our monev buying telescopes to watch the Russian pioneers in space/’ (Text)
Editorial in The Houston Post: “Why Khrushchev’s word should be accepted on this [commenting that Russia does not have a definite program for putting a man on the moon] any more than on anything else is hard to understand .... It . . . must be kept in mind that Soviet policy in any area is a zig-zag affair and subject to quick change. Moreover, under the Soviet system, Khrushchev does not have to worry about congressional attitudes or reaction if he should decide upon a change .... “. . . why should Khrushchev be permitted to set the policy on this country’s space program? That is something for the Legislative and Executive branches of the United States government to do on the basis of careful study and evaluation. “The fact is that the United States government made its decision several years ago. It stands committed to a program of trying to put a man on the moon in this decade. What the Russians do or don’t do should be a matter of secondary importance at this point in the program. Much more is involved than merely a contest with Russians as to time.” (Text)
Various Russian sources had listed a variety of possible uses for the Polet type of maneuverable satellite, according to Space Business Daily. Space expert Vladimir Dobronravov had said that the spacecraft would be used for rendezvous and docking experiments. Tass mentioned the potential for reconnaissance, weather, or communications satellite. M. Litvin-Sedoi said it was a test of a system for construction of an orbiting space platform. {Space Bus. Daily, 11/5/63,201)
Moscow Radio said U.S. astronauts “become bourgeois exploiters [of the people] in their own right,” but the Russian people had “profound respect” for U.S. spacemen, who needed “no little bravery” to let themselves be launched in rockets “whose reliability is highly dubious.” (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 1/8/63)
Dr. T. L. K. Smull, nasa Director of Grants and Research Contracts, said in commencement address, Univ. of Georgia: “Today we are dealing not only with profound changes in a social and economic structure of our country and of the world; we are dealing as well with even more profound changes in man’s own conception of the boundaries and limitations of his habitable environment and of his understanding of the forces of the universe. “Therefore, the opportunities available to you graduates in the next decade are, in a very real sense, boundless. The challenges of tomorrow are not just for the scientist, the engineer, and the technician working toward scientific developments, but for all men and women in all professions—for every one of you. Even if science is not your field, you must understand what it implies simply because science will continue affecting your lives with even greater impact as each year passes .... “Never before has a civilization seized upon and exploited a new technology at the rate man is now exploring the new dimension of space. In the 2,060 days since the Russians launched Sputnik, nasa has conducted 96 major vehicle launchings, an average of one every 22 days. In this period, the ussr has announced about 35 successful space flights. 741-623 0—64--21 “nasa’s impressive accomplishments will be dwarfed by United States activities during the rest of this decade as our understanding of the nature of space, the sun, and the map of the Universe is greatly enhanced. “In an age of exploding knowledge in all of the physical sciences no area of human activity better focuses and dramatizes the meaning of today than does this boldest, most challenging arena of space . . . .” (Text)
The space program would not change greatly under the new President, Lyndon B. Johnson, William Hines of the Washington Sunday Star predicted: “The reasons are twofold and simple. “First, Mr. Johnson is fully as enthusiastic about the space program as was Mr. Kennedy, if not more so. Second, the new President has been in on the space program from its start, and tVl W/M1 nrb + n	O A	*vi/\*.4V»n n-f *D wnr.1,/1 n«\ 4	U’	f nnimn w»An Lxiiuugu uiio	wt	mt/xiiiio vi x acoiuciii	ikcmicuV	o lcuuic nao	uxi • Space.’ ” Mr. Johnson was head of the Senate Preparedness subcommittee at the time the U.S.S.R. launched sputnik i, Hines pointed out. As Senate Majority Leader he caused the inquiry into U.S. space posture and sparked the special Senate committee that later became the standing Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “More than any other one man, President Johnson is personally responsible for the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and the sprawling agency which it created .... “With the advent of the Kennedy administration, the space program immediately grew in importance, largely through Mr. Johnson’s urging. The Space Act was amended to make the Vice President head of the [Space] council .... “Under then Vice President Johnson, the council took on real meaning. . . . “The Johnson-organized council staff prepared the studies which the Vice President used to persuade President Kennedy in the spring of 1961 that a manned lunar landing should be undertaken before the decade is out.’” (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/24/63)
Humorous columnist Arthur Hoppe commented on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not competing to land a man on the moon, said this marked the beginning of a new weapon in Soviet diplomacy—“Competitive unresistance.” “Oh, it strikes at the one weakness in the American character. For while we are imbued with the will to win, we can’t stand licking somebody who isn’t trying. Competitive unresistance, let me warn you, will sap our will to resist. “. . . Of course we could do some things for other reasons. Like maybe feeding people because they’re hungry. Or reaching for the moon because we believe the future of our race lies in the stars. But would Congress buy that? Nonsense. It’s unrealistic-“So I say we must meet this new Soviet threat head-on. We # must abolish our moon program, knock off foreign aid and do our utmost, fellow Americans, to make our Nation a second-rate power. But cheer up. I’m certain we can count on Congress.” (Hoppe, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/63, 5)
Sermon by Dr. Duncan Howlett, Washington Unitarian minister, was quoted in Washington Post. On June 18,1961, Dr. Howlett said: “Why can we not boldly propose now a cooperative moon-shot, built and manned by Russian and American scientists ? Why can we not send a capsule to the moon with a Russian and an American inside it; and when they get there let them claim the moon— not for Russia, not for the United States, but for humanity ? ... “We can claim space for humanity or we can make it a battle ground to which to extend the ancient quarrels of earth. Which shall it be? There is but one choice before us. We can try to make the exploration of space a cooperative venture. We cannot succeed unless we try . . . .” (Glaser, Wash. Post, 9/28/63)
cosmos xix transmissions have beenpicked up by the Sohio Research Center near Cleveland, Ohio. The Center said that Russian satellites normally have an on-off switch which the Russians can activate for transmission as the satellite passes over Russian territory. They theorized that the switch might have stuck, causing the satellite to transmit continuously. (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 10/6/63)
priorities in space as well as article from current issue of Reader’s Digest entitled “We’re Running the Wrong Race with Russia” which said: “The Russians have recently achieved an increase in the effectiveness of nuclear explosions so devastating that it dwarfs all previous records. Confirming this, our own atomic experts have warned that such stupendous forces, let loose above us from a satellite, could, in a few seconds, literally cremate a large part of the United States. There would be nothing left below, no man, beast, vegetation, buildings, nothing at all but the glare of white-hot cinders. “In the face of such a dire threat, it must come as a stunning shock to all thoughtful Americans to learn that the United States has no top-priority programs beamed at preventing, anticipating, or deterring such a terrifying prospect. Our top priorities are all tied up with steamrollering through the moon shot. Many billions of public money, together with the rich cream of scientific talent, are lavished on an effort that could well be aborted in midstride by Soviet enterprise and realism. “There is a crying need for a reappraisal of our space aims, for more specific public information, especially since statements from those highly placed in Washington are so contradictory that they blur rather than clarify our understanding . . . .” {Reader’s Digest, 8/63, CR, 7/31/63,13035-39)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told the Senate that it was unwarranted to assume from Premier Khrushchev’s Oct. 26 remarks that the Soviets had pulled out of the space race. “The competition in space between the United States and the Soviet Union is still intense. It would be foolish indeed if this country were to attempt to reorient its vast space program each time the Soviet Union made some pronouncement about its goals. We should take cognizance of Russian statements but we should not let ourselves be diverted from sound objectives on the ground that competition no longer exists.” {CR, 11/6/63, 20140)
Dr. Edward Teller, Univ. of Calif, physicist, declared at symposium on “open space and peace” held at Stanford Univ. that surveillance from space of every part of the world should be made legal. Noting that “open skies” policy was first proposed in 1955, he stressed that today the security of U.S. and Free World depend in “a most vital fashion on information obtained from Russia.” Surveillance from space should be conducted “publicly, freely and in the interest of the peace of our nation.” (Davies, NYT, 9/6/63,10)
Three ruby-colored spots appeared on the surface of the moon on the night of Oct. 29, 1963, and might have been volcanic eruptions, Dr. John Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz., announced. Hall said that James Greenacre found the spots while studying the moon through a 24-in. refracting telescope. The spots stood out against the yellow-white surface of the moon. Greenacre said that in three years of studying the moon’s surface he had never seen spots similar to these, although a Russian astronomer had reported sighting a similar phenomenon in Nov. 1958 or 1959. (upi, Ban Diego Union, 11/1/63; Christian Science Monitor, 11/2/63)
Sixth anniversary of launching of sputnik i, the opening of the Space Age.
On test ban treaty, U.S. News and World Report said: “Nuclear test ban does not mean disarmament. Nuclear weapons still will be the weapons of future war. Weapon testing will not come to a full stop. “Tests will continue underground. France will go on testing in the air. Red China will test in the air, too, if and when she gets the bomb .... “Test agreement, now being entered into, favors Russia. Russia, behind in smaller nuclear weapons, can catch up by testing underground. United States, behind in bigger weapons and in an antimissile missile, will be hindered in her effort to catch up by the bar against testing in the atmosphere .... “Just as long as Russia is a closed country, ruled by a dictatorship, possessed of weapons capable of destroying United States, there can be no real disarmament, no real end to the arms race without great danger . . . .”	(U.S. News, 8/5/63, in OR,
Eric Sevareid, in Washington Evening Star column titled “If Columbus Had Never Sailed,” discussed the debate on landing men on the moon: “It was two years ago this week end that President Kennedy sent his special message to the Congress in which he said that he himself believed we ‘should go to the moon.’ It has taken two years to develop the beginnings of a national debate on the question, among Congressmen, scientists and editorialists. “I say the beginnings of a debate because, on its public plane at least, the argument has not yet come into its true focus. The true question is not whether we should try to land men on the moon—the nature of this political world as well as the nature of men’s curiosity and the unquenchable spirit of science make it inevitable that we try—but how we go about it ... . “This is only the beginning. Anyone has only to let out his imagination a short notch to see the ultimate possibilities—to see humanity’s push into space transforming this society, dominating its intellectual pursuits, absorbing its resources, altering the training of its youth and its moral and religious concepts, upsetting the priorities for the its social and humanitarian efforts on terra firm a. “Those who scold the worriers say that to cancel the moon voyage would be as if Ferdinand and Isabella had cancelled Columbus’ voyage which opened the New World. They are more often right than they know. What is at stake are not only the new marvels to be found, but also the profound transfiguration of the source of the search. 741-623 o—64--15 “After the voyage of Columbus the Old World was never the same, in political, economic, military, social, religious or intellectual terms. After the first men walk upon the moon, Old Earth will never be the same and the change will begin in the two societies, Russia and America, now competmg for the cataclysmic honor of commencing the alteration.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/28/63, A13) May US: Stanford Research Institute report, prepared under Aerospace Industries Association grant, criticized “industry-Government aerospace relationship” as inefficient, full of overregulation and ineffective administration by Government and “over-management” by industry. Report said its findings were of national significance because aerospace industry’s output represents three per cent of gross national product and even greater share of manufacturing volume and employment. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/29/63, A4)
Speaking at the dedication of the Douglas Space Center in Huntington Beach, Calif., Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson emphasized the peaceful purpose of the U.S. in space research and compared our policy of cooperation in space to the secretive Soviet program: “Those who say—as some are inclined to do—that our purposes and the purposes of communism in space exploration are the same misread and misunderstand the history and meaning of our times. In 1957 when the Soviets placed the first sputnik m orbit, the Communist rulers of Russia refused to consider sharing the fruits of space research with other nations—refused to consider committing themselves to developing space for peaceful purposes alone. In that same year, we of the United States clearly stated our own national policy and purpose. We committed and dedicated ourselves to sharing the fruits of space research with all mankind—and to the sole objective of developing the uses of space for peaceful purposes. “It is significant that while the Communist efforts are conducted behind a curtain of secrecy, we of the United States enjoy the cooperation, support and alliance of more than 60 nations for our space program. It is significant that while we of the United States can and do propose joint endeavors for peaceful purposes, the Soviet both rejects our proposals and devotes itself to attempts to dissuade us from continuing on the programs we have established. “America’s commitment to the exploration of space for peaceful purposes—and for the good of all mankind—is a firm commitment. We will not retreat from our national purpose. We will not be turned aside in our national effort by the transparent maneuvers of those who would attempt to divert us. “Our national purpose in space is peace—not prestige. “Our foremost objective is not to send a man to the moon but to bring a greater measure of sunlight into the lives of men on earth.” (C^, 11/19/63, A7163)
Japan sent a note of protest to the U.S.S.R. in reaction to the Soviet announcement of Nov. 29 designating two areas in the Pacific as test areas for a new series of Russian rocket launchings from Dec. 2,1963, through Jan. 25,1964. Japan reserved the right to claim damages if any were incurred by Japanese as a result of the tests. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/63)
Administration reactions to Premier Khrushchev’s statement that Russia would not attempt to land a man on the moon indicated strong reservations on Russian motivations. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Russian withdrawal announcement was “a very wise pronouncement. "Whether they planned to go to the moon or not, they have sensed some slackening of support for the moon program here and have made a strategic move to capitalize on this situation.” Another official said: “All during the moratorium on nuclear testing the Soviets secretly prepared for an intensive series of tests. How can we be certain that they won’t do the same thing in space?” (Wash. Post, 10/27/63)
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
In Saturday Evening Post, Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D.-Nev.) “A perilous notion grips Washington—that through some sort of gentleman’s agreement with Russia we can quarantine space, can keep it from becoming a theater of war. Wishfully the nation gears its space program to peaceful purposes, blind to the fact that the Russians have no such inhibitions. While we dream, the Russians bend every effort to develop military space systems. Quite openly they are striving for a decisive advantage in ilifli notrlu nonolrato^ romnn
Reported that Russian trawlers and other Soviet vessels regularly appeared off of nasa’s Wallops Station to observe rocket launchings. (Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 5/26/63)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. negotiations began in Rome on technical details of a three-year agreement signed at Geneva in June 1962, for exchange of data to be gained from separate satellite launchings. Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, Deputy Administrator of nasa, headed U.S. scientific delegation, and Prof. Anatoli A. Blagonravov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences headed the Russian delegation. Joint space research program would include coordination on meteorology and communications studies, and charting of the earth’s magnetic field. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A3)
Soviet embassy in Rio de Janeiro reported that Cosmonauts Pavel Popovich and Andrian Nikolayev were to arrive in Rio to represent Russia at the Brazilian air and space show on March 15. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/8/63,1)
A Russian Embassy official in Washington quietly collected from the U.S. State Department the Russian satellite fragment that fell in Manitowoc, Wis., on September 5, 1962. U.S.S.R. had previously ignored U.S. offer, made at U.N. last fall, to return the re-entered fragment. (TVos A Post, 1/8/63,1)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Science, was the opening witness in hearings on the Government’s role as a patron of science and technology, conducted by the subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Seitz said that the period of almost unlimited growth of Federal investment in science and technology was coming to an end, would have to level off and force some “hard decisions” on choices, and expressed the fear that basic science would suffer in competition with more glamorous hardware projects. For the most part he thought U.S. science wras well ahead of Russia, but noted remarkable progress on the part of West Germany and Japan. (Finney, NYT, 10/16/63)
Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of Russian cosmonauts chosen to make the trip to the moon and that Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned capsule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combination to the moon. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/63)
The Russian Deople heard of President Kennedy’s U.N. proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration for first time. Pravda reprinted without comment Walter Lippmann’s column praising the President’s proposal. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capability despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch another “space spectacular.” (Dallas Morning News, 4/24/63)
In press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current lunar probe [lunik iv], do you think we will beat the Russians with a man to the moon ?” He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We will have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill race at best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians are making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not spongy, and I think that we would have to make the same ourselves. “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe, to be ahead at the end of this decade, and that is where I think we ought to be.” Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars and that enormous sums were being wTasted in the space program (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March 291, President Kennedy said: “. . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a decision that the United States would not continue to be second in space. We are second in space today because we started late. It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year, that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think we should continue to do so. “President Eisenhower—this is not a new position for him. He has disagreed with this at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position. It is the position I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a slow pace in space, I don’t think so. “This Administration has concentrated its attention since it came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of the reasons why you could not possibly put in the cut which has been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we now have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent. In a whole variety of ways—in the Navy we have added about 46 vessels, and strengthened ourselves in defense and space . . . .” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 4/4/63)
Exchanging Scientists and Engineers: Oppose__________________________________ 54% Not sure_________________________________12% Selling equipment with potential military application to Russia was adamantly opposed. (L. Harris, Wash. Post, 12/16/63, 1)
U.S. tracking data on the Russian polet i maneuverable spacecraft substantiated the Russian claim of change in apogee but indicated that any substantial change in plane had to be made before completion of the first orbit. According to Aviation Week, norad’s initial orbital plane for the Russian satellite was 59.99°, later revised to 58.89°. Whether this 1.1° change was a result of a satellite maneuver or was merely a refinement of earlier data is uncertain. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63,28)
First official Soviet comment on President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation came from Russian news agency Tass. While not identifying the proposal with the President, Tass said: “Maybe it is too early to discuss now the question what is better—to combine a Soviet rocket with an American spaceship or to include an American in the Soviet space crew, but first steps in cooperation cannot but give satisfaction.” A few hours later, Cosmonaut Pavel Popovich made an unscheduled talk on Moscow Radio, calling for a “common effort by the peoples of all states of our planet” to solve the earthly difficulties that hinder man’s flight to the stars. ( Wash. Post, 10/4/63)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, interviewed on nbc-tv, said he was surprised in May 1960 when the U.S.S.R. publicized the downing of the U.S. U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Russia. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles also “believed just as I did that it was necessary to use it but he also believed that it would cause no real publicity if one of them should fall.” Both of them felt that the Soviets would not be willing to concede publicly that for “three or four years we’ve been doi'ig this . . . .” On the question of admitting U.S. responsibility ror the flights, Mr. Eisenhower said: “ . . . I just thought as L.ig as the thing had come out, the best thing to do—and I don’t believe I asked anyone’s advice on this—I just said ‘l am responsible and that’s that.’” (TFasA Post, 11/4/631
A roundup of world press opinion on the manned lunar landing race, following Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not presently planning manned lunar flight, indicated that the majority of the newspapers thought Khrushchev had made a sensible decision which the U.S. ought to follow. (NYT, 11/3/63, 9E)
Thomas J. Watson, Jr., chairman of the board of International Business Machines Corp., speaking at the 46th annual meeting of the American Council on Education in Washington, D.C., expressed concern about the current course of education. “That concern has its origin just 6 years ago tomorrow. It was the day that the Soviet Union put Sputnik I in orbit. Do you remember the thoughts which flooded in on us that day? Thoughts of embarrassmefit—dismay—concern. ... We could even try to say that satellites were just stunts, that Sputnik was a silly hunk of iron. But try as we would to whistle m the dark, Americans finally had to reach the conclusion that the Russians had outdistanced us at least temporarily in the exploration of space, a pursuit which in our century might well become as important as the exploration of the oceans had been in the time of Columbus and Magellan.” Mr. Watson pointed out that the impact of sputnik on education “has thrown the sciences and the humanities badly out of balance. ... In the fiscal year of 1961, of all Federal funds for basic research, the physical and biological sciences got 97 percent. “There are many traditional reasons for reemphasizing the humanities—which today are more important than ever. “In the first place, a thorough grounding in the humanities is vital training for many leaders who can wisely manage people as well as sufficiently manage machines. This need exists in universities, in public service, and in business. “Secondly, as our planet continues to shrink, we will more and more have to become citizens of the world. We must acquire a better understanding of the language, history, and culture of people of other lands. With present day mass-destruction weapons, this understanding is not just desirable—it’s vital. “Finally, the greater our skills in the humanities—in literature and the arts—the greater our capacity for a constructive use of leisure time, which is bound to increase as machines lift old burdens from men’s shoulders and minds. “On this sixth anniversary of the flight of sputnik, we can be sure of one thing; no second sputnik will come along to jolt us into action, and do for American education in the humanities what the first Sputnik did for American education in the sciences.” {CR, 11/12/63, A7010-A7012)
Two Soviet Ilyushin-18 transport aircraft completed 15,000-mile flight from Moscow to the Russian Antarctic base of Mirny. Director of the Leningrad Polar Institute, A. Treshnokov, said in New Zealand that such flights might well inaugurate regular supply flights between Moscow and the Antarctic. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A29)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11 tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capability and in every other phase of the space program. . . .” (CR, 1/31/64,1443)
Dr. Boris Yegorov, the Russian doctor who orbited the earth in the VOSICHOD I spaceship, suggested that persons suffering from high blood pressure and heart trouble might one day be rocketed into weightless space for therapy. By relieving the gravitational load on the patients and giving them drugs, he said, “it will be possible to heal a person and give his wearied heart a chance to recuperate.” Dr. Yegorov said this novel heart treatment would be possible in the “foreseeable future.” (Toth, Boston Sunday Globe, 12/20/64)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
William B. Bergen, president of Martin Baltimore, said U.S. had closed the so-called “space gap” of Russian competition “without fanfare, and almost without knowing it ourselves.” Addressing National Space Club in Washington, Bergen said that, with all the “Hollywoodian propaganda” about enormous Soviet satellites, “there seems little doubt that the objective part of the scientific world is now convinced that our modest-sized couriers into space have brought back far more useful information than has been collected by the Russians’ more massive messengers.” (AP, Houston Post, 7/23/64)
Washington Star was informed of voskhod i’s safe landing 25 min. before Soviet Government made the official announcement, when Edward Baskakov of the newspaper Soviet Russia called from Moscow for a reaction to the flight. “Beat” of the Star was based upon their editorial on sputnik I in 1957.	(Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/64)
echo ii passive communications satellite was used for transmission of two radiophotos between Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station at Manchester and Gorki University’s radioastronomy observatory at Zimenki. A third space telegram was sent from Jodrell Bank to Zimenki via the moon, and its quality was comparable to those received via echo n. The U.S. satellite was termed by Tass commentator “the Friendship Sputnik.” (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64; NYT, 3/2/64, 9; Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/1/64, 4, Atss-t Trans.)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
A Commerce Dept, reprint of a Russian scientific article indicated that Soviet satellite cosmos V had detected and reported a high altitude explosion of U.S. nuclear weapon over Johnston Island in the Pacific on July 9, 1962. (NYT, 11/20/64)
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said in Saturday Evening Post “As a Republican I believe in what has been called the ‘conquest of space,’ but which I prefer to think of as a thorough exploration of a new scientific frontier to improve our living here on earth. This is an exploration we should pursue vigorously with a step-by-step program in line with our means and our needs. That was the aim of the space program as initially undertaken during my Administration: On the advice of eminent scientists we conceived a long-range effort, not a stunt, with costs to be stabilized around two billion dollars a year. That hardly could be called picayune by any reasonable standards. “But now, under the Democrats, this program has been blown up out of all proportion. With hysterical fanfare our space research has been presented as a crash effort, as a ‘race to the moon’ between the United States and Russia which we must win at all costs. And the costs are tremendous: They now are running well over five billion dollars a year. The Government now has more than 73,000 engineers and scientists working on the nonmilitary space program, either on the federal payroll or employed under contract. This swollen program, costing more than the development of the atomic bom'b, not only is contributing to an unbalanced budget; it also has diverted a disproportionate share of our brainpower and research facilities from other equally significant problems, including education and automation. “We are breezily assured that the cost and dislocation brought about by this moon race are worthwhile for the new ‘prestige’ they will bring us. There is no way of telling how true that may be, but we can be sure of one thing: The voyage to the moon will set a new record for a trip taken on borrowed money.” {Sat. Eve. Post, 4/11/64, 17—19)
In press interview during Third International Symposium on Bioastronautics and Exploration of Space, in San Antonio, Major Duane E. Graveline, a usaf doctor who examined each of the Project Mercury astronauts after their flights, said there was no doubt that even brief forays into space created a certain physical debilitation. “What prolonged space flights, with the constant state of weightlessness and no gravity as we know on earth might do to the human body, we don’t know yet. We know that the Russian cosmonauts have suffered from the effects of prolonged weightlessness, and that U.S. astronauts Walter Schirra and L. Gordon Cooper had temporary debility for the same reason. . . . What we must do now is determine how to condition man for long-duration manned orbital missions and journeys into the universe. Frankly, we don’t have the answers yet.” (Macomber, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 11/19/64)
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was reported to have told visiting Japanese legislators that U.S.S.R. had developed a new “terrible weapon” capable of destroying mankind. Two days later, however, Mr. Khrushchev clarified his remark, denying he had said that the weapon could destroy mankind. “I said that scientists had shown me the terrible weapon, which shows what mankind can do. We did not say anything about unlimited power.” He also said the weapon was not a nuclear bomb. He blamed the earlier report on having been “misinterpreted” in translation from Russian to Japanese and then to English. (NYT, 9/16/64; Shabad, NYT, 9/18/64)
Red spot on the moon was observed from 12:18 a.m. to about 1:00 a.m. by three lunar observers in Port Tobacco, Md. Using 16-in. telescope, the astronomers described the spot as a “red, pinkish glow” which was “located on the base of the central peak in the Crater Alphonsus.” This was said to be eighth sighting of such a spot on the moon in the last six years and the first in Alphonsus since the discovery of the phenomenon by a Russian scientist in 1958. The three observers, associated with Trident Engineer Associates of Annapolis, Md., were using equipment specially developed for detecting the red spots, in lunar observation project for NASA. (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/1/64; NASA Release 64—278)
Seventh anniversary of the Space Age—orbiting of sputnik i by the U.S.S.R. on Oct. 4, 1957. Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin said in Trud interview that U.S.S.R. was preparing a manned space flight: “We are working and making studies and are preparing for a new launching. It is not our custom to advertise, but I’ll tell you that new and more complicated research work is in store for us.” (upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64)
New program combining study of science with study of U.S.S.R. at Columbia University’s Russian Institute was announced by Institute director Prof. Alexander Dallin. (NYT, 5/24/64, 21)
At NASA background briefing for news media, Doctors W. Randolph Lovelace II, Orr E. Reynolds, and Frank B. Voris made presentations on space medicine, biosciences, and effects of space environment on man. Dr. Lovelace described the close working relationship between the offices of Space Medicine, Biotechnology, and Space Science and Medicine. He pointed out Center responsibilities as well as the “detailed task-level technical coordination” completed at the NASA—dod level “which ensures most effective use of all existing facilities” throughout the Nation. In question period, Dr. Reynolds discussed timing of life-detector experiments for Mars:	. . we had hoped that it would be possible to have a landing capsule on Mars for the 1966 mission. Just as the plans for that were being developed, questions were raised by recent astronomical data about the density of the atmosphere of Mars that made it very difficult, if not impossible, to design the proper landing system. “At the present time we are hoping to have a landing vehicle for Mars for the 1969 opportunity. This is not an improved program. But we are working on the development of plans in that direction. It has already been decided that the biological sciences payload, that is, the life detector instruments, or whatever else the biological community thinks are most appropriate for that flight, will have high priority on any landing mission. “So I think the best guess now would be that certainly our first opportunity would be for 1969, and we certainly hope we will have such instruments aboard.” Discussing space radiation, Dr. Reynolds said: “. . . a number of committees and meetings that have been held by the radiobiologists in this country have recommended that an experiment be done below the radiation belt carrying a known source of radiation. The reason for this is that there have been reports from organisms, living organisms flown in the natural radiation belt, of a higher than expected effectiveness of the radiation. There is no good theoretical basis for knowing why this should occur. . . Experiment for checking this would be flown in first flight of Biosatellite, carrying known source and dosage of radiation below the area of the Van Allen belts. Asked about the previous data, Dr. Reynolds said : “There are experiments both by United States experimenters in piggyback flights, and the Russian experiments that show a higher than expected effectiveness of the ambient radiation in genetic effect and in systemic effect. These experiments we strongly suspect had this result due to lack of adequate dosimetry, measurement of the actual dosage that was encountered. For this reason the radiobiologists who have been advising us have recommended this experiment with a known source so as to eliminate any question of whether the dosimetry was wrong. . . .” Dr. Voris discussed “our studies into the biological effects of extremely low magnetic fields and into alternating and high magnetic field forces. Because of a recently expounded theory that individual neurons possess individual and isolated electromagnetic fields of their own, it is conceivable that the functions of the human nervous system may suffer impairment as a result of exposure to electromagnetic fields that deviate markedly from ambient terrestrial levels. . . .” Asked about slow rotation for manned space stations to provide partial gravity, Dr. Voris said that it presented “a problem in disorientation and in the effects of mal de mer. Slow rotation is fine if you can keep your head immobilized and become acclimated to it and stay in one spot. If you move around, move with the turn or away from the turn, or move from the periphery of a circular station into the center, you are changing the field force there, you are developing what is called a Coriolis effect, and you then disturb the balance mechanism or vestibular mechanism of the body and you develop recurrent effects such as seasickness.” (Transcript) .	' 766—508 O—65----12
Howard Simons of the Washington Post was awarded the 1964 American for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science writing award. His winning entry consisted of stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics in Russia, and the planet Jupiter. (Wash. Post, 12/18/64)
out an agreement with the Europeans, and it was believed that the system would be greatly strengthened by Russian participation. The Geneva meetings, which would involve the U.S., European nations, and the U.S.S.R., would include a general discussion of recent developments in space communications. It was also reported that before the Geneva meeting a negotiation session in London between the U.S. and European nations would work on a preliminary agreement on an interim organization for a space communications system. (Farnsworth, NYT, 6/7/64,6)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, discussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injection vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of frequency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has been in on 142 of them—almost half. It is currently being employed at the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very important upcoming projects. . . Haggerty described Agena contributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending ranger vii on its course to the moon. (J/Armed Forces, 10/3/64, 8)
Soviet Ministry of Defense said Pentagon was spying on Russian military and space installations in Moscow, via radio and radar monitoring stations on borders of U.S.S.R. and other Socialist nations and satellites. Allegation called for increased Soviet vigilance against such “espionage.” American embassy in Moscow called statement “nonsense.” (NYT, 6/11/64,10)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and Soviet space accomplishments:	“1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly, having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the Saturn I. “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in total weight of net payloads orbited. “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR has since Sputnik I in 1957. “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive. During the past three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82% of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record, while not identical, is comparable. “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some 1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury. . . . “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space than we. have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits, in which the U.S. emphasis has been much greater than theirs. “7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating scientific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it is not safe to assume so. “8. The U.S. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and navigation. “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in the race with our able and aggressive competitor. “. . .1 want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly program, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
An article in the Russian publication Krasnaya Zvezda {Red Star) reported a speech delivered by Russian Premier Khrushchev before a group of professors and students in Mishkol’tse in April 1964. In the speech Khrushchev noted that in the U.S. “the scientists to a considerable degree are not Americans . . . the U.S. has pirated its scientific staffs from the representatives of various nations.” The article went on to call attention to British criticism that the U.S. was drawing scientists out of Britain and detailed the activities of the American army at the end of World War II in attempting to capture German rocket scientists. The article concluded, “We can justifiably be proud that all our achievements in the field of rocketry and cosmonautics, to be sure in all fields of science and technology, are due to the brains and the talent of the Soviet scientists alone, without any help from the outside.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 7/17/64,4, ATSS-T Trans.)
Yelena Andrianovena Nikolayeva, infant daughter of Russian cosmonauts Valentina Tereshkova and Andrian Nikolayev, was to be thoroughly examined for next few years to determine whether weightlessness or radiation of her parents had any effect. (Snider, CDNS, Houston Chron., 7/13/64)
Among the ten top scientific, medical, and technological advances in 1964 as selected by Dr. Watson Davis, Science Service Director, were: 1.	Close-up photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii. 2.	Orbiting of the earth by three Russian cosmonauts in the voskhod I spacecraft. 3.	Discovery of quasars, the brightest, most violent, and heaviest sources of light and radio waves, possibly fueled by collapse of gravity waves. (Sci. Serv., Wash. Daily News, 12/14/64)
Translations of reports in Russian journals indicated that space flights lasting longer than 24 hours produced changes in the human body, including bladder and kidney troubles, that could not be corrected. Future Soviet flights would be aimed at detecting the beginning of these disorders and attempting to prevent them. The translations indicated that the Russians planned to send up more doctors and physiologists and that the primary reason for the 16-mo. delay between flights by the U.S.S.R. was the seriousness of the disorders affecting astronauts after flights lasting for five days. Future crews would be selected “as medical teams as opposed to individuals,” said one Soviet journal. The men would also be picked on the basis of their medical compatibility— to see that one man’s personal germs, bacteria, or virus did not infect other members of the team. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 12/13/64)
Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far U.S. now was on its way to the moon. “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.” Asked about Administration policy to classify Soviet space failures, Dr. Welsh replied: “. . . The policy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed largely to protect sources of information, many of which in those days were individuals actually in the Soviet Union. “Most of the information we get today comes from sources outside the Soviet Union which need no protection. As a consequence, there is less j ustification at the present time for classifying Russian space failures than there was in the past. I am not saying that there is no justification. . . . “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet failures.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. designer of the F—12A (A—11) aircraft, said that the airplane could easily outfly Russian aircraft. He stated that the F—12A could capture all three absolute world flight records currently held by the Russians. (AP, Kansas City Times, 7/18/64)
British scientists at the Jodrell Bank radio astronomy station were reported searching the skies for the Russian space probe zond i which was believed to be approaching Venus. The Russians had never revealed the precise mission of the probe and refused to supply the Jodrell Bank scientists with the radio frequencies on which it was operating, but it was believed that the probe would closely approach Venus during the 72-hr. period beginning July 17. (Reuters, Minneapolis Morning Trib., 7/18/64)
U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
Several U.S. and foreign scientists would be guests on the 11th Antarctic expedition of the Soviet Union, Tass announced. Leonid Balakshin of the Arctic and Antarctic Institute in Leningrad said that 50 foreign scientists had already spent winters at the Mirny Observatory and other Russian stations near the South Pole. “The exchange of polar scientists is striking evidence of the constructive cooperation between Soviet and foreign explorers on the sixth continent,” Balakshin said. (Reuters, NYT, 8/21/65, 21)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
Russian communications satellite MOLNIYA i, because of its higher and sharply elongated orbit, could transmit continuously several hours longer than American Telstars, reported Tass. Tass claimed that Tel-stars could transmit uninterruptedly for only 30 min. (Reuters, NYT, 5/7/65, 3)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever said in the keynote address at the Air Force/Industry Planning Seminar in Dayton that “we need a broader perspective and greater vision in our conceptual planning ... we need to be more farsighted.” He continued: “The Soviet Union is making a major effort to surpass us in science and technology. The Soviets now have approximately the same number of scientists and engineers that we have. But every year they graduate an average of 200,000 scientific and technical students as compared with about 120,000 a year in this country. It is also worth noting that the number of scientific institutions in Russia has grown from about 3000 in 1957 to about 5000 in 1965. “Both of these facts indicate that the Soviets are deadly serious when they talk about the importance of science and technology to their global ambitions. We must more than match their effort, not only too maintain our national security but also to keep our world markets.” (Text)
North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracked a new Russian satellite (cosmos lii) for several hours before Moscow announced the launching. As of this date, norad’s space detection and tracking system was observing 488 man-made objects in space, of which 29 were actual payload satellites and the rest debris from previous launchings, (ap, Balt. Sun, 1/12/65)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. to receive an honorary doctorate, said in a speech:	“. . . while our national policy is to maximize the peaceful uses of outer space . . . and to avoid the extension of weapons, we have no choice but to acquire a broadly-based total capability in space; a capability that can enable us to insure the protection of our national security interests while we actively seek cooperative peaceful development. . . . “The Roman mastery of land and sea communications, the English mastery of the seas, the American mastery of the air and of nuclear energy were each accompanied by greatly enhanced prestige and followed by vast increases in power and position, new knowledge, the establishment of strategic international economic advantages, the wide use of new resources, great advances in military capability, and a quickening of national pride and vigor. Portentous realignments among nations were inevitable. These are the advantages the Russians now seek from their enormous investments in space. These are the advantages we cannot permit them to acquire and use against the non-Communist world. “In these lessons of history lies the real challenge of space. The portents for our own time are clear enough in the early lead of the Soviet Union with the first Sputnik, Vostok, and Voskhod. The spurt in Soviet prestige brought a new assurance and weight in the international political arena, a new pride and confidence in Soviet national purpose. We have reacted quickly and with ever-increasing success, but the challenge of the mastery of space remains to be accomplished for us as a nation and for you as a member of the new generation. We are meeting this challenge, and in doing so enhancing the broadest values for our society and our world. “Our power to survive as a great and vigorous Society is in the process of being proven again through our space efforts. Your own involvement in the actions and consequences will be far greater than you or I can fully appreciate today. . . .” (Text; NYT, 2/5/65)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, manned by pilot Col. Pavel Belyayev and co-pilot Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Tass reported. The spacecraft set an altitude record, reaching an apogee of 495 km. (309 mi.)—higher than any manned spacecraft had flown. Other orbital data: perigee, 173 km. (108 mi.); inclination, 65°; period, 91 min. During the second orbit, Lt. Col. Leonov, clad in a spacesuit with “autonomous life support system,” stepped into space, moved about five meters from the spacecraft (tethered by a cable), and successfully carried out prescribed studies and observations: he examined the outer surface of the spacecraft; turned on a film camera; carried out visual observations of the earth and outer space: took horizontal, vertical, and somersaulting positions; and returned safely to the spacecraft. Tass said: “Outside the ship and after returning, Leonov feels well.” He spent about 20 min. in conditions of outer space, including 10 min. free-floating in space. Entire procedure was carried out under control of Col. Belyayev, with whom continuous communication was maintained. A television camera fixed to the side of voskhod ii relayed pictures of the maneuver to Soviet ground stations. Biotelemetric data indicated that both cosmonauts had satisfactorily withstood the orbiting and the transition to weightlessness: the pulse rate of Belyayev and Leonov was 70—72 beats a minute and the respiration rate 18-20 a minute. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. Tass said voskhod ii would complete at least 13 orbits of the earth. (Tass, ap, ALT’, 3/19/65; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 3/19/ 65, 1, atss-t Trans.; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 3/19/65)
Gen. Thomas Dresser White, usaf Chief of Staff from 1957 to 1961 and one of the chief proponents of a balanced air-space defense system, died. He had been a member of the naca 1957-58, and the first U.S. military attache in Russia in 1933. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, D4)
Dr. Hideo Itokawa, professor at Tokyo Univ. and deputy director of Japan’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, was quoted on Japan’s role in space activity by Peter Temm in an article in the Washington Sunday Star: “Space research is not a competition. It should be a cooperative undertaking among all countries, to explore and study the universe. “Both America and Russia appear to be chiefly interested in artificial satellites and manned space vehicles. I see Japan’s role as filling some of the gaps skipped over by these two nations. “I believe it is possible that Russia may be preparing to abandon its project of putting a man on the moon in favor of assembling a satellite space station; at least, this how I interpret the recent Voskhod flight and its emphasis on carrying out tasks outside of the capsule. “I sincerely hope if this is so, that American space scientists will not swerve from their intentions of getting to the moon. There are many sides to space research, and the ideal approach is for all nations engaged in the new science to tackle different areas. “That way, we will all progress at a faster rate.” (Temm, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/25/65)
LUNA VII 3,313-lb. instrumented moon probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Tass said the last stage of the multistage launching rocket was put into parking orbit and then LUNA VII was fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. Launching occurred on the eighth anniversary of the orbiting by the Soviet Union of the first earth satellite, sputnik i. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 10/5/65, All; Nordlinger, Balt. Sun, 10/5/65, 5)
LUNA VII moon probe probably was destroyed in impact on the moon because the firing of the retrorockets was “only partially successful,” speculated Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Observatory. Sir Bernard said variations in the signals heard at Jodrell Bank showed luna vii’s retrorockets were fired at 4:58 p.m. EDT for six minutes. He estimated that LUNA VII, traveling about 2 mps., was slowed down by five-eighths of a mile a second during this firing. Signals began again at 5:20 p.m. and then stopped at 6:08 p.m.—the precise time when Russia had said luna vn would reach the moon. There was no official word on the /ate of the ton-and-a-half space probe, but Western experts believed the Soviets had failed in their third attempt to softland on the moon. (upi. Wash. Post, 10/9/65, A6; ap. Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A5)
An article in Human Events expressed fear that Russian military space capability surpassed that of the U.S.: “. . . Four times in the past 2 months, Red Star (a newspaper published by the Defense Ministry) has trumpeted the claim that Russia now has orbital space rockets with the capacity of wiping any aggressor off the face of the earth. “There is no doubt at all about the intended identity of the aggressor and among American scientists back home there is little doubt about the weapon. “There is little doubt because the United States spent 7 years and $10 million between 1958-65 to plan the nuclear-powered space orbiting system called Project Orion. We have high-ranking scientists who believe the Russians have copied or adapted Orion, which has been declassified since October, 1964. The Russians might easily have cracked the secrecy before that. “It is a first generation vehicular system that is capable of carrying 8 men and 100 tons of payload to Mars and back. It is a jet-propelled engine or engines powered by a nuclear reactor which, in effect, bombs a shield at the rear of the vehicle and drives it forward. The usual limitations of temperature do not affect this vehicle because the hot debris of the explosions makes only a momentary contact with the shield. The limitations of using full nuclear power are also absent because the reactor is outside the vehicle. “Guidance, mobility, range, the exchange of crew-members, and the restocking of the payload are all within this space cruiser’s capability. Its potentials as a raider of earth targets, and as an interceptor of our space satellites, are almost limitless. It may not be the never-never ultimate weapon, but it will do until another comes along.” {CR, 8/25/65, A4807-08)
U.S. would make the first lunar landing because the “Saturn 5 booster ... is the only one anywhere powerful enough to do that,” predicted NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the International Radio and Television Society in New York. He believed the U.S. was ahead of Russia in cumulative knowledge of manned spaceflight, but conceded that Russia was probably 18 mo. ahead in other areas—specifically, multimanned spacecraft and the building and use of big boosters. Webb refused to classify Russia’s LUNA VII mission as unsuccessful, explaining: “They’re practicing how to do these things. They must have gained a good deal of information from it.” (San Diego Union, 10/10/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
After 26 hrs. of flight, Col. Pavel I. Belyayev landed voskhod ii manually near Perm, Russia. Tass announced. The two-man spacecraft had completed 17 orbits of the earth, one more orbit than planned, and had traveled 447,000 mi. This was the first time landing of a Soviet spacecraft had been described as manual. Impact of voskhod II on the ground, later revealed as snow bank, was described as “soft.” (Tanner, NYT, 3/20/65, 1, 3; Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
Editorial in Life put into perspective the “break-throughs” and spectacular “firsts” recently achieved in space exploration—U.S.S.R.’s voskhod II, U.S.’s Gemini hi, ranger ix, ComSatCorp’s EARLY bird. “The first Sputnik was less than eight years ago, but already the space age has reached what President Johnson calls an ‘early maturity.’ Each technical advance is a planned and measured consequence of the previous one; Mercury fed Gemini and Gemini feeds Apollo; each hero stands on the shoulders of predecessors who are also his contemporaries. . . . “Our space program is, as Johnson puts it, ‘a national asset of proven worth and incalculable potential.’ Its cost is leveling off at about $7 billion a year. One hopes this includes enough to land us on the moon before the Russians—and what’s wrong with wanting to be first? . . . “Our program, which may or may not be overtaking the Russian, is well past its own first period of jumpy desperation. We can stick to it in confidence.” [Life, 4/9/65)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
Dr. A. J. Drummond of Eppley Laboratory, Newport, R.I., told Missiles and Rockets that a number of Russian cosmonauts were said to have died in booster failures at launch. Dr. Drummond got his information through unofficial sources while attending a technical meeting in Leningrad last year. He also said there were no large solar-simulation testing facilities in the Soviet Union and that Soviet spacecraft used crude bulk insulation for thermal control instead of emission-absorption coatings. (M&R, 1/25/65, 7)
Referring to the “real success of Luna 6,” an article in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin said: “This is not the first Russian failure in space. But it is the first open admission of failure. Americans, who have had their own failures, can’t help but warm up a little in the glow of such non-Marxist honesty.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/15/65)
By a 45%-to-42% margin, the American people believed the space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure, according to a Harris poll. By a 50%-to-38% margin, the public would oppose continuing the program at the present rate of expenditure if it were not for Russian exploits in space. (Harris, Wash. Post, 11/1/65, A2)
LUNA vi, Russian probe, passed the halfway point on its journey to the moon. All systems continued to function normally, Tass announced. (Tass, 6/9/65)
Editorializing in the Washington Evening Star about “lean years” beginning for the aerospace industry, William Hines said: “. . . Since the ’50s, aerospace companies have become accustomed to a diet of caviar, filet and champagne. The government has poured something like 100 billion into rockets, missiles and spacecraft since the Soviet Union’s Sputnik went up in October, 1957. The torrent of funds is now being reduced, if not precisely to a trickle, certainly to a more moderate flow. . . . “The aerospace crisis is serious enough that the management-consultant firm of Arthur D. Little, Inc., has just published a study, ‘Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry.’ It makes the following revealing point:
U.S. experts believed that Russia might attempt to launch a multimanned spacecraft on a 15-day mission as her next manned space effort, reported William J. Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Based on recent conversation with Soviet scientists, U.S. specialists felt that there was complete confidence in the Voskhod environmental-control system which had been qualified for 30-day missions, Normyle explained. They also believed that the Soviets were prepared to attempt a rendezvous mission more ambitious than Gemini 6. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 11/1/65)
Washington Post concluded that it might be embarrassing for the Russians to refuse President Johnson’s invitation to send a representative from the Soviet Academy to view the next Gemini launching. An editorial elaborated: “It just so happens that a high-level Russian space delegation will be in New York City in mid-October to attend a meeting of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. “It just so happens, too, that the Gemini 6 launching is scheduled for late October. “And, it just so happens that Mr. Johnson knew the dates of both scheduled happenings. . . . “There is no guarantee that the Russians will accept the President’s invitation—the first formal invitation of its kind extended to them. Hitherto, the Russians have not accepted informal invitations to witness an American space launching. . . . “Experts have suggested that one reason for this Soviet shyness was the tacit implication that if the Russians accept an American invitation to Cape Kennedy, Russia would have to respond with a like invitation. . . .” (Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
“The Americans had not planned to let a man out until the end of this year. But after our flight they became bolder. A small group of American specialists, with the permission of our government, came to the Soviet Union and talked with cosmonauts [Col. Pavel I.] Belyayev and [L/Col. Aleksey] Leonov about their flight and we didn’t hide anything.” Questioned by newsman about the visit by “American specialists,” Kamanin said either three or five persons had interviewed the Russian cosmonauts for several days, but he could not recall their names. Kamanin was asked if the visitors were officials of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “I don’t know,” he replied. “Officially they were here with a television company—allegedly.” NASA categorically denied General Kamanin’s allegation, UPI reported. A spokesman said: “We have been unable to uncover any United States delegation of scientists addressed by the Soviet cosmonauts.” Reuters, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; upi, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/25/65, 1)
U.S.S.R. had kept the U.S. under relatively continuous surveillance with photo reconnaissance satellites launched as part of the Cosmos program, said Edward H. Kolcum in an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology. In 1964 14 such satellites were launched, he asserted. The article continued: “Soviet photo reconnaissance payload is believed to be an unmanned version of the Vostok spacecraft, which successfully carried cosmonauts into orbit six times. The unmanned camera mission uses the same launch facilities and same recovery techniques developed from Russian manned satellites. The recoverable section is the pressurized cabin, which weighs about 5,000 lb. when it is ejected from the main spacecraft for a parachute descent on land. . . . “Six of these payloads were recovered after eight days; two after seven days, one after six days and another after five days. One came down after 24 hr. in orbit; one remained up five weeks, another eight and a half weeks, and another, launched Aug. 29, is still in orbit. Departures from the norm are believed to indicate retrofire malfunctions or failures. Most recent Soviet reconnaissance satellite was Cosmos 52, launched Jan. 11 and recovered Jan. 19. . . .” He stated that 11 of the 14 reconnaissance satellites orbited in 1964 were orbited at 65° inclination. The remaining three orbited at 51° inclination—“an inclination that also permits the payload to sweep over the entire continental United States.” The other Cosmos satellites, orbited at 49° inclination, had remained in orbit until they decayed naturally. They were “believed to be scientific applications and military development payloads.” (Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 22)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
In a New York Times letter to the editor, Daniel Murphy commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop Manned Orbital Laboratory: “Once again we are asked to silently acquiesce to a questionable military dictum—‘if we don’t, they will.’ Because Russia has the capacity to send up such armaments, why does it so logically follow that they will do so? It is we, not they, who have a three or four to one superiority in icbm’s. . . . “By our action will we allow the Soviet Union any alternative but to respond in kind? Would not President Johnson’s invitation to the Soviet scientists stand a much greater likelihood of acceptance if coupled with an offer of diplomatically exploring the possibility of not constructing such armaments? “The Administration’s proposal can only increase the tensions of a world troubled enough.” {NYT, 9/1/65, 32)
Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff (r&d), stated in fy 1966 appropriations hearings of House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “I cannot help but believe, if we take a look at the last 40 years of Russian national development, that they are watching for an opportunity to gain a major military advantage over us. I cannot help but feel that they are examining opportunities in space very thoroughly for this particular purpose. “In order to be able to offset any advantage which they may discover, I feel we must move as rapidly as we can in this area, and take full advantage of any other national space programs such as the NASA activity. “The big program that we hope to get a go-ahead on here shortly is the Manned Orbital Laboratory. Here we think we will achieve a number of answers in the next 2 or three years. . . .”	(DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 148)
A spokesman for Britain’s Jodrell Bank Radio Telescope Observatory said concerning the Tass report that radio signals from cta-102 might come from intelligent beings in outer space:	“We have made measurements on these sources and confirmed that they are very weak and very small. But there is no observational evidence at Jodrell Bank to show any variation in the signal strength received. We would have to scrutinize carefully the Russian evidence before making any further statements.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 4/13/65)
In January, Dr. Donald F. Hornig began his second year as science adviser to President Johnson and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. In interview he mentioned that his job was created to prevent a recurrence of the kind of official surprise that greeted Russia’s launching of the sputnik i on Oct. 4, 1957. Hornig said the policy questions that he encountered were not ones of “right or wrong, but wise or less wise.” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 16)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made his first address on the U.S. space program at the Goddard Memorial Dinner sponsored by the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He said: “1 intend to be an advocate of a dynamic space program—a program which will succeed in reaching to goals we have set—and one which will see new goals—one that can see beyond the moon and into fields where we can only speculate about the knowledge awaiting us.” The Vice President spoke briefly about the Soviet Union’s VOSKHOD II flight: “It is well for us from time to time to take stock—to take a careful look—in order to see how we are making out in comparison with our main competitor. The facts are that we do have very strong competition and hence we have another big reason for a major space effort—namely, prudence. Our national security alone would suggest reason enough for us to strive for absolute leadership in space exploration.” Humphrey pointed out that the Soviets remained ahead in propulsion for their rockets, while the U.S. continued to lead “in the directly useful fields of weather reporting, navigation, and communications.” He continued: “The Soviets clearly have an advantage in studying the effects of space environment on human beings. . . . We can salute the Russian achievements . . . but we would be foolish if we did not understand the military implications of Soviet space science as well as our own. “Each Russian shock has produced action here. But a mature nation should not need shock treatment. We are a peaceful nation . . . but we would ignore the real interests of the free world if we diminished our military efforts in space.” In the principal presentation, the widow of the scientist presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and leader of the RANGER vii team that obtained the first close-up pictures of the moon’s surface. The National Space Club Press Award for “an outstanding role in adding significantly to public understanding and appreciation of astronautics” went to Aviation Week and Space Technology; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for “an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft, and space field” was presented to Florida Research and Development Center, Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to John Tascher, Case Institute of Technology, for U.S. Rocket Society Number Two: the Story of the Cleveland Rocket Society; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to the university of the recipient’s choice) for “the purpose of stimulating the interest of talented students in space research and exploration” was awarded Willard M. Cronyn, a graduate student in Maryland Univ.’s Dept, of Physics and Astronomy. (Text; Program; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/20/65)
In an article in the Indianapolis Star discussing Soviet medical practices observed during his visit to Russia at the invitation of the Soviet Academy of Science, Dr. John M. Keshishian, associate in surgery on the George Washington University School of Medicine faculty, said: “It is not generally known that just before Voskhod was ordered into reentry, the pulse rate of one cosmonaut dropped to 40. “When your pulse rate drops below 40 heartbeats a minute, you’re in trouble. “The Russians haven’t said anything about this . . . but it could be another one of the problems their space medicine is encountering for which there seems to be no ready solutions. “For example, some Russian cosmonauts have suffered severe, hallucinations, both in flight and afterwards. Others have suffered equally severe and, thus far, inexplicable vertigo during which they can’t be certain whether the floor’s coming up to meet them or vice versa, or whether they’re spinning, or the room is. And Russian physicians have found that . . . space flight environment—possibly weightlessness—draws calcium from the blood and expels it in the urine.” (World Book Encyclopedia Science Service, Inc., Keshishian, Indianapolis Star)
Russian Cosmonaut Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, first man to walk in space, was quoted as calling the Gemini iv flight of Majors James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Edward H. White n (usaf) “a very interesting one.” During an interview with the Bulgarian news agency, he congratulated the Gemini crew, wished them “a happy landing back on earth,” and said “no doubt the experience from our flight must have helped the U.S. space program very much in preparing and executing the flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/7/65)
A secret weapon, about which former Soviet Premier Nikita S. Khrushchev had boasted, blew up in 1960 killing the commander-inchief of the Soviet missile forces, Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, and 300 others, the Manchester Guardian reported. The weapon was a missile with a nuclear propellant. The Guardian quoted secret reports of Oleg V.	Penkovsky, a Russian executed in 1963 for spying for the West, which would be published in November 1965.	(NYT, 10/17/65, 25; Wash. Post, 10/17/65, 1)
Two Russian airmen had set a world altitude record by flying mI^I helicopter with a load of nearly two tons to 20,894 ft., Tass reported. (Reuters, N.Y. News, 3/14/65)
Rep. Burt L. Talcott (R-Calif.) inserted in the Congressional Record a letter from E. J. Stecker, president of Holex, Inc., and an exhibitor at the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) : “At Paris the Russians made us look like idiots and we cooperated so beautifully that it almost looked as though our public relations program was being directed by the Kremlin. . . . “I walked through the aircraft park where the Russian and American exhibits were practically side by side. The Russian aircraft were exclusively commercial, the American almost 100 percent military. Think of the irony of the situation. . . . “There was a long line waiting to enter the . . . space exhibit of the U.S.S.R. . . . inside was a full scale model of the Vostok space capsule and its rocket motor suspended from the ceiling, what appeared to be an operational Vostok in a glass case and Mr. Gagarin, Russia’s first man in space, who shook my hand . . . and gave me a Vostok lapel pin. This was easily the most popular exhibit at the show and I would estimate that 70 percent of the attendees had Vostok pins and were wearing them. . . . “The Russians then flew in their great misshapen 750-passenger transport aircraft which really impressed the public. I examined it and as a pilot and engineer of many years standing, I feel it economically and militarily foolish, but the publicity value was tremendous. “Then there was the announcement of the proposed U.S.S.R. SST transport which looks like a retouched Concorde. This also hit all of the front pages. “In short, the Russians stole the show with an obsolete space capsule much inferior to our Mercury, an artist’s sketch of a supersonic transport and an overgrown, awkward monstrosity of an airplane. But they could do it because everything they did was aimed at and shown to the general public. . . . “When White, McDivitt, and the Vice President finally arrived, it was a triumphant tour surrounded by Secret Service, press, public relations and photographers and the great mass of the unwashed public including the exhibitors were generally ignored and forgotten. . . . “There were a few good points. James Webb, Administrator of the NASA, visited the U.S. exhibitors. He came unheralded and alone and had time to stop and talk for a few minutes without the aid of 50 photographers. In this, Jim was unique among the U.S. officials and should be commended. The usaf Thunderbirds and the U.S. Navy Blue Angels put on fantastic flying exhibitions on Thursday evening. But it occurred around 7:30 p.m. when most of the public had departed. “The point is this: The Russians appealed to the people; we ignored the people and appealed to the press. As a result, the Russians only lost the front pages once and that was when we made them through the unfortunate crash of our 2-58.” (CR, 7/6/65, A3555-6)
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
“U.S. space officials are in no particular hurry to develop a ground landing because water landings have worked so well,” reported the Washington Post. The article said that the “Soviet landing system— partly due to the Russians’ large and sparsely populated land area and their lack of sea forces—required Russian astronauts to parachute out of the descending spaceship.” This put stress on the airman—especially after long periods of weightlessness, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
President Johnson, asked during a press conference, “where does our space program stand in relation to the Soviets’ in the wake of their latest feat?” replied: “The Soviet accomplishment and our own scheduled efforts demonstrate, I think dramatically and convincingly, the important role that man himself will play in the exploration of the space frontier. The continuing efforts of both our program and the Russian program will steadily produce capability and new space activity. This capability, in my judgment, will help each nation achieve broader confidence to do what they consider they ought to do in space. “I have felt since the days when I introduced the Space Act and sat studying Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 that it was really a mistake to regard space exploration as a contest which can be tallied on any box score. “Judgments can be made only by considering all the objectives of the two national programs, and they will vary and they will differ. Our own program is very broadly based. We believe very confidently in the United States that we will produce contributions that we need at the time we need them. For that reason, I gave Mr. Webb and his group every dollar in the Budget that they asked for a manned space flight. “Now the progress of our program is very satisfactory to me in every respect. We are committed to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind. We stressed that in our hearings and our legislation when we passed the bill, and while the Soviet is ahead of us in some aspects of space, U.S. leadership is clear and decisive and we are ahead of them in other realms on which we have particularly concentrated.” (Transcript; Wash. Post, 3/21/65)
In advance excerpts of his book, Waging Peace, 1956-1961, President Dwight D. Eisenhower related his “reactions to Sputnik and the Gaither Report” in October and November 1957. President Eisenhower reviewed a meeting on October 8, 1957, with his principal military and scientific advisers. The late Deputy Secretary of Defense Donald A. Quarles reported: “There is no doubt that the Army Redstone could have orbited a satellite a year or more earlier. . . .” Quarles reviewed the reasons for the separation of the IGY Vanguard satellite from the ballistic missile programs, saying: “The Russians have done us a good turn, unintentionally, in establishing the concept of international space,” a principle confirmed by the orbiting of Sputnik over the air space of country after country. “Late that same morning,” President Eisenhower wrote, “I directed Secretary of Defense Charles Wilson to have the Army prepare its Redstone at once as a backup for the Navy Vanguard.” Of sputnik II, which orbited “Laika” on November 3, 1957, President Eisenhower said it did not arouse American public opinion because people “seemed to resent the sending a dog to certain death—a resentment that the Soviet propagandists tried to assuage a few days later by announcing that they had put poison in the last of Laika’s rations. . . . “The public, however, became bewildered and upset when word got out that a far from optimistic secret report had been made to me in the National Security Council . . . called the Gaither Report. “This was a period of anxiety. Sputnik had revealed the psychological vulnerability of our people. The Communists were steadily fomenting trouble and rattling sabers; our economy was sputtering somewhat, and the ceaseless and usually healthy self-criticism in which we of the United States indulge had brought a measure of self-doubt. Added to this was the failure of our first satellite launching attempt [Vanguard] in the full glare of publicity and the alleged missile ‘gaps’ which political observers claimed they had detected .. . “The Soviet satellites,” President Eisenhower said, “were a genuine technological triumph, and this was exceeded by their propaganda value. To uninformed persons in the world, Soviet success in one area led to the belief that Soviet communism was surging ahead in all types of activity.” {Wash. Post, 9/21/65, Al, A19)
AEC report said that nuclear fuel aboard a spacecraft which failed to go into orbit last April 21 had burned up harmlessly at high altitude. This was a reply to Russian and other critics who had accused the U.S. of causing radiation hazards by putting atomic generators aboard spacecraft. The generator involved was a Snap-9A aboard a Navy navigation satellite launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/8/65)
Moscovsky Komsomolets reported that the wife of Valery Bykovsky, Russian cosmonaut, was expecting a second baby. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 2/12/65)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
Results o{ a recent Gallup Poll indicated that 47% of the American public believed that the United States was ahead of Russia in the “space race.” A 1961 poll had shown that most Americans viewed the space race as an even contest. Asked if they, themselves, would like to go to the moon, 87% of the people approached said no. (Wash. Post, 7/23/65, A2)
Need for creation of a “Buck Rogers rescue squad” with trained men and equipment to give aid on short notice to spacemen stranded or stricken in orbit was discussed by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. Hines said a persuasive case had been made by Michael Stoiko of the Martin Co.: “Stoiko estimated that in the next 20 years there will be about 280 manned space flights involving about 800 men. Half of each—men and flights—will be American, half Russian. Total flight time will be about 2.4 million man hours, compared with the world-wide total of about 1,200 man hours to date.” Stoiko projected “a 62 percent probability of at least seven emergency situations involving 22 men in the next 20 years; a 58 percent probability of two or three emergencies in the coming decade.” Hines said that now “astronauts stranded in orbit would have no hope of rescue and only a melancholy choice between two fatal alternatives: to sweat it out until the oxygen finally was gone, or to make a quick end of it by explosively decompressing both spacecraft and suit.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/2/65)
Soviet Cosmonauts Col. Pavel I. Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov appeared in public for the first time since they landed voskhod ii in the Perm region Mar. 19. They were en route to Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan where they were expected to undergo detailed medical checkups and debriefings by scientists and technicians before being welcomed in Moscow in Red Square. (Shabad, NYT, 3/22/65, 1,3)
Russia was developing long-range intercontinental missiles that could maneuver in flight, Col. Gen. Vladimir Toluhko, First Deputy Commander of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, told Tass. (upi, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
Display of what the Soviets called an orbital missile at the military parade in Moscow Nov. 7 and “related Russian statements do seem to place upon the Russian government an obligation to make clear its future intentions with respect to the [U.N.] resolution” against weapons in space, State Department press officer Robert J. McCloskey told a news conference. Noting that the U.S. could easily put such a weapon into orbit, McCloskey said that the military value of this would be negligible, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/19/65, A10)
VOSKHOD iTs two-man crew, Col. Pavel Belyayev and Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, rested under medical supervision at an undisclosed place in the northern Ural mountains, Tass reported. Soviet space flight headquarters at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan reported that VOSKHOD n’s antennas had burned away as the spacecraft reentered the earth’s atmosphere. The descent had been tracked by radar units. Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev, Soviet Cosmonaut, said the order to use manual controls in landing voskhod ii was given by a Soviet ground station, Izvestia reported. It was not known whether the manual landing was part of the original program or was made necessary by a malfunction of the automatic controls. (Shabad, NYT, 3/21/65, 3) . . . . .
Soviet deputy minister of communications I. V. Klokov, commenting for Izvestia on orbiting of the second molniya I comsat, said: “The orbiting of the second Soviet Comsat ‘Molniya-1’ will permit us to verify the feasibility of organizing a communication system envisaging the combined use of several sputniks. This will offer the possibility of a marked increase in the duration of contact to the point of becoming a round-the-clock system. . . . “With the aid of the new sputnik, the first telephone communication sessions have already been conducted; Moscow and Vladivostok have exchanged the first TV programs. These tests have shown that the quality of the radio communications and telecommunications is superior to that found in the experiments with the first Soviet Comsat, Molniya-1.” (Izvestia, 10/16/65, 3; atss-t Trans.)
A group of amateur astronomers working on a lunar research project for nasa reported observations of unusual color glows on the moon and photographed this phenomenon. The group told nasa it saw the color in the crater Aristarchus during a four-hour period before daylight through a 16-in. telescope at Port Tobacco, Md. Although such events had been observed several times since the Russian astronomer N.	Kozyrev first recorded observations or red glows on spectrograms, this was the first time photographic equipment was used successfully to record the sightings in the crater Aristarchus. Observation was culmination of a 16-mo. vigil by members of a “Moon-Blink” team from Annapolis, Md. The team had made two previous confirmed sightings, including one in the crater Alphonsus last year, but they were much shorter and were not photographed. (NASA Release 65-370)
Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal: ". . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may conceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from the first international treaty on space law could produce future difficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations beyond the time of the first manned lunar landing. . . . There is no time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36) ". . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a prospect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the President’s call for a renewed effort ... to negotiate an understanding under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6) "The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970. The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. ". . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs, as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) ". . . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive treaty of this nature is, 'Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems, on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . . . "There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in Antarctica—nearest thing to the moon on earth—is neither to assert nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy before the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
Soviet press reported that Belka and Strelka, dog passengers on U.S.S.R. ’s sputnik v in orbit more than 24 hrs. Aug. 19-20, 1960, were alive anp well. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/28/66, B7)
Aviatrix Geraldine Mock—who in 1964 became first woman to make a solo flight around world—set a new world nonstop distance record for women in a 4,550-mi., 31-hr. flight from Honolulu, Hawaii, to Columbus, Ohio, in single-engine Cessna 206. Previous distance flight record of 3,671 mi. had been set by three Russian women in 1938. (NYT, 4/12/66, 25; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A3)
Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square. After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a niche. Commentary in the New York Times: "Death has finally declassified the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to Leonov’s 'walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press only as the mysterious 'chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photograph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
Pointing out that "space triumphs” had made "secrecy and the hoarding of scientific data less worthwhile,” editorial in the Baltimore Sun concluded: ". . . it is not surprising that, despite the relationship between military defense and some space activity, Russia and France seem about to agree to cooperate in space research—and the United States and Russia likewise.” (Balt. Sun, 6/27/66)
Seven U.S. scientists had consented to serve on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Editorial Board provided for in agreement on space biology and medicine reached by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences representatives Oct. 8, 1965, in New York City: Melvin Calvin, Univ. of California, Berkeley— U.S. co-chairman; Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of Kentucky; Dr. Robert W. Krauss, Univ. of Maryland; Robert B. Leighton, Cal Tech; Dr. John P. Marbarger, Univ. of Illinois; Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, nasa; and Wolf Vishniac, Univ. of Rochester. Agreement provided that Editorial Board, cochaired by a Soviet and a U.S. scientist, would supervise collection, preparation, and publication of materials on space biology and medicine. It would select compilers to assemble and prepare materials and authors —approximately equal number of Soviet and U.S.—to write the material. Work was expected to be published in several volumes, in both English and Russian, between 1967 and 1968. Cost of work performed by each country would be borne by that country, (nasa Release 66-49)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
The Washington Post commented on criticism of NASA spending: "What an uproar there was in 1957 when Sputnik showed us we were second in space! The Eisenhower Administration was roundly condemned. Congressmen and Senators clamored for a stepped-up space program and promised all the money needed. President Kennedy, in his 1960 campaign . . . said repeatedly: 'I am not satisfied to be second in space.’ "Well, we are no longer second in space. And the critics of the Johnson Administration are now not satisfied to be first in space—■ unless it can be done cheap. As a result of the space program we are not only going to be first on the moon and first in space. We are going to be first in a thousand fields of science, education, and industry. "This country does not have to choose between a space program that will keep it in first place and a poverty program that will keep it first ... in national exertion for the disadvantaged. It can be and ought to be first in both.” (Wash. Post, 12/2/66, A16)
Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, "chief constructor of space systems for the Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after World War II. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union, Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from sputnik i in 1957 to voskhod ii manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; upi, Wash. Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66, 82)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
International press commented on luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon. New York Times: "Two facts indicate the magnitude of the advance that has now been made. One is the known failure of four earlier Soviet rockets to make the soft landing finally achieved by Luna 9. The second is the unhappy history of efforts in this country to build the Surveyor vehicle, which is intended to perform moon reconnaissance of the type in which the Soviet ship is pioneering. The Surveyor project is currently far behind schedule. The first flight is not planned until later this year, and it is impossible even to forecast when a Surveyor will duplicate the soft landing of Luna 9. "The whole process demonstrates again the wastefulness of the Soviet-American moon race. Were the United States and Russia cooperating fully, rather than competing, the hundreds of millions of dollars spent on Surveyor would have been applied to progress in fields still inadequately explored by either country.” Yomiuri Shimbun, Tokyo: "It is possible to say that the Soviet Union is considerably ahead of the U.S. in the moon development program. It is regrettable that the two nations have failed to exchange information and technology for the development of outer space.” La Nazione, Florence: "If the Russians already know how to land on the moon, they still don’t know how to effect a 'rendezvous’ in orbit. The inverse holds, naturally, for the Americans. This means that both are still faced by formidable problems and that the great contest is still open.” Times of India, Bombay: "At this rate it is not unreasonable to presume that a Russian-manned probe will land on the moon and return in about a year from now, beating the Americans to it by about three years.” (NYT, 2/6/66, Ell)
U.S.S.R. launched 3,608-lb. luna xi space station toward moon for "further testing of systems of an artificial moon sputnik and scientific explorations of near lunar space.” Preliminary data indicated that spacecraft was traveling close to calculated trajectory and equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 8/24/66)
Ninth anniversary of orbiting of sputnik i by U.S.S.R.
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: "Two years ago I asked Administrator Webb for nasa’s future space plans and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been issued. Instead, nasa Administrator Webb has told us 'the future of the nasa program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . . "Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear. Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically, the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had. From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage. "Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
France’s President Charles de Gaulle watched launch of cosmos cxxn unmanned satellite from Baikonur cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, into 625-km. (388-mi.) altitude circular orbit with 65° inclination and 97.1min. period. Tass said all instruments aboard satellite were functioning normally. De Gaulle was first Westerner to witness a Soviet launching and to visit Baikonur space center. (Tass, 6/25/66; Tanner, NYT, 6/26/66, 1; Wash. Post, 6/26/66, A20; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/26/66, A8)
There might be a connection between period of inactivity in Soviet manned space flight and Soviet efforts to create an effective antimissile system, speculated Crosby S. Noyes in the Washington Evening Star. ". . . The Russians, in assessing the present state of the world, [might] have radically readjusted their priorities in favor of earthly defenses over celestial exploration. . . .” Noyes suggested U.S. might have to choose soon "between the astronomical costs of continuing exploration of space, and those of the best possible antimissile defense system. If the Russians have, in fact, already made their choice, our own dilemma should bejeasier to resolve. But in any event, the new Russian defense system raises military and political problems which cannot be simply ignored.” (Noyes, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/66, All)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially, there had been little cooperation in space science between the two countries, but said that "Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradition that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin envisioned joint space mission as proof that U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together for "the good of all men on earth” despite disagreement on "how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that he invite "a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea had "great merit.” Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): "As long as America and Russia accelerate space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in space development for military purposes. ... If the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate and 'all the families of the earth’ pitch in to further space development, war on earth will gradually become absurd.” New York World Telegram: "What do we have to lose? If we succeed and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66) During week of March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying objects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask dod to make an investigation. (upi, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; dm, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, Al; upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, A20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/66, Al)
Senate, in approving (60-5) NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) of $4.7 billion, accepted figures of Senate Committee on Appropriations. Measure would go to conference to reconcile differences between House and Senate versions. NASA FY 1968 funding in three categories tallied: r&d Senate appropriation of $3,955 billion was increase of $96.0 million over House appropriation, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization, and decrease of $356.5 million from budget. Construction of Facilities Senate appropriation of $55.4 million was increase of $19.5 million over House appropriation, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget. Administrative Operations Senate appropriation of $628.0 million was decrease of $20.0 million from House appropriation, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman, Senate Committee on 324-801 O—69 Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said: “Ten years ago we did not have the knowledge or the equipment to meet the Russian challenge. ... But today ... we are at the crossroads of decision as to what our space program is going to be in 1970 and beyond. . . .’’ Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking minority member, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, stated that President’s signing of FY 1968 authorization bill “clearly signaled a new policy of relegating the space program to a secondary position.” (Testimony; CR, 10/6/67, S14367-82)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
End of the “space race” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. was nowhere in sight, Holmes Alexander speculated in the Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “As matters stand today, the space contest is pretty much a race between the Communist and capitalistic systems. . . . Percentagewise the Soviet government is investing 2.5 times as much of its gross national product in the moon dash as we are. Moneywise, the investment is about equal. But the Russian economy, being much more ‘managed’ than ours, permits the ordering of what our economists call an ‘internal brain drain.’ Russian consumer industries are raided in order to feed the USSR space programs, whereas . . . NASA must compete . . . [with other agencies]. “It is wishful thinking to believe that the Russians will make any substantive concessions to ease the cost of the space race. As in Vietnam, we are locked in an expensive contest against Communism. Nobody has yet found a way to the negotiation table.” (Alexander, P EB, 5/9/67)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
First flight test of Saturn V, designated Apollo 4, was scheduled no earlier than Nov. 7, announced m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director. “This is a target date,” he said. “We are in a very complex learning process and we are going to take all the time we need on this first launch.” Launch vehicle and Apollo spacecraft combination was 363 ft tall and weighed 6 million lbs. Thrust of Saturn V’s first stage was 7.5 million lbs. Key objective of flight planned for Nov. 7 would be evaluation of Apollo command module heat shield under conditions encountered on return from moon mission. Flight would also test thermal seals for use in new quick-release spacecraft hatch which would be installed on all manned Apollo missions. Apollo 4 flight plan would call for Saturn V to place spacecraft and launch yehicle 3rd stage (S-IVB) into 117-mi circular orbit. After completing two orbits, 3rd stage would he re-ignited to place spacecraft into orbit with apogee of 10,800 mi. After separation from 3rd stage, service module propulsion system would be fired to rafee spacecraft apogee to 11,400 mi. During descent the service module motor would fire again, boosting velocity of spacecraft to about 25,000 mph, the reentry speed of a lunar return flight, (nasa Release 67-274; B Sun, 10/26/67, A6) • GSFC officials completed week of checkout of Oso IV and turned on last of nine experiments. All experiments were performing well and spacecraft was transmitting satisfactory data. The 599-lb spacecraft, launched from etr Oct. 18, had received 1,500 commands. It was 3,000th object in orbit since Sputnik I in 1957; 100th satellite orbited in 1967; and 50th satellite orbited by Delta launch vehicle in 53 attempts. (NASA Release 67-273)
Soviet Union announced a new series of rocket tests believed designed to perfect a sea-landing system for Russian astronauts in preparation for a resumption of manned space flights. Soviet news agency, Tass, said the test of “carrier rockets” would begin Sept. 3. It warned all ships and planes to stay clear of two 80-mile-wide “bulls’ eyes” in the Pacific Ocean, one about 900 miles northeast and one 300 miles northeast of Midway Island, from noon until midnight every day through Oct. 30. (Reuters, W Post, 9/S/61, A16)
U.S. defense warning system was “highly vulnerable” to missile attack because of increasing Russian missile strength, report by Institute for Strategic Studies warned. Institute, 2m unofficial body of military and international affairs’ experts from 28 countries, recommended that U.S. establish a new back-up interceptor control against hostile missiles by mid-1970. {W Post, 4/11/67, A15) Computer technique which had been used to enhance 12 Surveyor I photos of the lunar surface in August 1966 might be applied to diagnostic x rays, Dr. Robert Nathan, jpl scientist who developed the process, suggested in speech over closed-circuit TV broadcast. Process, which separated significant from insignificant detail, could remove distortions and obscurities that often make it difficult for physicians to interpret x-ray films. Dr. Nathan also predicted technique might enable scientists to see the inner details of human chromosomes and gain a new understanding of birth defects. (Randal, W Star, 4/11/67, A3) faa would appoint 10 radiation biology experts to study the radiation aspects of sst operation, faa Administrator William F. McKee revealed. “We want to assure ourselves, beyond any doubt, that high-level altitude flights can be made routinely.” faa was also studying new pressurization on equipment to assure passenger safety at 40,000-ft flight levels as well as new escape devices and evacuation methods, McKee said. (AEr, 4/13/67,74)	_ nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh predicted that U.S. would have the best sst in the world. “Despite its timing, I nominate it for the ‘clean-up’ position in sales, safety, and economy.” Dr. Welsh said expenditures for the SST could be justified because it was important to “our international balance of payments, to our technological progress, to our private enterprise system, to improved transportation, as well as to our international prestige.” (Text) Philco-Ford Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. both displayed several monitoring devices which had grown out of technology acquired by NASA in the development of remote sensing equipment for astronauts. The corporations indicated they would attempt to market the devices for use in medical sciences. (Tech Wk, 4/17/67, 22) Dr. Charles F. Gell, chief scientist of Submarine Medical Research Laboratory at U.S. Naval Submarine Medical Center, received Eric J. Liljencrantz Award and $500 honorarium for his contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and space sciences through medical research. (Av Wk, 4/24/67,121)
Engine noise survey designed to study noise prediction during ground runups was postponed by NASA, reported Aviation Week. Tests, which would have been combined wth usaf studies of propulsion system calibration for amsa, were given lower priority because these' experiments would have caused two-week stand-down between flights. (Av Wk, 10/23/67, 23) Reviewing history of naca and NASA, giss Executive Officer Arthur L. Levine noted that forces which accounted for creation of naca in 1915 were both different from and far less intense that those behind creation of NASA in 1958. NASA played a much more significant role in the Nation and in Federal activity in science and technology than naca, he said, and NASA’s leadership was subjected to a wider variety and greater intensity of pressures from within Government and from outside interests. NASA Historian Eugene M. Emme reviewed historical evolution of U.S. aeronautics and astronautics in context of major national policies and decisions. Citing effects of World Wars I and II, the “cold war” of the 1950’s, and launching of Sputnik, he described how they helped' determine the pace and utilization of technological advances and reviewed major U.S. turning points and relevant factors contributing to the Apollo decision. (Program) m/g J. D. Caldara (usaf, Ret.), President of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., suggested commonality between safety problems and solutions for underwater, aircraft, and space systems based on recognition, reasoning, and responsibility: “This process [of problem solving] spells out the basic building blocks in the structure of the man/machine relationships . . . involving safety. ... If every scientist-engineer accepts his rightful responsibility and applies his imagination and experience to his task, the end result will be . . . [operations that are] 100% efficient and . . . 100% safe.” (Text) GSFC engineers F. 0. Vonbun and J. T. Mengel proposed development of a worldwide tracking and communications system for manned planetary missions similar to that used for Apollo. Planetary Manned Space Flight Network (pmsfn)—consisting of three 30- to 50--ft-dia ground stations, three 210-ft-dia dish antennas, and three synchronous orbiting tracking stations (sots)—would obviate need for other radar, ships, and aircraft, sots, they said, while providing continuous communications, tracking, and telemetry functions, would be more cost-efficient by removing requirement for numerous new tracking stations. (Text; Program) Addressing Honors Banquet, use President Dr. Norman Topping stressed need for expanded program to search and disseminate data produced in space research. Although such data did reach social problems occasionally, “the arrival in the right place at the right time is largely a coincidence,” he noted. To realize the total potential of modern discovery, scientists had to communicate outside their separate, narrow fields, find a common language with the layman, and work together to “find places for their discoveries within the social, ethical, and moral framework of our civilization.” (Text) Princeton Univ. economics professor Oskar Morgenstem, participating in President’s Forum, “The Worth of the Space Program,” contended that the space effort, as a public investment of natural resources, had to be evaluated by comparing its benefits with other ways the resources could have been used. Although no basic discoveries as important as atomic fission, the transistor, or the laser could be attributed to space exploration, he said, U.S. could still afford a high degree of space exploration and could expect discoveries “of a magnitude that will astonish even this generation which has seen so much and is prepared to expect that our knowledge will increase without limit.” Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President of Associated Universities, Inc., and first NASA Administrator, submitted that the most important enduring contribution of the space endeavor to U.S. future was education. Progress in higher education, he said, had occurred as a result of the compelling challenge of space exploration along with nasa’s “clear and evident desire to assure an adequate flow of highly trained manpower. . . Current statistics on NASA investments in higher education were very impressive, he noted, but if NASA’s budget were trimmed further its support to education would have to be diminished. Dr. Willard F. Libby of ucla predicted that space program would “come out to be the best bargain the American people have ever made— both for its practical value in technological developments, and for its contributions to pure knowledge through science.” Space program had already contributed to and answered questions about geosciences, interplanetary sciences, astronomy, and chemistry but most consuming question was that of extraterrestrial life in solar system. (Texts) Major aiaa awards presented at Honors Convocation included: Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to LeRC Director Abe Silverstein for “imagination, technical excellence and leadership which have led to practical application of high energy liquid hydrogen fueled propulsion for space transportation, and for initiating and contributing to the free world’s first manned space transportation system”; De Florez Training Award to Edwin A. Link, chairman of General Precision Equipment Corp.’s Link Aviation Div., for “conceiving and implementing the idea of ground-based flight training equipment”; G. Edward Pendray Award to Columbia Univ. professor Robert A. Gross for “original contributions to gas-dynamics and plasma physics especially in the field of shock wave ionization phenomena”; and Lawrence Sperry Award to msc Flight Director Eugene F. Kranz for “outstanding contributions in directing spacecraft mission planning in developing flight control teams, and as Flight Director of manned Gemini spaceflight missions.” (Av Wk, 10/30/67, 13; aiaa Facts)	,
Life magazine disputed critics who advocated cutting back NASA’s Apollo program: “We do not share the attitude that it doesn’t matter who gets to the moon first, we or the Russians. It does matter. . . . Remember the astonishment, the embarrassment, the apprehension, the loss of prestige we all felt so keenly when Sputnik I went up on Oct. 4, 1957? The prestige we then sought to regain was not mere prestige, an empty abstract symbol of superiority. The superiority at stake was real, not symbolic. . . . “NASA is now engaged in its customary annual defense of its budget requests. We recommend that its expenditures be kept at the $5 to $6 billion level for now. As we continue to compare NASA’s budget with other pressing needs, we must be aware of the challenges and opportunities that arise in space. . . .” {Life, 3/24/67)
U.N. space law treaty had been ratified by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Tass announced. Presidium acted on behalf of the Supreme Soviet when the full body was not in session. Ratified by U.S. Senate April 25, treaty would become effective when U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other nations had filed ratification papers. Washington Evening Star later commented: “. . . [the space law treaty] may not be one of the most significant agreements of our time, but it is surely the most far-reaching, encompassing nothing less than the infinities between us and the stars. It is an agreement, moreover, that puts America and Russia on the same side. It can be helpful as an example of what the two of us can do together—down here on the troubled earth—to promote a good and enduring peace.” (NYT, 5/20/ 67, 1, 5; AP, W Star, 5/20/67, A5; W Post, 5/20/67, 1; W Star, 5/22/67, A16)
Despite the high cost and dangers in exploring space, tragically dramatized by the deaths of three U.S. astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut in recent months, Americans overwhelmingly approve of the U.S. effort to land men on the moon,” the National Observer reported. Survey in 12 metropolitan areas showed that 77% of people questioned supported the lunar landing program; 17% opposed it; and 6% were undecided. There was less enthusiasm, however, for manned planetary exploration programs: 57% favored manned planetary expeditions; 31% opposed them; and 12% were undecided. (Nad Obs, 5/8/67)
Mass meeting in U.S.S.R.’s Palace of Congresses inside the Kremlin Wall heard l/c Aleksei A. Leonov recall heritage of fellow pioneers; he had been an associate of Col. Komarov who had been killed on Apr. 24 in the first flight of third-generation Soyuz I spacecraft. Cosmonaut Leonov said: “We cannot help recall our friend, test pilot Vladimir Mikhailovic Komarov. Grateful mankind will always preserve the memory of these wonderful people in its heart.” The mass meeting was the highlight of Soviet celebration of the 10th anniversary of Sputnik 7’s launching [see Oct. 4]. In the Soviet press on the same day, scientist Konstantin P. Feoktisov, veteran of three-orbit flight in 1964, listed a manned laboratory in orbit as first among coming space developments, then a moon landing, then a “starting to Venus and Mars.” (upi, AP, NYT, 10/5/67, C20)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
U.S., France, and U.K. had had excellent displays at Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 23-31], but visitors had seemed most impressed by U.S.S.R. exhibit, Time magazine noted. “The greatest Soviet surprise was the launch vehicle that in 1961 sent Pioneer Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into orbit in Vostok 1. . . . Visitors at the show flocked to a huge mock-up of the 13.6-ton Proton satellite, [to] ... a model of their advanced Molniya communications satellite, [and to] . . . the variety of new Russian jet liners. “. . . the U.S. went all out . . . [and] Britain and France also put their best fleet forward. . . . But it was the Russians who stole the show, simply by taking the wraps off space hardware—some of it a decade old—that they had never before displayed in the West. . . .” (Time, 6/9/61)
Former Vice President and current leader for Republican Presidential nomination, Richard M. Nixon, on TV said it was “very likely . .. some of those appropriations [for the space program] are excessive.” Referring to the space program as “a sacred cow,” he called for the President to be “a balance wheel” in evening off the pressure from “vested interests.” He defended a congressman’s right when representing an area with important space business to fight for more funds. (SBD, 11/29/67,140) Coupling a plea for constructive realism with a denunciation of U.S.S.R.’s mere lip service toward international space cooperation, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin discussed ways for understanding “international space cooperation.” No Russian attended the conference, two speakers and one cosmonaut declined invitations. Frutkin explained that cooperation meant “joint projects, jointly undertaken, jointly carried out, and jointly profitable.” Realistic projects practicing space cooperation on an international scale were cited by Frutkin to be: nasa’s program; esro/eldo complex for combining “ten European nations in spacecraft development and seven nations in large vehicle development;” and Intelsat satellite telecommunications consortium, including “some sixty nations in day-to-day operational space communications traffic.” He included in U.S. benefits from the NASA cooperative program “gold flow [for] foreign purchase of space hardware and services,” Canadian ionospheric investigations, West German barium cloud technique, Italian atmospheric density measurements, and French global wind circulation studies. Frutkin referred to esro’s program as “a true pooling of resources [which] goes well beyond the NASA cooperative program. In esro, “common facilities have been planned, financed and operated on an international basis by an international governmental agency.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth discussed manned space flight “from Mercury to Apollo.” He said Mercury defined man’s survivability in space, Gemini defined man’s operational capability, and Apollo would be first in utilizing space for manned exploration. “To progress in ten short years from exploring survivability to utilization on the most difficult exploration mission ever undertaken implies a rate of change in technical capability which has no real parallel in history,” he said. Deep space and lunar operations would be faced as “two new major dimensions to our space capabilities.” Space explorers would be coping with the need for huge amounts of energy, extremely precise navigation to hit target and reentry corridor, and radiation protection that could include the intensities generated by solar flares. Lunar explorers would require a vehicle designed to operate entirely outside earth’s atmosphere, descend to and ascend from lunar surface, and propel reliably while exhibiting “relative sophistication of a throttleable engine.” Man returning from first lunar exploration trip would have accomplished “an age-old dream [of visiting] his nearest neighbor in space [and found] a key to the riddle of Earth’s relation to its nearest neighbor [and] a chance of understanding the creative forces that formed his own home—Earth.” “For the first time he will have soared beyond the confines of Earth’s gravity and felt the pull of a foreign planet [and] personally viewed our whole planet as a small bluish ball only four times the span of the lunar disk. These experiences may well produce profound changes in man’s attitude towards himself and his world comparable to those wrought by Galileo’s dramatic demonstration of the Copemican theory, changes which should tend to inspire man to place the affairs of his very small house in order.” (Text) NASA’s Apollo Applications Program (aap) Director Charles W. Mathews listed basic objectives for aap: long-duration space flights of men and systems based on unique capabilities of man, habitability, biomedical and behavioral considerations, and systems development; scientific investigations in earth orbit based on solar astronomy, earth observations, and stellar astronomy; applications in earth orbit based on meteorology, earth resources, and communications; and extended lunar exploration. “The activities involved in [aap] represent major steps in the utilization of our space capability. The results , . . can serve to establish the direction of future space exploration and applications. In particular, increased knowledge on the effective integration of men into the total system should accomplish much in determining the character, systems configurations and operational approach in future programs. The ability to capitalize on the large investments already made in the Apollo Program affords the opportunity to carry on this work in [aap] in an efficient and economical manner.” (Text)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
Britain’s leading radio astronomer, Sir Bernard Lovell, was convinced the Soviet Union would attempt one or more space spectaculars during 1967, possibly during October, reported Richard Lewis of Chicago Sun-Times. October would mark the 10th anniversary of the launching of the first satellite, Sputnik I, and the 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. The possibilities included a flight around the moon or a lunar landing with animals as passengers, a manned space station in earth orbit, and the first photographs of the planet Venus, the astronomer said. Sir Bernard Lovell said: “I have always believed that 1967 was the year they would try the circumlunar (around the moon) flight, but I should think they would do it unmanned because of the difficulties of the return at lunar flight velocity.” (Lewis, C S/T, 9/18/67, 16)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
A manned Apollo spacecraft should be launched to recover Explorer 1, first U.S. satellite, whose orbit was expected to decay in late 1969, G. Snowden of Melbourne, Australia, suggested in a Letter to the Editor of Aviation Week. “When Apollo swings into action, maybe one of the tasks could be a rendezvous and retrieval of man’s first satellite. I say first because Sputnik 1 and 2 have decayed, leaving Explorer 1 at the head of the list. A replica can be built at a fraction of the cost of retrieval, but there is nothing like having the original. Not only would it have value as a historic memento of man’s venture into space, but also to scientists. I am certain after nearly 10 years in space it would be valuable to them. . . .” (Av Wk, 6/5/67, 110)
Washington Evening Star editorial praised Senate’s unanimous approval of the space law treaty April 25: “The action lends timely support to President Johnson’s policy of seeking to promote a spirit of detente through various types of agreements designed to build Bridges between our country and the Communist East. “. . . the new space treaty is at best only a modest step in the direction of improved Soviet-American relations. Still, it is a step forward, and a good one. Anybody who objects to it on security grounds can rest assured: It will not interfere in the slightest with our country’s ability to detect Russian cheating between us and the stars if such cheating actually takes place.” (W Star, 5/1/67)
Increased appropriations for riot-torn cities should take precedence over NASA’s request for funds to finance unmanned exploration of the planets, Washington Daily News suggested in an editorial. “James E. Webb . . . is concerned over cuts in the agency’s $5 billion budget including reduction in money for unmanned exploration of Venus and Mars. Russia, he says, is about to send up the biggest . . . rocket you ever saw. In the present state of domestic affairs, we’d say let ’em! “From all appearances our scientists already have more and more exact information about conditions on Venus and Mars than our police and war-on-poverty experts have on Los Angeles and Cleveland-----” (W News, 7/28/67, 16)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
Dr. Henry J. Reid, former Director and Senior Staff Associate at nasa Langley Research Center, died in Gloucester, Va., after heart attack at age 72. He had become LaRC Director in 1926 and retired in June 1961, after 34 yr continuous service. (AP, W Post, 8/1/68, B10) During July: Ralph Kinney Bennett in Data scored U.S. complacency in year which might “see some of the greatest Soviet space spectaculars of the decade.” In U.S., he said, early glamour of space race had faded and NASA projects were neither as ambitious nor as well-funded as they once were. In contrast, he noted, U.S.S.R. showed signs of “a new spurt of activity, new technical accomplishments above our planet, an accelerated assault on the moon and dark rumblings of advanced military uses of the threshold of space. The time for a Soviet resurgence could hardly be better. “. . . Soviets are badly in need of a great techno-propaganda feat to reassert their influence on world public opinion. . . .” Soviet hold on European satellite nations had shown evidence of advanced erosion. “Their position in relation to the rest of the communist world is no longer clearly defined.” U.S.S.R. was spending estimated $9 billion a year on space and half that sum went toward military applications of space technology. “There is an American attitude ... of waiting until you get burnt before you shed complacency. When Sputnik I burnt us, we came back with a vengeance. Now complacency has set in again. Perhaps we will feel the fire from the Soviets in space before this year is out and react accordingly. But in space technology . . . it’s a tough way to play the ball game.” (Data, 7/68)
J. S. Butz, Jr., in Air Force and Space Digest article “The Men Behind Soviet Aircraft Design” wrote: “Top Russian designers are exuberant realists; and they operate under a ‘prototype’ system of development that is probably the most competitive and technically stimulating in the world. This system is similar to the one employed in the United States until the mid-1950s and the odds appear strong that the U.S. will return to such an approach in the 1970s, rejecting the strong dependence on ‘systems analysis’ and ‘cost-effectiveness’ studies that characterized the 1960s.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 62-7)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXXIV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 295-km (183.3-mi) apogee, 208-km (129.2-mi) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Equipment functioned normally. Satellite reportedly softlanded in its home territory Aug. 5. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/68; 8/15/68; SBD, 7/31/68, 129; AP, NYT, 7/31/68, 3; 8/7/68)
Pravda released description of preparations for launching of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin in history’s first manned space flight April 12, 1961. Songs by 110-member folk music choir—instead of one man’s voice—had been selected for radio tests to avoid arousing rumors that U.S.S.R. had put a man into orbit. Pravda reports were excerpts from The First Four Stages, book recognizing leading role in Soviet manned space flight of Sergei P. Korolev. U.S.S.R. acknowledged malfunction had occurred during first unmanned test of Vostok spacecraft launched May 15, 1960, as Sputnik IV. Because of improper alignment, spacecraft was hurled deeper into space when retrorockets fired instead of braking for reentry. (Anderson, NYT, 1/25/68; A&A, 15-60, 123, 147)
Uspekhi SSSR v Issledovanii Kosmicheskogo Prostranstva. Pervoye Kosmicheskoye Desyatiletiye 1957—1967 [U.S.S.R. Achievements in Space Research (First Decade in Space, 1957—1967)] was published as Sputnik anniversary edition by Nauka Publishing House, Moscow. Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, Academician and chief editor, wrote introduction. Text included results of scientific studies, experiments, and exploration. Appendix listed satellites, spacecraft, and their characteristics. Joint Publications Research Service of U.S. Dept, of Commerce published translation, jprs 47,311, on Jan. 24, 1969. (Texts)
Astronautics & Aeronautics noted that NASA-sponsored translations of Russian historical works compiled 1963—68 were available from Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information, Springfield, Va. 22151. It was a credit to NASA’s historians “that they have not neglected bringing to our attention the products of their opposing numbers.” (Stehling, A&A, 9/68, 76)
Soviet Prof. Georgy Petrovich, writing in Trud, praised U.S. space achievements hut pointed to 20 Soviet “firsts” since Sputnik I. Past neutral appraisals had generally agreed with Petrovich that U.S.S.R.’s payloads had been heavier and U.S. hardware more sophisticated. Recent contradiction had been intricate softlanding for Soviet Venus IV, Oct. 18, 1967, and successful U.S. test of Saturn V, world’s largest booster, Nov. 9, 1967. Petrovich praised NASA’s broad application of space equipment in practical commercial use of satellite technology for communication, meteorology, and navigation. (Winters, B Sun, 2/9/68, A3)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXXV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 283-km (175.8-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.2-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite performed satisfactorily and reentered Aug. 17. (W Star, 8/9/68, 1; SBD, 8/12/68, 177; gsfc SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCXXIV from Baikonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 311-km (193.2-mi) apogee, 167-km (103.8-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Satellite functioned normally and reentered June 12. (AP, NYT, 6/5/68, 7; SBD, 6/5/68, 172; gsfc SSR, 6/15/68)
Nearly 1,000 scientists and educators attended “crisis” meeting called by New York Academy of Sciences to demand science be declared “disaster area” because of threatened $6-billion Federal budget cut. Federal R&D funding, after decade of average 22% annual expansion, had risen only 2.5% annually since 1964, while number of scientists had risen 20%. It was feared resulting crush would damage U.S. leadership in science and technology. MIT Provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner said, “If the Congress continues to do what it is now doing we’ll wake up with another sputnik in a decade.” Federal R&D funding had risen from $74 million in 1940 to $16.9 billion in 1968 with October 1957 “shock of Sputnik” giving greatest impetus. Cut of $6 billion would mean “we’re going to cut not only into the fat, but into the flesh of lots of areas,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President’s Science Adviser, said. NASA’s sustaining university program had been one of chief casualties of recent cutbacks with budget slashed from $45 to $10 million yearly, forcing drop from 1,300 to 50 training grants which had produced more than 1,000 Ph.D.s since 1961. Government officials had chided scientists for being ill-prepared for leveling of Federal support and for alleged detachment from political realities. (Reinhold, NYT, 6/21/68, 1)
U.S. News & World Report said story of how U.S. had been steadily stripping away “some of the most valuable military secrets of Soviet Russia for the past five years” was being revealed in bits and pieces. At heart of story were spy satellites orbiting earth. Powerful spaceborne cameras could photograph in detail objects less than one foot in diameter from 150-mi altitude. “Ultramodern” radar circling in outer space now penetrated cloud covers and forest vegetation to reveal hidden missile sites, tanks, and even troops. Infrared sensors could detect submarines and missile launching. Electronic sensors could monitor atomic explosions and pick up telephone messages from deep within U.S.S.R. or Communist China. President Johnson had said spy satellites alone made U.S. space investment worthwhile. USAF had, to date, launched more than 200 classified payloads. At least one intelligence satellite was always ready for orbit. Most stayed operational for 1 to 25 days. Even more useful, Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) was yet to come. U.S.S.R. was particularly concerned about its intelligence implications. “The Russians are starting now to understand that one of their centuries-old weapons against the rest of the world—their secrecy—is rapidly being removed.” (VS News, 9/9/68, 2)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on “Soviet Spectacular.” U.	S.S.R. had scored impressive advance with “boomerang-style” Zond V.	“Congratulations are in order. But handwringing assertions that the Russians will be indisputable masters of the universe are decidedly premature. The shot demonstrated two major steps forward in the space sciences: A degree of accuracy in the guidance and navigational systems that is new for Russian spacecraft, and a re-entry system capable of withstanding the searing heat of a 25,000-mile-an-hour plunge into the atmosphere. . . . But the essential fact is that neither Russia nor the United States has yet successfully flown its third generation spacecraft ■—the ships that will eventually carry men to the moon. The outcome of the ‘space race’ . . . will depend on what happens in the Apollo missions immediately ahead and the Soviet manned flights still to come.” (W Star, 9/24/68, A12)
Cosmos CCXXXI was launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 391-km (243-mi) apogee, 206-km (128-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 64.9° inclination. Equipment functioned normally and spacecraft reentered July 18. (upi, W Star, 7/11/68, A5; upi, NYT, 7/12/68, 7; SBD, 7/12/68, 41; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68, 7/31/68)
Associated Press roundup of comment by space authorities on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The most important demonstration of total space capability up to now by any nation.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: Hoped U.S.S.R. achievement would “cause some stir in Congress. . . . The Russians again did something we have not done. We slept until the Sputnik. That may be what we’re doing now.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station: “I think it is a very considerable achievement and I expect that a human being will be placed in a similar spacecraft in a matter of months.” Heinz Kaminski, Chief of West Germany’s Bochum Observatory: “Still in this year or at latest in first quarter of 1969 a three-man spacecraft of the Soyuz type will circle the moon. After that [in a later flight] they will land on the moon.” In Moscow, unidentified Western expert on U.S.S.R.’s space program said that, because of seasonal factors, best time for Soviet manned lunar circumnavigation would be no later than early November—or spring 1969. “They are now in a position to send a man around the moon and back to earth, without landing him on the moon. They might try one more unmanned shot, just to be sure, and then they could send up a man.” (AP, NYT, 9/23/68, E8)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) told American Astronautical Society meeting in Los Angeles: “In evaluating space spending as a budget priority, it is vital to consider the relationship of space to defense. . . . Both Russia and the United States have advance surveillance capacity. ... As long as the threat of nuclear war from any source continues, Russia and the United States will be producing ever more sophisticated orbital ‘spies in the skies’. . . . That is why the space program of the United States never is going to be abandoned. It will always be high on the list of spending priorities. The reason is not charming, but basic. We need to be in space to protect ourselves. ... In the somewhat more distant future the harvest of human rewards . . . now only beginning . . . will prove that space research and space applications justify a continuing high priority.” (Text; Aero Daily, 10/29/68)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
Dept, of State said it would issue visas to 35 Soviet space scientists to attend 19th Congress of International Astronautical Federation (iaf) in New York Oct. 13—19. However, it might recommend cancellation of sightseeing tour of KSC arranged with NASA by AIAA for scientists from 34 countries attending both IAF Congress and AIAA annual meeting in Philadelphia Oct. 21—25. No Soviet scientist had yet visited ksc, “apparently out of concern that the United States would ask for reciprocal rights in Russia for American scientists,” said New York Times. Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D-Fla.), in letter to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, had said visit was inappropriate in light of U.S.S.R.’s invasion of Czechoslovakia, imprisonment of Pueblo crew by> North Korea, Soviet aid to North Vietnam, and existence of Communist regime in Cuba. (NYT, 10/9/68)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
New York Times commented on Soviet linking of Soyuz spacecraft: “It is probably not too soon to begin planning for- standardization of space vehicles—a move that would permit joining these vehicles regardless of their national origin. It would be tragic, for example, if a group of Soviet spacemen needed rescue and could not be saved because the only available vehicle was an American space ship impossible to link with the Soviet ship. Here is an area in which international cooperation could not only save lives but help pave the way for the joint operation of stations in space for the benefit of all mankind.” (NYT, 1/17/69, 46)
President Nixon announced James H. Wakelin, Jr., former Assistant Secretary of the Navy for R&D, would be chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Oceanography [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1393-4) Soyuz VII, carrying Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Vladislav N. Volkov, and Viktor V. Gorbatko, was launched from Baikonur at 3:45 pm Oct. 12 into orbit with 217-km (134.8-mi) apogee, 200-km (124.3-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass said spacecraft’s mission was “maneuvering in the orbit, staging joint navigation observations of the spaceships ... in group flight, observation of celestial bodies and the horizon of the Earth, determination of the real luminosity of stars, observation of changes in illumination created by the Sun and other scientific experiments.” Third spacecraft, Soyuz VIII, carrying Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, was launched from Baikonur at 3:29 pm Oct. 13 into orbit with 278-km (172.7-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Its mission, Tass said, was “comprehensive simultaneous scientific studies in near-terrestrial space in accordance with an extensive program; testing of the complex system of controlling a simultaneous group flight of three space ships; mutual maneuvering of ships in orbit with the aim of solving a number of problems of developing the piloted space system.” TV viewers received announcement of flights about 30 min after launches and saw video-tape recordings of launches about U/2 hrs later. Ultimate goal of three-spacecraft mission was not given. In prelaunch interview shown on TV several hours after launch, Dr. Yeliseyev said group mission would conduct experiments leading to “creation of still more powerful orbiting stations.” Tass reported crews had checked out equipment and communicated with each other. Soyuz VI	was conducting medical-biological tests, Soyuz VII was observing and photographing earth and celestial bodies, and Soyuz VIII was conducting research on polarization of solar light reflected by atmosphere. On Oct. 14 Tass reported Soyuz VII and Soyuz VIII had moved close together, carried out “mutual observation-photography and movie filming,” studied “possibility of exchanging information with the aid of light signals and visceral optical methods,” conducted series of medical experiments, and observed “effect of erosion by micrometeorites on the condition of illuminators and optic systems of the craft.” On Oct. 15 spacecraft approached to within 500 yds during rendezvous, while Soyuz VI hovered nearby. On Oct. 16 Radio Moscow announced Soyuz VI had successfully completed mission and had softlanded in preset area 100 mi northwest of Karaganda at 12:52 pm Moscow time. No information on other two Soyuz spacecraft was given until Tass announced softlanding of Soyuz VII	at 12:36 pm Oct. 17 and of Soyuz VIII at 12:10 pm Oct. 18. Western officials speculated missions had not achieved all objectives. Tass said all major tasks were carried out with “high efficiency.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 10/12-14, 18/69; SBD, 10/14/69, 195; 10/ 21/69, 230; Reuters, W Post, 10/15-16/69; AP, W Star, 10/16/69, Al; Reston, LA Times, 10/19/69, A2; gsfc SSR, 10/15/69; 10/31/69)
Terre Haute [Ind.j Star said: “In backing Columbus, according to Samuel Eliot Morison, historian, Queen Isabella had two motives: To make a buck in the spice trade, and to open new territories for her Catholic missionaries. It did not occur to her that she was about to change the history of mankind. That is the way of most turning points in human history. The Manhattan Project which resulted in the atomic bomb was basically a defensive move against the danger of Germany’s doing it first. It launched the atomic age. Johann Gutenberg found a way to print with movable type for the simple reason that he wanted more people to read the Bible. He had no idea that he was introducing mass literacy. These great human adventures had two things in common: They were done for practical reasons, and most contemporaries said, 'who needs it?’ The space program began for practical, everyday reasons. Russia’s Sputnik scared the pants off most Americans. The initial goal of catching up with the Russians has been achieved, and this is part of the reason why there is now a slowing interest. However . . . this country now has the potential of changing the world. . . . The U.S. should continue in the forefront of space exploration, with a well-funded and stable program. Space should continue to have a permanent, though not extravagant, position in the priority of national goals.” (Terre Haute Star, 5/29/69)
In editorial directed to “Americans who think Soviet Russia is ‘mellowing’ ” and who opposed President Nixon’s Safeguard abm plan, New York News noted U.S.S.R. had paraded no military gear in Moscow May Day parade and limited oratory “to a peace-it’s-wonderful speech” by Brezhnev. Paper then quoted April 30 issue of Partinaya Zhizn in which Marshal Matvey V. Zakharov, U.S.S.R. Chief of Staff, described Soviet stockpile of nuclear missiles: “ ‘These rockets are always prepared for immediate firing. Global rockets have unlimited range, and are able not only to carry colossal payloads but to overcome the antimissile defense of the adversary.’” (NY News, 5/2/69)
New York Times Magazine profile quoted NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine: Late President John F. Kennedy’s decision to try to put man on moon by end of 1960s was “bold act that is standing the test of time damned well,” Dr. Paine had said. “Our ability to function now in a new environment a decade after Jack Kennedy is going to be a very challenging test for us. Do we understand that environment? Can we achieve a new consensus without the ‘Pearl Harbor’ of a Russian lead in space? We’re not really talking about the space program anymore. The space program is finished. You wouldn’t speak about Columbus’s voyage as the sail-powered water craft program. What Columbus’s journey was all about had nothing to do with water. It was the extension of man’s dominion, new life styles, new forms of government, new societies.” Dr. Paine believed U.S. had no choice but to push ahead. “A nation that turns down a challenge like this is a nation that’s on its way out.” (Buckley, NYT Magazine, 6/8/69, 34-63)
Norrlandska Social-Demokraten, Boden, Sweden, editorial commented that Russian press was surprisingly generous with praise of men behind Apollo 11 and American space research in general during mission, but now press seemed to fear landing might have increased respect for U.S. around the world. “It is surely disturbing for Pravda and the Russian Party leaders that the American conquest of the moon . . . witnessed by the greater part of the Communist world, crushed the myth of the Communist system’s superiority.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Press in U.S. and around the world underscored Apollo IPs landing on moon and man’s first steps on another planet. St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “There is no doubt that the United States should continue to support a substantial spacefaring program. Anything else would be a denial of the scientific spirit of the century and the qualities that have made America what it is. But its scope should be measured by findings and probabilities—and one other factor. Future spacefaring ought to be a co-operative effort of all nations able to participate, with the benefits to be shared by all.” (St. Louis P—D, 7/20/69) Washington Sunday Star: “A creature that can stand where Armstrong and Aldrin stand tonight—that can, in the future, move among the spheres and literally explore new worlds ... is unlikely to give up on the hard task of perfecting himself and his life in his natural environment on earth. The God who brought him thus far from a blob of squirming protoplasm ... is unlikely ... to let man blow it all now. Here . . . must be the answer to the national debate as to whether we go ahead in space, or whether we tend to our knitting at home. We are bound to do both. . . . The progressive expansion of the physical and spiritual domain of man inevitably will intensify our determination and ability, in concert with other nations, to build a home world where hunger, fear and violence no longer have a place.” (W Star, 7/20/69, Gl) William Hines in Washington Sunday Star: “One cannot question the majesty of conception or magnitude of effort that made Apollo 11 possible.” But one could ask, “Is this trip really necessary?” One saw in Apollo “that fundamental failing called hubris, which got so many protagonists into hot water in the old Greek mythology. Hubris in English is usually taken to mean prideful arrogance; in ancient Greek the word meant simple insolence. The Apollo enthusiast rejects the concept of hubris; he says we go to the moon not because we are arrogant, but because we are driven, and thereby implicitly rejects the concept of free will and substitutes sappiness for sassiness. The majority asks, ‘But if we didn’t go, what?’ and the minority responds, ‘If we didn’t go, so what?’” (W Star, 7/20/69, G2) Humorist Art Buchwald in Washington Post: “Sometimes one gets the feeling that the right hand germs in the Government don’t know what the left hand germs are doing. This was brought home to me . . . when I read about the millions of dollars that were being spent to see that the astronauts did not bring back a single germ from the moon. Unfortunately, across the page from that story was another that the Army was going ahead with open air testing of nerve gases and germ warfare.” (W Post, 7/20/69, B6) Los Angeles Herald-Examiner: “America’s moon program has benefited all mankind. It has brought better color television, water purification at less cost, new paints and plastics, improved weather forecasting, medicine, respirators, walkers for the handicapped, laser surgery, world-wide communications, new transportation systems, earthquake prediction system and solar power. . . . The Mars goal should bring benefits to all mankind even greater than the tremendous contributions of the moon program.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/20/69) Baltimore Sun: “. . . it is still almost incredible that in the afternoon of a Sunday on earth two humans found themselves within a vehicle resting on the surface of the moon. Nothing could quite prepare one’s mind for that, or for the subsequent moment of climax, the actual setting of a human foot on the substance of our barren satellite. One of the mysteries that had engaged the infinitely inquisitive mind of man is now made tangible. Others remain beyond our planet and upon it.” (B Sun, 7/21/69, A16) Chicago Daily News: “These have been moments to savor—moments in which uncounted millions have shared the immediacy of a turning point in history. This time there was no lapse of weeks or months, waiting for the event to be confirmed. We were all there, bound together by the miracle of communication that intertwined all the other miracles of technology that marked man’s first step on a celestial body.” (C Daily News, 7/21/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Superlatives pale before the magnificence of the achievement. . . . but how many years before the astounding performance of Armstrong and Aldrin will seem as primitive as the pioneering work of the Wright brothers?” (MJ, 7/21/69, 14) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Man’s store of scientific knowledge will be vastly enriched by the landing on the moon. In no other single event in history has there been greater opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the universe.” (Plain Dealer, 7/21/69) London Daily Sketch: “America’s moon triumph offers this old world’s bickering and jealous people a parable of hope.” (B Sun, 7/22/69, Al) Montreal Star: “The deepest hope for a world starved for some form of symbolism, of an attempt at harmony in place of selfishness and narrow nationalism, came from the astronauts,” CFOX Radio, Montreal, broadcast. “Eliminate war? Yes! Eliminate poverty? Yes! But the exploration of space will help us, not impede us, in reaching these goals.” (Am Consul, Montreal) Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden (principal organ of Social Democratic Party): “No Soviet politician has ever before used such conciliatory tones toward the U.S.A. as did Foreign Minister Gromyko recently in his speech before the Supreme Soviet. . . . This Russian position seems generally to be based on fears of a confrontation with China. . . . One of the side effects can be increased Russian interest in broader scientific cooperation in space research. Nothing else could be better designed for global cooperation, since nothing else gives us clearer testimony that we live in one world.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
New York Daily News editorial said: “For some years, the U.S. Air Force has had an entirely feasible project for orbiting by 1972 a 30,000-lb. space laboratory carrying two men, at a cost of around $3 billion. About $1.3 billion having been spent on the program, Deputy Defense Secretary David M. Packard announced Tuesday that it has been junked, scrapped, scrubbed, in order to save the taxpayers some money. We’re hot for government economy. But this looks to us like a most dubious move in that direction. You can bet that Soviet Russia, poverty-stricken though it is, is not skimping in its drive to make space serve the Kremlin militarily.” (NY News, 6/12/69)
Soviet Academician, Dr. Anatoly A. Blagonravov, conceded that competition with U.S.S.R. might have been major factor in U.S. determination to reach moon and said that in space there was no way to declare a winner, Space Business Daily reported. “I don’t preclude the idea that such a boosted preparation of the Apollo project was in some measure the result of competition with us. Basically a healthy competition is no obstacle to success. . . . Science is boundless in its development and it cannot be compared to a horse race—there is no finishing line. The interests of science are bound to win anyway. . . .” U.S.S.R. would continue research in “several major scientific areas,” make “extensive use of automatic devices for exploring outer space,” and pay “due attention” to moon and to both manned and unmanned missions. Cosmos, Zond, and Proton spacecraft would continue to be used for research and Soyuz spacecraft would be converted into “modules of orbital space laboratories designed for research in lengthy flight.” (,SBD, 7/31/69, 79)
Economist editorial commented: “If the Russians are ever going to get another prestige victory over the United States, and not the sort of worldwide humiliation they have endured with Luna 15 during the American moon landing, and then with the triple Soyuz anti-climax, they will have to pull something off soon. For if not the Soviet planners may see increasingly less reason to continue spending even 1 per cent of the country’s gross national product on its cosmonauts. . . . What is ironic is that a Soviet slowdown could be seen as a mirror image of the running battle in the United States between the scientists and the space engineers, but with the Russian scientists coming out on top. The Academy of Sciences is widely regarded as the repository of all that is most stuffily conservative in Soviet science. That may have been the central cause of the Russian flop.” It was also blow to Americans who relied for new space funds on Nixon Administration’s “continuing fear of what the Russians may yet do.” (Economist, 11/8/69, 12-3)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCLXVII from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Orbital parameters: apogee, 331 km (205.7 mi); perigee, 202 km (125.5 mi); period, 89.8 min; and inclination, 65°. Satellite reentered March 6. (gsfc SSR, 2/28/69; 3/15/69; SBD, 2/27/69, 212; C Trib, 2/27/69)
Space/Aeronautics described 1969 as U.S.S.R.’s “most active and most frustrating” year in space. “In the fall of 1968 it was possible to believe . . . that the Soviet Union might fly men around the moon before the United States. A year later it was possible to ask: ‘Where are the Russians?’” Most failures were in attempts to prepare man’s way to moon. “The inglorious performance of Luna 15, just as America was landing men on the lunar surface, could almost be called the least of Russia’s lunar problems. By far the worst . . . must be repeated technical troubles with the long-awaited ‘super booster,’ the rough equivalent of Saturn 5. If semi-official rumors are to be accepted as accurate, the Russian vehicle is in a great deal of difficulty. “The . . . launchings of Soyuz 6, 7, and 8 were impressive in many ways—but Western officials still counted the group flight as a disappointment to the Russians. . . . The most skeptical Western estimates now are that the Russians may have abandoned the big booster, that they will not land men on the moon before 1972 . . . and that no large Soviet station will be assembled in orbit before the last half of the ’70s.” {Space/Aeronautics, 12/69, 24—6)
Atlas said its “Talk of the World” section had “got a little hoarse” on subject of Apollo 11. It quoted “a few of the more unusual moon-thoughts” from international press. El Tiempo in Bogota had reported Colombian wool fabrics were used in Apollo 11 spacecraft upholstery. Canada’s Kitchener Waterloo Record had said lm had touched down on moon with legs made in Canada by Montreal firm. Oiga, in Lima, Peru, had said when Sputnik went into orbit “it was noted that Pedro Paulet Mostajo had invented a jet-propelled rocket back in 1895.” Atlas commented that “this could go on forever.” (Atlas, 9/69, 10)
Surprise had been expressed over enthusiastic reception in Moscow of U.S. lunar rock exhibit, Washington Evening Star editorial noted. There was really nothing surprising, however. “From a narrowly nationalistic point of view, the Russian people and the Soviet government can claim that, were it not for the early Russian successes in space, that piece of rock would still be resting on the moon. But it is more likely that the Russians, and the other peoples of the Earth, see the first moon landing for what it truly was: A triumph for the collective ingenuity of Man.” (W Star, 12/17/69)
Harvard Univ. biologist Dr. George Wald and mit physicist Dr. Bruno Rossi disclosed that some 251 nas members out of 806 had signed letter to President Nixon expressing continued opposition to deployment by U.S. of abm system. Letter said, “Russia is as well prepared to build such devices as we are. This can only introduce a new and perhaps disastrous spiral in the arms race. Our science and technology, rather than being used to add further to the present ‘balance of terror,’ needs to be redirected to solving pressing problems of poverty, malnutrition, control of population, and improvement of the human environment for our own people and people everywhere.” (AP, W Post, 3/22/69, A5)
U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts, in joint space efforts, could succeed in improving U.S.-Soviet relations where “tired old politicians” had failed, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said during visit to msc. “Maybe this would be a way to break through to the rulers of Russia. When you get professional people together—scientists, aviators . . . you find you have many common problems.” Sen. Goldwater said he hoped Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman would not seek Senate seat in 1970 but would wait awhile “and take mine.” (upi, NYT, 11/16/69, 79)
Administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson ended as President Richard M. Nixon was sworn in as President of U.S. Johnson had served U.S. space program continuously since Sputnik l in October 1957, first on Capitol Hill as Chairman of Select and then permanent Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. As Vice President under late President Kennedy, he had served as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, post held by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey during Johnson Administration. (EH)
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Philadelphia Inquirer cited possible danger to Apollo spacecraft from “drifting junk” in space. “One notable sidelight to the Apollo 10 flight came in a report that the spaceship brings the number of man-made objects in space to 1691. Although the chance of Apollo 10 colliding with any of the objects is infinitesimal, it is significant that there is so much hardware floating around in space 12 years after Sputnik I. . . . “U.S. and Soviet scientists should find ways of bringing back or destroying rockets and satellites and their separate components after they have become inoperable. If some sort of solution isn’t found, it may not be long before a tragic collision will occur.” (P Inq, 5/20/69)
Dr. Rafael Caldera, President of Venezuela, addressed joint session of U.S. Congress: “I am convinced that the future of the hemisphere depends on the extent to which this great nation reaches a decision to become a pioneer in social international justice. The measure to which your people. . .become conscious of the fact that with the cost of one of its Apollo moon shots it could contribute to the prosperity and happiness of nations like ours on whose security its own security depends,” Venezuelans hoped Apollos would continue exploring space, “but the result of these explorations make the need for a better life for men on earth more urgent," (CR, 6/3/ 70, H5025-7)	. * Baltimore Sun editorial on Soviet space platform program: “How far along towards realization it is and what Soyuz 9 will contribute to it can only be matters of conjecture. What is impressive is the methodical way the Russian space directors are concentrating their efforts and resources. While there has been nothing eyecatchingly novel or adventurous about the progress so far, the program seems concerned not with the public response, either in Russia or the rest of the world, but with a gradual, systematic achievement of a single, selected goal." (B Sun, 6/3/70) June 3-5; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, headed group of NASA and industry officials who met in Paris at request of European Space Research Organization (esro) to brief ESRO representatives and European scientific, industrial, and government representatives on space station and related systems. Dr. Paine told meeting U.S. wished to expand cooperation with European nations. He said space station should grow over next decade into very important international research facility. (NASA Release 70-83; Av Wk, 6/8/70,16) Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, said: “Where men are concerned in utilizing the space facilities of the future. . .we are prepared to accommodate astronauts of other countries in these programs.” NASA assumed there would be “an interest in training pilot-astronauts in conjunction with some expectation to use them for your own experimental or applications objectives. We would be very happy to cooperate in that kind of training, and we would be prepared to see pilot astronauts fly the space shuttle after a test period establishes the operational status of the vehicle.” (Transcript)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
AP quoted Soviet geophysicist Sergey Timofeyev as saying Europe had entered period of colder summers and winters because moon was closer to earth than usual. Situation created “atmosphere tide” that disturbed normal movements of warm and cool air. (NYT, 5/20/ 70) Among 32 NASA officials and scientists attending meeting were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong. Armstrong received tumultuous welcome from predominantly Russian audience, AP reported. During question-and-answer period before his report, Armstrong said that when he viewed earth from moon, “I thought it was impossible that a little island like that in the sky could have so many problems on it.” He had found it “more pleasant on the moon than on earth as far as gravity is concerned.” In report on experiences on moon, Armstrong said, “Since the sky is black the impression is somewhat like being on a sandy athletic field at night that is very well illuminated with flood lights.” Further improvement in mobility of pressure garments would improve ability of astronauts to carry out lunar experiments. At later session when Armstrong attended as observer, guards had difficulty restraining cheers of audience, which included 800 Soviet delegates and 420 representatives of 30 countries. AP said it was “dramatic and unusual” tribute to foreign visitors in U.S.S.R. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL scientist, reported to COSPAR meeting on study and comparison of 60 Surveyor photos taken in April 1967 and 20 Apollo 12 photos that showed moon’s extreme stillness. Photos indicated only one small pebble had moved during 31 mos at Surveyor III site. Rate of meteoroid impact or surface movement was low in area of Ocean of Storms where Apollo 12 and Surveyor III had landed. Camera and several portions of Surveyor spacecraft had coating of One dust stirred from lunar surface as Apollo 12 LM descended nearby. Only other change observed in Surveyor was that its white paint had turned to tan, “partly due to deposition of material on the spacecraft.” nas-nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1969: “Popular interest in the space program, which reached a high point with the first successful lunar landing, has diminished somewhat. Furthermore, a reassessment of national priorities has resulted in reduced financial support for space research and technology during the past year, and the support will probably be even more limited this year and next. It is our intention, despite these limitations, to try to maintain a reasonably balanced program, with continuing effort in all areas of space research in which we are currently engaged and to support mutually advantageous international cooperation in space research wherever possible.” (Text) Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov told meeting U.S.S.R. would launch two French sret earth resources satellites as part of 1966 French-Soviet agreement on scientific cooperation. French Roseau (Radio Observation par Satellite Excentrique a Automatisme Unique) program, with multisatellite payload to be launched in 1971-1972, had been postponed because of budgetary restrictions and sret (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique) had been retained. Joint French-Soviet space program also included plans for emplacement of French laser reflector on lunar surface by Soviet Luna spacecraft; stero, launching of French experiments for measurement of solar radio emission; and arcade, study of solar energy particles with French and Soviet equipment on board Soviet spacecraft. (NASA Release 70-73; upi. NYT, 5/24/70; Reuters, NY News, 5/24/70; AP, NYT, 5/26/70, 31; Reuters, B Sun, 5/26/70; AP, W Star, 5/27/70, All; SBD, 5/27/70, 125; jpl, Release 554)
Stewart Alsop said in Newsweek: “The story of the failure of the Russian moon-exploration project... is interesting and rather puzzling. The first test of the Soviet space vehicle comparable to Apollo was operationally successful in March 1967. The most recent SL-12 mission—an unmanned, nonrecoverable lunar probe—aborted in February, the eleventh to do so. “The Soviet Government and the Soviet press had not a word to say about this string of failures.... But in the American intelligence community there is no doubt at all about the failures, and no doubt either that the Soviet space-exploration program has been a thoroughly miserable performance.” (Newsweek, 4/27/70)
U.S.S.R. was spending two percent of gnp on space and U.S. one half of one percent, Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Div. of Library of Congress, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. U.S.S.R. gnp in 1969 was estimated at $420 billion; U.S. total was $931 billion. Successful Soviet launches had totaled 44 in 1966,74 in 1968,70 in 1969, and 40 thus far in 1970. Largest element in Soviet space program had been photo-reconnaissance. U.S.S.R.. had led U.S. in payload launch weight every year since launch of 83.5-kg (184-lb) Sputnik in 1957 except 1969. Total payload weight for U.S.S.R. was 2 million kg (4.5 million lbs); for U.S. total was 1.9 million kg (4.25 million lbs). (B Sun, 8/20/70. A3)
Christian Science Monitor editorial: “China’s successful orbiting of her first satellite is further proof of her continuing effort in space and rocketry—even if her entering of the space age comes nearly 13 years after Sputnik I. It is proof, too, that even if China still lacks industrial brawn and remains basically an underdeveloped country, she is not lacking in scientific and technical brilliance. What she has achieved is all the more remarkable because—as the Chinese themselves report it—the Soviet Union reneged in 1959 on its 1957 agreement to help China with ‘new technology for nuclear defense.’ Thus what China has done has been done on her own—and by her scientists and technologists in spite of the self-inflicted torment of Chairman Mao’s cultural revolution.” (CSM, 4/29/70)
Appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., as ost Director and presidential science adviser had evoked surprise, D. S. Greenberg said in Science, because “unlike his five predecessors” he was not “member or protege of the fairly small group that had dominated the upper levels of government science since Sputnik.” Dr. David had been “picked by members of President Nixon’s personal staff without consultation with the then-incumbent, Lee A. DuBridge.” There had been “no inclination to ask the White House science advisory apparatus to assist in finding a successor when it was time for Dr. DuBridge to go.” (Science, 10/23/70,417-19)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
First launch of Poseidon missile from submarine had been postponed by USN [see July 25] because of proximity of heavily instrumented Soviet trawler to U.S. nuclear submarine James Madison, AP reported. Informed source had said there was nothing wrong with Poseidon or support systems and that dod officials “became a little apprehensive after the Russian trawler. . .moved in so close [within 183 m (200 yds)]” during test July 24. (B Sun, 7/28/70, Al)
First volume of third edition of Bolshaya Sovetskaya Entsklopediya, new Soviet encyclopedia, was released in U.S.S.R. It credited Wright Brothers with first airplane flight. Second edition, which appeared from 1950 to 1958, had contended that Russian, A. F. Mozhaisky, was designer of first airplane, which had been flown first during summer of 1882. This version had appeared in U.S.S.R. as late as 1968, in history of Russian aviation and astronautics published by Ministry of Defense. New edition of encyclopedia said Mozhaisky’s airplane was built in 1885 and “crashed on take-off.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 3/24/70, 6)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during hearing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation: Recent agreements had been directed toward “achieving common objectives,” not “exchange of technology.” Review of relations between NASA and U.S.S.R. “suggests that we should exercise considerable caution in assessing the prospects for prompt and effective implementation of these agreements.” But U.S. negotiators of October and January agreements had observed “definite improvement” over past decade. Negotiations had been “more straight forward, less political. ... A closer kind of relationship seems to be intended by the Soviet side. The top level of the Soviet Academy for the first time participated directly. The negotiations were attended by the first instances of meaningful access to Soviet facilities.” Dr. Low said he had “spent a half-hour or more inside the Soviet simulator with a young Russian engineer who explained in detail the working of that spacecraft and answered every question that I had. Later on, I was in the docking and rendezvous trainer with one of their cosmonauts and was allowed to attempt to fly a docking of one Soyuz against another. I did not succeed in bringing the two together. In addition, in January our delegation was invited to the principal Soviet tracking station in the Crimea. Unfortunately, the time available . . . did not permit us to make this visit, but we have every intention of doing so in the future.” Advocating “air of cautious optimism,” Dr. Low said U.S.S.R. had, “in effect, met the schedules laid down in the first agreement with a variance of only a few days. In any event, we have laid out and agreed to specific milestones for an even-handed exchange, so that neither side will gain more than the other.” In response to question, Dr. Low said military components of U.S. and Soviet space programs had not been discussed at NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meetings. (Transcript)
nasa’s Apollo 15 was 5351st man-made object launched since U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957, according to Air Defense Command Hq. figures reported by AP. Center was tracking 2454 objects still in orbit. (NYT, 7/27/71, 14)
The Russian Space Bluff by Leonid Vladimirov, Soviet engineer-journalist who had defected in 1966, had been published in U.K., AP reported. Book said Soviet space program had begun as series of publicity stunts to persuade West that U.S.S.R. had reached level of advanced technology equal to that of U.S. Vladimirov had said that U.S.S.R. knew “she could not beat America to the moon because she cannot build a moon rocket. Even today the Soviet Union cannot produce any significantly big jet nozzles.” Mid-1960 flights in Voskhod series had been short because spacecraft were overloaded earlier Vostok type with some equipment removed. Last-minute modifications had been engineering disgrace. (AP, W Star, 11/25/71, H7) On Nov. 27 Mariner 9 failed in attempt at closeup photograph of Martian moon Phobos. JPL ground controllers said spacecraft’s camera wasn’t pointed correctly when attempt was made. Orbit of Phobos was not known precisely enough to ensure getting photo. Successful photo of Phobos would have shown greater detail than recent picture of Deimos, Mars’ other moon, since Phobos was twice as large as Deimos and spacecraft passed 1600 km (100 mi) closer. Mariner 9 had photographed Phobos Nov. 13 from 150 000 km (93 000 mi) out. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/27/71, A4; W Star, 11/28/71, A6)
Launching of eight Soviet Cosmos satellites, Mars 2, and Mariner 9 had raised number of man-made objects in space to 2378, Reuters reported. Of total, little more them one fifth were satellites or payloads; remainder was space junk. Spokesman for usaf Air Defense Command had said usaf had recorded 2840 objects, 760 payloads, and 2080 bits of debris that had decayed since launch of Sputnik 1 Oct. 4, 1957. (LA Times, 6/17/71)
New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and support” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C. “The development of new cities may be the important challenge we face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
Administration officials expected U.S.S.R. to test-fire SS-9 icbms within few months, New York Times reported. Two silos were being rebuilt at Baykonur test center in Kazakhstan to same dimensions as larger silos that had been appearing all over western Russia since December. (Beecher, NYT, 5/19/71, 1)
Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force and later leading test pilot in U.S., died in New York at age 83. He had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)
Donald K. Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmonauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave countrymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; msc pio)
International aspects of U.S. space program were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400 million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In 1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger scale.” U.S. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada, Japan, and Australia—“countries having the most obvious potential for post-Apollo work-sharing”—had been given “every chance to become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources. European Space Conference had put several million dollars into studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” U.S. had said it would “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and existing international agreements . . . [and] that general technical access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility except where European costs were directly affected, in which case decisions would be joint.” In U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.” U.S. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” U.S. was cooperating with U.S.S.R. “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where important new knowledge is to be gained, for the benefit of all men, everywhere.” While U.S. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part— initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer planets. . . .” In Jan. 18—21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [0.11 oz] of sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 11 and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed scientific examination of a comparative nature.” Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the planned exchange of information is taking place.” On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer, and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the U.S. astronauts.” (Text) • President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee A.	DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Friedman of nrl; Dr. Daniel P. Moynahan, former Counsellor to the President; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp.; and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. {PD, 2/1/71,
Moscow newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya quoted unidentified “Chief Designer of Spaceships” as saying U.S.S.R. was preparing further manned orbital flight of long duration as prelude to creation of permanent space laboratory. Soyuz spacecraft had “undergone necessary modifications to insure fulfillment of a long and extensive program.” Later New York Times said designer was believed to be Mikhail K. Yangel, member of Soviet Academy of Sciences. (NYT, 3/15/71)	_
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 mission: “What is significant ... is not the docking, in itself, but the evidence of the Soviet Union’s zealous determination to exceed everybody in space—for whatever purpose. There is nothing in all this that the U.S. space agency cannot, when it chooses, accomplish—given the funds and priorities. It is not a question of firsts—the U.S. has had its share of those, and more. The difference is that to Russia the priorities and judgments are made in one place, the Kremlin. In the United States, not only the space agency but the President, Congress and the prevailing public mood share the decisions.” (W News, 6/8/71)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference, “I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian spacecraft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.” (upi, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, was first speaker in Leuc Awareness Program series. Dr. Von Braun said at LeRC: “Our agency is at the crossroads. Our success story is our greatest enemy.” After four successful manned lunar landings, people had become complacent. If nasa fell behind U.S.S.R. in space, it would create another “Sputnik” environment. (Lewis News, 12/3/71, 1)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
Conversation between Mary Ann Harbert, U.S. citizen released Dec. 14 after nearly four-year internment by Chinese Communists, and escort Col. Leonard W. Johnson, Jr., Commander of 9th Aeromedical Evacuation Group at Clark afb in Philippines, was reported by AP. Miss Harbert had asked, “Have you put any men on the moon yet?” Col. Johnson had responded with description of U.S. space program that had put eight men on moon. Miss Harbert had said, “I really don’t know, I hadn’t heard about it. Many people in China don’t know that. The last thing we knew about space was that Russia had something circling the moon.” (B Sun, 12/15/71, A9)
Discovery of diamonds in 1.4-kg (3-lb) .meteorite that fell through roof of storehouse on Finnish island of Havro Aug. 2 was announced by Smithsonian Center for Short-Lived Phenomena. It was sixth such meteorite to be found. First discovery of meteoritic diamonds had been made by Russian scientists in 1888 while analyzing meteorite found near Novoured. (upi, NYT, 11/13/71)
Threat of military superiority was “inherent” in Soviet space program, New York Daily News said. “For it was the the development of a Russian rocket for intercontinental bombardment that led the way to the technological race in space in the first place. We certainly had nothing like it on Oct. 4, 1957, when the Russians startled the world with the orbiting Sputnik and came along a month later to launch Sputnik II, a 1200-pound [500-kg] vehicle carrying a live dog.. . .” U.S. Saturn rocket had no military usefulness; “one doubts that the Russians can say the same about their spacecraft launching vehicles.” (Greene, NY News, 1/31/71)
Claim that Central Intelligence Agency had “stolen” Soviet Sputnik spacecraft for three hours to examine it while it was on tour in 1958 was included in new book critical of CIA by former CIA agent, Baltimore Sun reported. Book was CIA—The Myth & the Madness, by Patrick J. McGarvey. (B Sun, 10/20/72, Al)
Selection of Dr. Manson Benedict, Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear physicist, to receive Enrico Fermi Award for 1972 was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission. President Nixon had approved nomination. President had informed Dr. Benedict that award was being given “in recognition of your pioneering leadership in the development of the Nation’s first gaseous diffusion plant, while paying equal tribute to your imaginative contributions in the development of the nuclear reactor and its safe use for generation of electrical power.” (aec Release P-366) November 4:	President Nixon, in foreign policy speech over nationwide radio, referred to U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings: “We agreed ... to cooperate in protecting the environment, explore in space, fight disease. This means the day is fast approaching when a Russian cosmonaut and an American astronaut will shake hands in space, when a Russian chemist and an American biologist will work side by side to find a cure for cancer, and each time our nations join hands in the works of peace, we advance the day when nations will no longer raise their hands in warfare.” {PD, 11/13/72, 1639-41)
U. Alexis Johnson, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, and Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on space agreements with U.S.S.R. signed in May, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ special hearing. Johnson said agreement signed May 24 endorsed at highest level understandings reached over past 18 mos between NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences for cooperation in space science and applications such as meteorology, study of earth’s environment, further exploration of moon and planets, and space biology and medicine. It permitted development of compatible rendezvous and docking systems which “should enhance safety and value of space flight” and opened possibility of further areas of cooperation. It demonstrated “in full view of the world that the two great space powers have both the will and the capability to work together on important and difficult tasks. We have high hopes . . . that this agreement will be a milestone in our relationship with the Soviet Union. ... It serves our broad national purposes, as well as our specific foreign policy objectives.” Dr. Low outlined earlier agreements and gave details of joint rendezvous and docking mission agreed on for 1975. During April visit to Moscow, agreement had been reached that astronauts must understand Russian to extent normally used in both regular and contingency operations. Soviet cosmonauts also would need to understand other language and be able to respond. Dictionary would be.developed of commonly used phrases. Some astronauts, all interested in flying this mission, had begun studying Russian on their own. Astronauts selected would take formal language training. Others in NASA would also learn Russian. (Transcript)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
Houston Chronicle editorial commented on Soviet attempt to restrict satellite TV broadcasts as threat to world peace: “We should be very-slow to accept any limitations upon the use of satellites. We have just begun to tap the benefits that can flow from the exploration of space. Our international space program stands in contrast to Russia’s secret effort. While we are opening new avenues of communications, Russia typically is acting to keep its citizens in ignorance.” (H Chron, 10/17/72)
Fifteenth anniversary of space age inaugurated by 1957 launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1, first man-made satellite. Soviet cosmonauts commemorated anniversary with interviews published in Soviet press. Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said: “Mankind’s entry into space has opened up . . . enormous prospects for the study not only of extraterrestrial space but also of the Earth. Modern space technology can be used to solve mankind’s vitally important tasks, such as the protection of the natural environment and the rational utilization of the Earth’s resources.” Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov discussed future in space in Komsomolskaya Pravda interview. In applied space research, “practical cosmonautics will move from purely informational tasks to exerting an active influence on . . . natural phenomena.” It would be possible “to destroy embryonic hurricanes, influence weather .... And both automatic and manned craft can serve as instruments in resolving these tasks.” Other space tasks of future would be study of Earth’s environment and study of universe, but “I do not believe that the exploitation of the planets’ natural resources for terrestrial needs will begin in our century.” (fbis-Sov, 10/17/72, L2-4)
New York Times editorial commented on data returned by Soviet Venus 8 probe, which had landed capsule on Venus July 22: “Since the first Sputnik went into orbit a decade and a half ago, the world has seen so many major accomplishments in space by both the Soviet Union and the United States that the original sense of wonder has been largely lost. Yet even in today’s jaded atmosphere, it must be recognized that what the Soviet scientists accomplished with Venus 8 was one of the great technological accomplishments of the age. The scientists and technicians responsible for this great feat deserve the world’s congratulations. It is self-evident that this work needs to be continued with respect to other planets . . . and that it can be done by international cooperation.” (NYT, 9/13/72, 42) September 13—15:	First national conference on remotely manned systems was held at- Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Stanley Deutsch of NASA Office of Life Sciences said in keynote address that usefulness of remotely controlled machines was “virtually limitless” both in space and on earth. “Using a remote system to scout Mars in advance of manned missions will enhance the safety of the man when we do send him to Mars.” Remotely controlled systems also could be used in future to rescue and return an incapacitated astronaut and provide a method for capturing unstable satellites. Remotely controlled systems technology developed for space was also being applied to nonspace applications such as Navy undersea manipulators, Air Force and Army remotely piloted aircraft, handling material in radiation laboratories, industrial safety, mining, medicine and hospitals, police work, and fire fighting. Dr. Ewald Heer of Jpl’s Advanced Technical Studies Div. said “intelligence” of automated systems would have to be increased greatly to ensure success of future earth orbital and planetary satellites. “Remotely manned systems are man-machine system® that augment and extend man’s sensory, manipulative and intellectual capabilities to remote places. However while machines may have superior strength and endurance and resistance to hostile environments, they still depend on human intelligence for decision-making in the performance of complicated tasks. Advanced engineering automation is essential in space station and shuttle operations and scientific data gathering must be microminiaturized for sustained interplanetary operations of two or more years.” (jpl Releases 625, 626; Swain, Pasadena Star-News, 9/14/72) September 14:	Senate approved U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms by vote of 88 to 2. Agreement was passed after adoption of amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) that urged President Nixon to seek future treaty which would not limit U.S. to levels of intercontinental strategic forces inferior to limits provided to U.S.S.R. (CR, 9/14/72, S14859, S14868-14913)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford made joint “flight” with Soviet Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev in Soyuz spacecraft simulator at Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), cosmonaut training center near Moscow. Stafford was member of NASA delegation to Oct. 9-19 Moscow meetings on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), joint rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. (upi, W Star & News, 10/18/72)
Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov had attributed 15-mo hiatus in Soviet manned space flight to major changes being made in Soyuz spacecraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Changes to improve cosmonauts’ living conditions were believed to include retrofit of miniaturized control and communications equipment for more space in command module. Dr. Sedov had said faulty hatch system had been corrected and spacecraft was ready for 30-day orbital laboratory mission. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
Soviet scientists were studying “collective effect” accelerators with high-current electrons to achieve very high energies needed to split atoms at lower cost and effort than by larger traditional accelerators. Traditional circular accelerators raised energy of electrons 50 mev per m. Collective-effect principle increased energy gain to 1000 mev per m. Very-high-current electron accelerators had been developed in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to generate beams of relativistic electrons with speeds close to velocity of light. (Shabad, NYT, 5/7/72, 64) May 8:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed space prospects in interview published in U.S. News & World Report: Chances of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. mission were “quite good.” It hadn’t been decided “exactly how it would work, but there might be two or three astronauts and the same number of cosmonauts.” U.S.S.R. probably would be “very active” in manned space flight until U.S. space shuttle was flying in 1978. “So it may appear that we have lost our leadership during that period.” U.S.S.R. would “try to be first in something— probably with manned and unmanned missions” during 1974 to 1978. “If and when they land men on the moon—even if they land on the same side . . . where we landed—that would attract a lot of public attention. ... If they were to land on the far side of the moon, that would be even more spectacular.” It would also be spectacular, Dr. Fletcher said, if U.S.S.R. announced it was “putting up a space station as the first step in a program to get to Mars.” Gap in U.S. space program had been caused by “series of things” including cancellation of two Apollos. “We probably should have worked it so that the shuttle would be operating earlier, but we spent a lot of time studying the shuttle—and that was good. . . .” Only possible fill-in was to “fly more Apollo components, and we are looking at that possibility. We have leftover Saturn rockets and leftover com-mand-and-service modules, and we’re looking to see if they can be used between 1974 and 1978.” It would take another Sputnik to accelerate U.S. space program to peak force, “but I don’t see that it’s necessary. ... I honestly think that we could do a reasonably good job on the budget that we’ve programmed for the ’70s. I think the main problem with the five-year gap is going to be loss of national prestige during the period.” Space program critics and decreasing space budget “may have a negative impact on people wanting to stay with the space program.” If there were no gap-filling missions, “we may have to phase part of the astronaut group into some other kinds of work while we wait for the shuttle.” When shuttle was operational it would “enable us to make space flight a routine event. Maybe we’ll have an every Monday-morning flight out to space. This will change the nature of what we do in space completely. When we can get into space cheaply, easily, quickly and routinely, this will open up space for new ventures at present not predictable.” (US News, 5/8/72)
British press correspondent Arthur Smith presented British view of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs since Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “Two major events in space marked 1971—both of them signs that America’s formidable lead in space exploration is being whittled away by the incredibly dynamic program” of U.S.S.R.: launch of Soyuz 11, which put U.S.S.R. ahead of U.S. in total launches for first time since 1958, and U.S.S.R.’s landing of Mars 3 capsule on Mars—“relatively unproductive from the scientific point of view,” but impressive. “These two events demonstrate that the Soviet space program is now making great strides after many years of relatively minor achievement in both manned and unmanned exploration and application. The characteristic pattern was a Soviet achievement announced to a surprised world, followed some months later by a more sophisticated and more useful U.S. version of the same mission, yielding far more scientific data, but little prestige.” U.S.S.R. program was characterized by excessive secrecy because, according to Soviet officials, rockets used in space program were similar to those used in military program. Smith said genuine reason for secrecy “is the desire to guard against a failure in the full blaze of world publicity.” U.S.S.R. “guards against ever having to admit failure by announcing launches only post facto. If there is a launch pad failure there is no announcement at all. If orbit is reached by the spacecraft, but it does not function as planned, no mention is made of this in the curt bulletin.” If lunar or planetary probe failed to enter planned trajectory, mission objective “is not mentioned, and the spacecraft is merely allocated a number in the catch-all Cosmos series. ... It is impossible to be absolutely certain how many of these escape stage failures there have been, but there may have been as many as 10 or 15 aimed at Venus and Mars alone.” Soviet program had “little ... of the technical virtuosity of the American approach,” but had more impetus and would “obviously continue on a growing scale. Apart from the progress in individual projects, the ever increasing number of Soviet launches demonstrates that the Russian equivalent of NASA is financially more secure. And the speed with which the Soviet space establishment can respond to a failure is also a pointer to the massive scale of the back-up precautions which are taken.” Soviet program, by its nature, was ensured greater financial security. “By their very success in being able to reach an unparalleled level of technology in their spacecraft, the American engineers have been working against their own best interests.” {Bull Atom Sci, 4/72, 18-24)
NASA had definite plans for international rendezvous and docking mission to link three Soviet cosmonauts with three U.S. astronauts in 1975, Washington Post reported. Tentative date was June 14, four days after U.S.S.R. orbited Salyut station and three days after cosmonauts docked Soyuz spacecraft at one end of Salyut 15 m (50 ft) long. Apollo spacecraft would dock with orbiting Salyut on 15th Apollo orbit of earth, day following Apollo launch. For 56 hrs astronauts and cosmonauts would work and live together under guidance of mission control centers in Houston and in Baykonur. There were “no longer any technical doubts that the feat of flying an American and a Russian spacecraft together can be accomplished.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, had said, “We haven’t seen anything in a technical sense that says we should stop.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/7/72, B2)
U.S.S.R. apparently was testing spaceborne satellite intercept system at high altitudes, Aerospace Daily reported. “In five earlier tests of the system . . . Russian satellites had shown they could disable target satellites flying at relatively low altitudes.” But Cosmos 520, launched Sept. 19 “into practically the same inclination as the earlier . . . vehicles, has gone into a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee of more than 39,000 kilometers [24 000 miles]. This could mean that the Russians are showing that their interceptor can reach to synchronous orbit . . . where more than half of future U.S. military satellites will orbit.” Orbit of Cosmos 520 was not equatorial—as was that of U.S. vehicles in Air Force and TRW Program 647 ballistic-missile early-warning satellite system—and its high point was apparently over Northern Hemisphere and its intermediate altitude rather more than the 32 000-km (20 000-mi) altitude of U.S. satellites. Military implications of Cosmos 520 mission were strong “since all SS-9 launched satellites are military vehicles. SS-9s have launched not only the interceptor series but all Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) satellites and another class of satellites . . . strongly related to weapons development.” (Aero Daily, 9/28/72)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev died in Moscow at age 84. During 50-yr career Tupolev and associates had pioneered design of 120 different aircraft from 35-hp ANT-1 in 1920s to Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport scheduled for service in 1975. He had been regarded as originator of all-metal aircraft, which he first designed in early 1920s. In 1934 he had built huge eight-engine aircraft with 63-m (207-ft) wingspan. Aircraft, named Maxim Gorky after Russian author, actually flew, but was demolished in 1935 crash. Tupolev, one of most decorated Soviet citizens, had won three Stalin Prizes and one Lenin Prize and was three-time Hero of Socialist Labor—highest Soviet civilian honor. He had been imprisoned in 1936 for allegedly divulging Soviet aviation secrets to Germany. During three years of forced labor he designed Tu-2 dive bomber which was flown by U.S.S.R. in World War II. Among postwar airliners designed by Tupolev design bureau were Tu-134 medium-range, 80-passenger transport and Tu-154, three-engine, 150-passenger transport scheduled to replace Tu-104 on Soviet domestic routes. (NYT, 12/24/72, 42) December 24:	NASA released Apollo 17 photos including one of best full-disc photos of earth taken from space. Photo, taken Dec. 7 as Apollo 17 spacecraft headed toward moon, showed earth from North Africa and Arabia to Antarctic polar icecap. (Photo 12-H-1578; NASA pio)
Relation of U.S. space program to national interest was discussed in Foreign Affairs article by Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator: “To some, space is, or should be, pure science; to others, it is prestige and the American image; to still others, space means national security.” Some space program students had said “its impact will be felt in other respects than the costaccounting of economic productivity versus technological investment. There has been much discussion of the influence of space exploration on the mind and spirit of man, as an extension of the revolution in thought that was initiated by Copernicus and continued by Newton and Darwin. A study of the history and pre-history of man suggests that the human drive is expressed through just such tentative movements out of the world of tried experience into a new world of untested promise. “Sputnik and the moon landing signaled the opening of a new frontier across which man can now travel into the endless reaches of outer space. The new frontier of space will not be closed quickly, for astronomical knowledge shows that billions of stars, some undoubtedly accompanied by earthlike planets, surround us in the galaxy. Space exploration has brought home to more people than ever before the reality of this vast complex of stars and planets. ‘Out there’ is really there, a place that one can get to. Never again can we make the mistake of identifying our speck of planetary matter as the universe.” (Foreign Affairs, 4/72, 532-44)
New York Times editorial praised President’s launch assistance policy announced Oct. 9: “Only a few days ago the fifteenth anniversary of the orbiting of Sputnik I—the beginning of the space age—passed into history. President Nixon’s announcement provides welcome evidence that the initial stage of nationalistic and irrational space competition may now be succeeded by a second stage of widening international space cooperation for the benefit of all peoples.” (NYT, 10/11/72, 42) October 12:	U.S.S.R. proposed global ban on unrestricted use of satellites for direct TV broadcasting during debate on peaceful uses of outer space by United Nations First (main political) Committee. Soviet delegate Yakov A. Malik submitted draft of proposed convention as presented to U.N. Secretary General Kurt M. Waldheim Aug. 8. Signatories would agree to transmit to other countries by satellite only if recipient countries agreed. U.S. delegate Ambassador George Bush, speaking first, told Committee U.S. was concerned over limiting “what promises to become an important new means of making information widely and immediately available to the people of the world.” (Astrachan, W Post, 10/13/72, A23; Worldwide Press Service, Inti Her Trib, 10/14-15/72, 5)
Neil H. McElroy—Secretary of Defense from 1957 to 1959, during President Eisenhower’s second term—died of cancer in Cincinnati, Ohio, at age 68. He had taken office five days after U.S.S.R. launched Sputnik 1 (Oct. 4, 1957), in midst of controversy between branches of U.S. armed services over responsibility for missile and satellite programs. McElroy, former executive of Procter & Gamble Co., ordered no cuts to be made in $l-billion budget that had been approved by Congress for basic research. Research led to successful launchings in 1958 of Navy and Army satellites that helped U.S. to recover some prestige in space field. McElroy resigned in 1958 to return to private industry after receiving Medal of Freedom from President Eisenhower. (W Star, 12/1/72, B7) During November:	Space shuttle impact was described by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Administrator for Planning, in American Scientist magazine article: Shuttle was “key to future exploration and use of space” that represented “significant new operational capability rather than a discrete mission or missions. Its ultimate impact will be to expand space activity while at the same time reducing the high costs of the space effort.” Shuttle combined in one transport “capability to launch or carry out unmanned or manned missions repeatedly and routinely. It will be the first true ‘aerospace’ vehicle in that it can fly and maneuver in both space and the atmosphere.” Shuttle would contribute more than any previous rocket vehicle to NASA’s progress in advancing technologies and capabilities for space flight and exploration, space science and study of aerospace phenomena, and expanded use of space and space technology for human benefit. “To achieve the smoothest, most economical progress and benefits at lowest cost to the taxpayers, all three objectives should go forward in fairly close concert, not piecemeal or with fluctuating budgetary peaks and valleys.” (Am Sci, 11-12/1972, 730-8)
NASA and Soviet Acadfemy of Sciences had approved results of fourth meeting of joint working groups on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) at Manned Spacecraft Center July 6-18, NASA announced. Croups had agreed to base future work on three astp documents: Project Technical Proposal, Organization Plan, and Project Schedules. Number of working groups would be increased to five. Groups had agreed to launch Soyuz spacecraft before Apollo spacecraft and had decided that sufficient progress had been made to proceed with system design and development for 1975 joint mission. Areas requiring future study included possible crew transfer by extravehicular activity (eva) in emergency situation, possibility of changing spacecraft pressure to shorten time required for crew transfer, TV system for docking, and choice of specific July 1975 date for mission. Next meeting of working groups was scheduled for October in Moscow. (NASA Release 72—190)
Houston Post editorial commented on international aspects of space program: “The history of the world has provided few efforts more conducive to worldwide participation than space exploration. Its benefits are mutual. The space shuttle is emerging as a practical, selfsupporting project and needs wider participation. Meanwhile, space investigations need to be continued. An international space agency would seem to be a practical way to perpetuate what the U.S. and Russia have started.” (H Post, 12/8/72)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. space mission scheduled for 1975 would include 48-hr linkup of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and crew exchange, Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov said in report released by Tass. Coyuz spacecraft, manned by two cosmonauts, would be launched first. “In seven and a half hours, Apollo spaceship manned by three astronauts will be launched from Cape Kennedy. In 24 hours, Apollo will approach the Soyuz ship and link up will be made. The system that will be formed will be operated as a single spacecraft. Within two days, spacemen will move from one ship to another, scientific and technical experiments will be made and there will be television transmissions to the earth. At the end of the third day, the spaceships will be undocked and will soon land on their respective territories.” Shatalov said he hoped manned Mars mission before end of 20th century would be international flight—“Possibly it will be the Soviet-American flight.” (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, L2)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
President Nixon sent to Congress United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Shaping a Durable Peace. The report recalled agreements made during the May 1972 Moscow Summit Meetings, including the agreement on a joint rendezvous and docking of Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. “Since the summit, all of the agreements have been carried out as expected. Our space agencies have conducted preliminary tests of models of the spacecraft docking system and crew training will begin this summer. The Joint Committee on Environmental Protection met in Moscow in September 1972 and planned 30 collaborative projects on a variety of subjects. . . . The Joint Commission on Science and Technology met in Washington in March 1973 and agreed to carry out some 25 projects in . . . energy, chemistry, biology, and agricultural research. American and Soviet naval officers will meet this year to review the agreement on reducing incidents between ships and aircraft. This process of cooperation has begun to engage an ever widening circle of people in various professions and government bureaus in both countries. Direct contact, exchanges of information and experience, and joint participation in specific projects will develop a fabric of relationships supplementing those at the higher levels of political leadership. Both sides have incentives to find additional areas for contact and cooperation, and I anticipate further agreements patterned on those already concluded.” (PD, 5/14/73, 455-653)
In its program of international cooperation, NASA launched Anik 2 domestic communications satellite for Telesat Canada and Intelsat-IV F—7 for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization. A significant milestone was the Intergovernmental Agreement on U.S. and European cooperation on Spacelab, signed by the U.S., Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. To be funded and developed by nine members of the European Space Research Organization, the Spacelab would be carried into orbit by NASA’s space shuttle orbiter and would accommodate experiments and personnel on missions of 7 to 30 days. Notable progress was made in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, with the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission on schedule for July 1975 launch. Working groups met in both countries and a November Moscow meeting familiarized eight U.S. astronauts with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. Docking system designs were essentially completed and all hardware construction was on schedule. Joint dynamic testing of test units began at Johnson Space Center. Flight crews were selected in both countries. Eighty-three nations entered into Definitive Agreements for intelsat, permanently establishing the global communications satellite system envisioned in the U.S. Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Scientists from other nations cooperated in nasa studies ranging from investigations of the solar system to practical applications of space technology. Erts 1 and Skylab environment and resources data were used throughout the world. Scientists from 37 countries and the United Nations participated in Erts 1 experiments and Brazil and Canada established their own erts data-acquisition facilities. Four foreign experiments were carried on Skylab missions and foreign scientists participated in the Apollo solar telescope program and in correlated astronomy sounding rocket programs. Scientists in 19 countries and the U.N. participated in 40 Skylab data-analysis investigations. German and Australian scientists were coinvestigators for Pioneer 11 experiments and French and U.K. scientists for Mariner 10. Investigators from 40 nations and esro were selected to participate in the Apollo 17 lunar sample program. A joint working group of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and nasa held the third and fourth meetings on space biology and medicine, exchanging information on manned space flight. Parallel communications channels using Intelsat and Molniya comsat systems were planned for 1974 to support the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Direct Communications Link, with construction of earth stations in both countries for access to each other’s satellites. Work went forward for future cooperative satellite projects. Agreement was reached with Italy to fly San Marco C-2 in 1974. Negotiations were underway with West Germany for 1974 launch of the aeros-b aeronomy satellite and work continued on the experimental cts comsat to be launched with Canada, the helios solar probe with Germany, the intasat ionospheric beacon with Spain, the UK—5 stellar x-ray satellite, Canada’s Anik C, and U.K.’s X4 technology spacecraft. Negotiations were also underway on nasa launch services for the French-German Symphonic comsat in 1974 and two ESRO test comsats in 1976 and 1977. The U.S. and esro were about to enter agreement for an air traffic control and navigation satellite system. During the year nasa launched 30 sounding rockets from ranges in other countries, including rockets carrying foreign payloads or cooperative experiments. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, Brazil, Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden. (Pres Rpt 1974; nasa Release 73-281; NASA Activities, 1/15/74, 2-3) • A burgeoning worldwide energy shortage led President Nixon to propose in June the establishment of a Cabinet-level Dept, of Natural Resources, an Energy Research and Development Administration, and a Nuclear Energy Commission. The shortage reached crisis proportion with the embargo by Arab nations on oil shipments to the U.S. in retaliation for U.S. support to Israel during the October Arab-Israeli war. In a November speech President Nixon noted the U.S. was on the verge of “the most acute shortage of energy since World War II.” He called for reduced use of heat, electricity, and gasoline; announced Federal Government steps to lower energy consumption; asked the Atomic Energy Commission to accelerate licensing and constructing nuclear power plants; and asked for an emergency energy act. Nine energy bills, passed in rapid succession by the first session of the 93rd Congress, included authorizations for mandatory fuel allocation programs, construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, a return to year-round daylight saving time, a speed limit on interstate highways, and the National Emergency Act. Soaring prices of all kinds of fuel, long lines of cars and banned Sunday sales at gas stations, and airline fare increases and schedule cutbacks marked closing months of the year. Economists forecast a possible depression as energy shortages aggravated an already recessed economy. Scientists sought additional sources of fossil fuels and, for the future, new sources of energy to make the U.S. energy-autonomous. The focus turned to NASA and its pioneering expertise in the technologies of solar energy and development of hydrogen as a substitute for gasoline in automobiles and aircraft. At the year’s end pending legislation endorsed NASA cooperation with other appropriate agencies in solving the worldwide energy shortage and in providing the U.S. with future sources of non-fossil-fuel energy. (A&A 1973; Library of Congress, Congr Research Service, Major Legislation of the 93rd Congress; Newsweek, 12/3/73)
A New York Times editorial commented on the successful Sept. 27—29 Soyuz 12 manned mission: “The purpose . . . was not primarily to set new records. Its main goal was to test the latest improved version of the Soyuz spacecraft. . . . Americans as well as Soviet citizens have reason to rejoice. ... In 1975 present plans call for the historic docking of a Soviet Soyuz craft with a United States Apollo vehicle. Thus Soviet and American astronauts must want each other’s space ships to be as safe as possible. And beyond the docking experiment in 1975 lies the prospect of a future fully integrated Soviet-American joint space program.” (.NYT, 9/30/73, 12) During September:	Soviet plans for a reusable space shuttle had been revealed by Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov and Soviet Academician Andrey Shikarin, according to a Vienna correspondent quoted by Interavia. The Soviet shuttle would consist of two vehicles coupled pick-a-back, each in delta configuration and designed for hypersonic operating speeds. One would be the booster, the other the orbiter. The spacecraft was designed for horizontal takeoff from a runway. The manned booster would carry the orbiter until it attained a 22-km-per-sec (4900 mph) speed corresponding to a 2- to 3-g acceleration. The stages would separate at about a 30-km (19-mi) altitude and the booster would descend in a controlled glide to land on the runway. The orbiter would accelerate to a more than 100-km (60-mi) altitude, complete its mission, and glide back to the earth. Construction was expected to begin during the 1970s. {Interavia, 9/1973, 945)
A Science editorial commented on the energy crisis: “A combination of environmental concerns and energy shortages is fostering wide-spread beggar-your-neighbor attitudes. Everyone wants cheap, unlimited energy, but all are prepared to fight tooth and nail to protect the environment and to prevent the location of energy facilities in their vicinity. It so happens that we are going to have neither cheap energy nor a perfect environment. Moreover, if we do not learn how to think nationally rather than parochially and to balance energy needs against environmental concerns, we are headed for trouble.” (Abelson, Science, 10/16/73, 657) November 17:	Soviet Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov discussed progress and problems of the astp to date in an interview published in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya. Generally, everything was progressing according to plan, but “as yet there is no unified search and docking system either on our or the American spacecraft. Only now are designers creating such a system on Apollo and Soyuz.” Spacecraft design and technical difficulties were being overcome, but there had been many problems. Personal relations between U.S. and Soviet crews and experts were very good: “The American astronauts are knowledgeable and highly skilled specialists. Suffice it to say that my opposite number, Colonel [Thomas P.] Stafford, has flown in space three times. Among ourselves we call the program . . . ‘the meeting on the Elbe’ in space. It was in 1945 that Soviet and American soldiers marked their joint victory over fascism by meeting on the Elbe. Thirty years later we dream of marking a victory over the accursed ‘cold war’ with a unique space ‘meeting on the Elbe.’ ” The language barrier had not yet been surmounted. “We are learning English, the Americans are learning Russian. It is said that Russian is the more difficult. But Stafford is courageously surmounting the barrier. Recently we were visited by Dr. [George M.] Low, deputy director of NASA, Eugene [N.] Cernan and Tom Stafford. Stafford made an entire speech on the space meeting [see Oct. 1-18] in relatively fluent Russian. And I assumed the role of translator.” (fbis-Sov, 12/6/73, B3)
The U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and NASA had agreed to a joint exhibit of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the 30th International Exposition at LeBourget Airport, Paris, May 24 to June 3, NASA announced. Each agency would exhibit actual size models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in docked configuration, (nasa Release 73-28)
The dismantling of the Federal fellowship program would liquidate some excesses but, “on balance, is a destructive move” at a time “when the need for some kinds of scientists and engineers is actually growing,” a Science editorial said. “After Sputnik was launched, this nation engaged in a frantic effort to expand its scientific capabilities. For a number of years government funds available for research in the physical and biomedical sciences increased rapidly. At the same time, the Apollo program was implemented. These developments created a shortage of scientists and engineers.” When Government support ceased to grow and unemployment arose, those in the Government who wanted to dismantle the fellowship program had had a useful excuse. But the unemployment argument was no longer valid. “The index of employment opportunities has climbed above 100. In some regions there already are shortages of engineers.” In years ahead, “this nation will encounter many unexpected problems requiring the skills of scientists and engineers. We may well come to regret bitterly the fact that we have been unable to do better than follow destructive blow-hot, blow-cold educational policies. We should adopt the more realistic assumption that this nation must have good science, good medicine, and good engineering, and we should make it possible for the top students, regardless of financial ability, to participate.” (Abelson, Science, 4/6/73, 13) April 6—13:	Two satellites, five aircraft, and ten surface vessels were used to study the New York Bight. The waters extending from Staten Island to more than 32 km (20 mi) east of Asbury Park, N.J.—used as a dump for sewer sludge, acid wastes, and dredging and excavation materials— were dyed green. Water circulation at and near the surface was mapped to plan balanced use of the coastal environment and to assess the impact of natural and man-made substances on the coastal zone. Data gathered by sensors on the aircraft and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) were checked for accuracy by measurements gathered by surface vessels. The program was managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with participation by NASA and the Navy, Environmental Protection Agency, Coast Guard, Federal Aviation Administration, and State of New Jersey. (noaa Release 73-60) April 8:	The first closeup radar images of the moon’s surface—obtained during the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission—had been assembled by scientists and engineers from Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the Univ. of Utah, the Univ. of Michigan, and the Center for Astrogeology of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA announced. The “pictures,” products of the Apollo lunar sounder experiment, would eventually provide a geological cross-section of the moon, detailing subsurface structure to a depth of 1.3 km (0.8 mi), (nasa Release 73-65)
Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, U.S. Secretary of State, said in a speech before The Pilgrims in London that the 1973 energy crisis should become “the economical equivalent of the Sputnik challenge of 1957. Only this time, the giant step for mankind will be one that America and its closest partners take together.” He proposed “that the nations of Europe, North America and Japan establish an energy action group of senior and prestigious individuals, with a mandate to develop within three months an initial action program for collaboration in all areas of the energy problem.” (Text)
The U.S. flight crew for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission was announced by NASA. Prime crew: Thomas P. Stafford, commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; Donald K, ) Slayton, docking module pilot. Backup crew: Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Louama. Support crew: Richard H. Truly, Robert F.	Ovennyer, Robert L. Crippen, and Karol J. Bobko. Joint crew training would begin in the summer of 1973, when Soviet cosmonauts would visit the U.S. for several weeks. U.S. astronauts would spend an equal time in Russia in the fall of 1973. (NASA Release 73-15)
A Tass photo published by the New York Times showed Soviet ApolloSoyuz Test Project Cosmonauts Valery N. Kubasov and Aleksey A. Leonov practicing moving from a Soyuz spacecraft in the water to a rescue raft. The site of the training was not identified. {NYT, 7/19/73, }) . . . .
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California barium cloud experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 18-Dec. 1: U.S. flight crews for the July 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission visited the U.S.S.k. for familiarization with the Soyuz spacecraft and discussions with Soviet counterparts on the flight plan. The discussions, held mostly at the Yuri A. Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training near Moscow, included joint crew activities and onboard documentation. Astronauts participating were Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. astp commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; and Donald K. Slayton, docking module pilot; backup crew Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma; support crew Robert F. Overmyer and Karol J. Bobko; and Eugene A. Cernan, Special Assistant to the U.S. astp Technical Director. At a press conference following the Nov. 29 concluding meeting, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said the U.S.S.R. planned further manned space flights—individual Soyuz missions and linkups of Soyuz with .the Salyut orbital platform—before the joint U.S — U.S.S.R. mission. Stafford told newsmen he was completely satisfied that the Soyuz would be “a great ship to fly.” He said there would be two joint training sessions in 1974, in Moscow in July and at Johnson Space Center in September, (nasa Release 73-250; Smith, NYT, 11/30/73, 9)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the U.S. stake in the Skylab missions, endangered by damage to the Sky-lab 1 Workshop during launch May 14: “Even if the present Skylab must be written off, the nation should not dismantle its unique capacity for manned space exploration. We have the equipment, including the Saturn V rocket, to mount another attempt in 15 months or so. More importantly, NASA currently has the brains and knowhow to operate in space with amazing powers of foresight and improvisation, which are being put to a severe test this week. The dispersal of this talent would be a loss to mankind in ways that can only be imagined.” (W Star & News, 5/24/73, A18) May 24-June 3: The 30th and largest Paris Air Show at Le Bourget Airport, marred by tragedy at its end, featured the first joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. pavilion—displaying models of Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft to be used in the July 1975 joint mission—and a record display of aircraft, subsystems, and equipment from manufacturers in 19 countries. The aircraft included the Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet production model Tu-144 supersonic transports, U.S. prototype Northrop F-5E international fighter and Grumman Navy F-14 variable-geometry air-superiority fighter, Soviet I1-62-M medium-range transport and Yak general-aviation aircraft, and the first European A-300B Airbus. nasa Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said at the opening of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. exhibit that NASA was “pleased to have the opportunity to demonstrate . . . the rapid progress our joint working groups have made. . . . During the past year, American and Soviet engineers have worked closely together in an atmosphere of good will to solve many complicated and technical problems. We are confident that the target date for a joint mission in Earth orbit in 1975 can be met. This joint mission will be an exciting adventure as well as a highly visible expression of our nation’s belief in the great value of exploring and using space in cooperation with other nations.” On May 30 the Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt met with Soviet Cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, and Anatoly V. Filipchenko— of the U.S.S.R. prime and backup crew for the Apollo-Soyuz mission— and Dr. Aleksey S. Yeliseyev at the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Pavilion. They inspected a model of the Soviet Lunokhod 2 lunar roving vehicle and Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft models and were invited aboard the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport by its principal designer Gen. Aleksey A. Tupolev. On June 3 the Tu-144 crashed into the French village of Goussainville, near Le Bourget Airport, while finishing a series of demonstration flights. All six crewmen, including pilot Mikhail Kozlov, and seven persons on the ground were killed and 28 injured. The aircraft was destroyed. A team of French and Soviet officials was appointed immediately to investigate the accident, which observers said might have resulted from attempted aerobatics. Witnesses said the Tu-144’s performance had been erratic just before it crashed. {Av Wk, 5/28/73, 6/4/73, 6/11/73; Shapley text; Tass, fibs-Sov, 6/1/73, F5; 6/4/73, F3) May 25:	Skylab 2 was launched from Kennedy Space Center Complex 39, Pad A, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle to carry Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz to join the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop for repairs and a 28-day mission [see May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission], (nasa prog off)
NASA and Soviet space officials had agreed to permit representatives of the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to observe and advise in Apollo and Soyuz flight control rooms during orbital phase of July 1975 joint mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. No agreement had been reached to permit U.S. observers at the Soviet launch site during liftoff of Soyuz spacecraft. [See March 15-30.] (Av Wk, 1/1/73, 13)
Kennedy Space Center announced a $10 517 967 contract extension, through July 31, 1975, to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corp. to process the Saturn IB 2nd stage for launching the Apollo spacecraft to rendezvous and dock with the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The award brought total contract value to $101 995 628. A six-month, $7 909 148 contract extension to Bendix Corp. Launch Support Div. brought to $240 857 165 the total value of a contract for launch support services, including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39. An $11831263 extension to an International Business Machines Corp. contract would provide launch support services to Saturn IB booster instrument units, for possible Skylab rescue vehicles and the astp launch. The extension, through July 1975, brought total contract value to $58 772 009. (icsc Releases 290-73, 291—73, 292-73)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
“The public has grown increasingly sanguine about NASA’s manned missions, almost considering them routine, because of the agency’s perfect safety record on manned missions.” The Aug. 2 oxidizer leak had shown “that the missions are anything but free of hazard, and the mental stress imposed upon the three astronauts must be intense. We hope, of course, that the mission will continue for the full 59 days and that the astronauts will then make it home safely. But if there is any serious question about the condition of the Apollo ship, then NASA certainly should exercise its option of sending a rescue ship up to Skylab and ending the mission in advance of schedule.” (B Sun, 8/5/73) August 6:	A Chicago Sun-Times editorial commented on space rescue capability as the Skylab 3 astronauts, manning the Orbital Workshop since July 28, conducted their first extravehicular activity: “There is a certain amount of calculated risk involved at this period of space experimentation. In a real emergency Russia might be able to help out with one of its spacecraft. When the shuttle program becomes effective, a reusable winged spaceship could be made ready for launching in two hours.” Meantime, “all we can do is trust that the good luck, astronauts’ skill and inventiveness of the space program people that have provided magnificent results to date continue during the current series of missions.” (C Sun-Times, 8/6/73)
A Washington Star and Daily News editorial commented on the June 3 crash of the Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport aircraft during the May 24-June 3 Paris Air Show: “Coming on the heels of a series of Soviet air disasters which have killed more than 600 people in the last 18 months and many failures of its space program, the image of Soviet technology at this point is not so reassuring. . . . The crash of the Russian SST is certain to affect the commercial prospects of the Concorde as well.” (W Star & News, 6/8/73, A18)
It was “puzzling,” a Washington Star and Daily News editorial said, “that Soviet leaders remain so secretive about their space problems, when the general nature of a mishap cannot be hidden from modem tracking equipment and more openness could lead to a sharing of corrective knowledge. The Russian announcement that the last Salyut had merely completed its mission . . . fooled no one. Greater frankness, certainly, will be needed in the joint mission [U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project] requiring the confidence of each country’s experts in the other’s equipment and ability.” (W Star & News, 5/9/73, A23) May 10:	Skylab 1, scheduled for launch May 14, would carry 950 kg (2100 lbs) of food, including lobster newburg, prime ribs of beef, filet mignon, asparagus, strawberries, and after dinner mints, the Washington Post quoted Dr. Malcolm C. Smith, Chief of Food and Nutrition at Johnson Space Center, as saying. Each Skylab mission would carry more than 70 different foods prepared by an automatic meal-reconstitution module. Semisolid food could be eaten out of the can with a fork and spoon and prevented from flying around in the weightless environment by a polyethylene membrane. Beverages could be consumed one swallow at a time from a multichambered bellowslike canister. Previously, astronauts had to drink the entire beverage at one time once the valve was opened. Fruit juices were fortified with potassium gluconate to replace the potassium lost in weightlessness. The use of alcoholic beverages had been rejected because of medical drawbacks and public opinion. The astronauts arranged their own meals with the correct combinations of nutrients and calories. Frozen foods would be used the first time in the U.S. space program. The cost of the Skylab food was $26.35 per man per day. Twenty percent more food than required would be carried. There would also be a rescue food supply of 16 days for three men. (Ross, W Post, 5/10/73, El)
Science & Government Report commented on results of the March 19-21 Washington, D.C., meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation: “What is clear is that after two postponements of the Commission’s debut and a good deal of indecisiveness, at least on the Washington end, concerning how much R&D [research and development] cooperation to offer the Soviets, both parties are approaching the relationship with caution and no evidence of haste. We will no doubt be seeing more Soviet researchers than ever before, and access to labs in the USSR will be eased a bit for American visitors, but the politically inspired match of the two research communities should not be mistaken for a raging love affair.” (Sci & Govt Rpt, 4/1/73, 3)	... April 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified on nasa’s role in supersonic transport aircraft development before the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans during FY 1974 appropriation hearings: “I don’t think we can turn our back on supersonic technology. This is a fact of life. Military planes are flying supersonically in this country; ssts are flying in Europe and Russia. We can not just say we don’t want to build a transport ourselves and therefore we should turn off all technology in this area. What we are doing in NASA is trying to address ourselves to the main problems with supersonic flight, both military and civilian. The main problems include the economic factors involved, the pollution of the stratosphere, and the noise.” NASA was the only agency qualified to investigate these problems but “I do think that the Congress has responsibility to determine any future development of a supersonic transport in this country, at least as far as the Government’s support of such a program, and it is not our intention to in any way change that decision.” (Transcript)
Russian translation computers of the Foreign Translation Div. of WrightPatterson Air Force Rase, Ohio, would be used in the exchange of technical and scientifie information necessary for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The computers, called Systrain, translated Russian to English at the rate of 100 000 to 300 000 words per hour using 10 topical glossaries and 300 000 terms. Systrain could translate multiple-meaning Russian words, resolve problems of ambiguity, analyze sentence structure, and provide finished English translations of technical documents, (afsc Newsreview, 3/73, 12) April 1:	Kenneth E. Hodges joined NASA as Director, Aeronautical Operating Systems Office, in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. He had recently finished a one-year tour of duty with the Aeronautics and Space Council and formerly had been a flight-test engineer with Lockheed-California Co. (nasa Hq WB, 4/9/73, 1)
Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. director of cosmonaut training, denied Western press reports of recent Soviet space failures and said there would be manned Soviet launches before the 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission, during a Moscow interview with U.S. correspondents. Of Soyuz 2 (launched April 3 and reported to have disintegrated in space) he said, “This craft this time was not intended for manned flight. The experiment was successfully completed and we are satisfied with the results.” Salyut 2 had had a “much more narrow purpose” than Salyut 1 (launched April 19, 1971, as a space station). Salyut 2 was “intended to finalize some design peculiarities. As soon as it fulfilled its task, it finished its existence.” Several manned space flights were planned as part of the Soviet space program and to test design changes in the Soyuz spacecraft for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp). The U.S.S.R. was considering admitting Western journalists to their space facilities for the first time and the establishment of a press center at Baykonur Cosmodrome, but newsmen would not be permitted beyond 7 km (4.3 mi) of the launch site, (upi, Inti Herald Tribune, 6/27/73; B Sun, 6/27/73, A2)
Concorde 02, reproduction model of the Anglo-French supersonic transport, flew from Washington, D.C., Dulles Airport to Paris’ Orly Field in 3 hrs 33 min. The aircraft had participated in dedication of the Dallas-Fort Worth airport Sept. 21. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74) September 26-27:	Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D—Wash.) explained S. 2495, a bill to apply NASA’s expertise to solving domestic problems, during the first day of two-day hearings on the state of the aerospace industry by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Sen. Magnuson, with Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.), introduced the bill Sept. 27. The bill, the Technology Resources Survey and Applications Act, would amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to provide “an organization within NASA to carry out programs ... to resolve critical national problems. This would expand an activity already underway within NASA and enable us to better utilize a capability which has already exhibited an impressive record of success.” The programs would be determined by a National Technology Resource Council of Cabinet members and heads of technological agencies, which would make its recommendations to the President. Sen. Magnuson suggested changing NASA’s name to the National Applications of Science Administration. “I do believe the name . . . would accurately reflect the new role which my bill attempts to create for NASA.” Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified that foreign competition for U.S. and international aerospace markets was currently “of a scope, determination, and quality that we have not had to face since World War II. The underpinning of strong research and development programs—vital to our technological advance—is being downgraded to a serious degree. There is an alarming scarcity of private sources of financing for the development and production of new commercial aircraft. As a low-profit industry, traditionally averaging a profit about half that of other manufacturing industries, we lack the resources for reinvestment, cushioning against risk, and attracting investors. Above all, there is uncertainty in this transitional period about future national gods which might utilize our capabilities. Will we continue to contribute primarily to space exploration, defense, and long-range air travel, or will we next find ourselves emphasizing such efforts as environmental control, law enforcement, health delivery services, housing, and urban mass transit?” Dr. Wernher von Braun—Vice President, Engineering and Development, Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning—testified on the future of satellite communications: “There is no field in which the goals of space applications are expanding at a faster rate.” Ever since NASA demonstrated “that radio signals bounced off passive reflection satellites such as the Echo balloon or rebroadcast by active repeater spacecraft such as Early Bird, worldwide communications by satellite have been growing. . . . Satellites, by providing international telephone and television service, are an important force in overcoming regional and national barriers. It is difficult to maintain hostility and isolation in the presence of free communications.” Satellite communications would “soon be commonplace in our country.” With the advent of the reusable space shuttle to service and repair satellites in the 1980s, “even nations with limited fiscal resources can put in a network of smaller, far less expensive ground stations.” Thanks to NASA programs initiated a few years ago, “the United States is still quite active in the area of pioneering new technology for communications satellites.” (Transcript) September 27—29:	The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 12, carrying cosmonauts l/c Vasily G. Lazarev and flight engineer Oleg G. Makarov, from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:18 pm local time (3:18 pm Moscow time; 8:18 am edt) into earth orbit with 229-km (142.3-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.8-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Soviet news agency Tass announced the objectives of the two-day mission were to test improved flight systems, test manual and automatic control in various flight conditions, and obtain spectrographic data of separate sections of the earth “for the solution of economic problems.” The flight would further improve development of manned spacecraft. After six hours in flight the cosmonauts reported they had adjusted to weightlessness and were carrying out all scheduled activities. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. During the first day, Lazarov—45-yr-old air force test pilot and physician—and Makarov— 40-yr-old engineer who had taken part in developing the control board and flight program for Yuri A. Gagarin’s Vostok 1 mission of April 12, 1961—maneuvered their spacecraft in orbit to test manual and automatic control and piloting techniques. The spacecraft was moved into a higher and nearly circular orbit, with parameters reported by Tass as 345-km (214.4-mi) apogee, 326-km (202.6-mi) perigee, 91-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The cosmonauts also made spectrographs of natural formations of the earth’s surface. They were reported Sept. 28 to be in high spirits and good physical condition. Tass reported a new spacecraft design and a new spacesuit, “very simple and comfortable,” were being tested. Spacesuits were worn for launch and descent but not during the flight itself. On Sept. 29 the crew oriented their spacecraft and fired the braking engine. The landing module separated from the spacecraft and entered descent trajectory. The parachute system was deployed at 7.6 km (4.7 mi) above the earth and engines softlanded the craft 400 km (250 mi) southwest of Karaganda in the Kazakhstan Steppe at 2:34 pm Moscow time (7:34 am edt). A medical check at the landing site showed “the state of [the cosmonauts’] health is good.” Soyuz 12 was the first Soviet manned space flight since the 1971 Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission. Soyuz 10 (launched April 23, 1971, carrying three cosmonauts) had docked with the orbiting Salyut 1 space laboratory (launched April 19) but the cosmonauts had not boarded. American observers believed the Soyuz spacecraft had spun out of control, causing the cosmonauts to become ill and necessitating an early return to earth. Three cosmonauts launched June 6, 1971, on Soyuz 11 had docked with and boarded Salyut 1. They worked successfully in orbit for 24 days but were found dead on landing, from pressure loss in the landing craft, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; fbis-Sov, 9/28/73, Ul-A>; 10/1/73, Ul—3; SBD, 9/28/73, 138; Kaiser, W Post, 9/28/73, Al; Shabad, NYT, 9/30/73, 1; Seeger, W Post, 9/30/73, 145) September 27:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a Titan IIIB-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into an orbit with a 384.6-km (239-mi) apogee, 128.8-km (80-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.5° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29. (Pres Rpt 74; Wilson, W Post, 10/16/73, A7)
Cosmos 573 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 401-km (249.2-mi) apogee, 195-km (121.2mi) perigee, 90.5-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The satellite reentered June 17. The Western press later quoted a Soviet source as identifying the mission as a test of an unmanned Soyuz spacecraft in preparation for an upcoming manned launch. Western tracking stations reported the orbit was identical to one used during manned Soviet flights. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/18/73, 265; B Sun, 1/6/13)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
Selection of the oflicial emblem of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, scheduled for July 1975, was announced by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences. The circular emblem displayed the English word “Apollo” and the Russian “Soyuz” around a center disc depicting the two spacecraft docked in earth orbit, (nasa Release 74-49)
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—routinely surveying crops, forests, watersheds, and mineral deposits on the earth since its 23 July 1972 launch—had transmitted photos of seven major Soviet antiballistic missile launch and radar installations at the Sary Shagan development site in southern Russia, the San Diego Union reported. The newspaper pointed out the erts satellites might be used to discover whether the Soviets were violating arms limitation agreements. (Macomber, San Diego Union, 15 Dec 75)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Theodore Wydeven, Jr., had developed a new technique for coating salt lenses, NASA announced. Lenses made from large salt crystals had long been used in scientific applications because they were transparent to infrared light, but they were susceptible to fogging from even slight moisture. Using a method from his water purification experiments, Dr. Wydeven had prepared a Teflon-like membrane in an electric discharge to coat a salt lens, at a few cents a coating. The coating increased resistance to moisture and enhanced optical quality of the lens because of the film’s antireflection properties. (nasa Release 74—319) 10-hr procedural simulation of the launches of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, with exchange of status reports and data on spacecraft position, was held at JSC the third day. The first JSC Mission Control Center simulation with Apollo crewmen was scheduled for mid-February 1975, with the first all-up simulation with both control centers and both Apollo and Soyuz crews in late March 1975. (jsc Release 74—275; Chriss, LA Times, 24 Dec 74, 8; JSC pio, interview, 15 Sept 75)
The combined calculated weight at launch of the U.S.S.R.’s Soyuz 4 (launched 14 Jan. 1969) and Soyuz 5 (launched 15 Jan. 1969) had indicated that the spacecraft had carried propulsion systems far in excess of requirements for an earth orbital mission, David Woods reported in Spaceflight. The 1.97-km-per-sec velocity requirement of such active docking vehicles as Soyuz 4 had matched the total velocity requirement of 1.94 km per sec of Apollo 11 (launched to the moon 16 July 1969), indicating that these early Soyuz spacecraft had been capable of manned lunar missions, Woods deduced. (SF, Aug 74,300-302) September 1974
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Wind-tunnel tests at Ames Research Center had indicated that NASA’s swing-wing aircraft configuration could provide a practical design for an advanced commercial jet transport, NASA announced. The aircraft’s straight wing, mounted above the body, could be turned to various oblique angles for different flight speeds and was proposed for slow and fast design versions. Operating at speeds of 800 to 1400 km per hr, the needle-nosed fast version would maintain relatively economical fuel consumption—13 000 to 17 000 km per cu m per passenger—about twice the fuel economy of supersonic transports like the Concorde or the Russian Tu-144. For slower flight, the wing would be fixed at right angles to the fuselage, for landings and takeoffs with minimum power and noise. The design’s flexibility would permit shorter flight times with little increase in overall fuel consumption, (nasa Release 74-318)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 656 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 322-km apogee, 185-km perigee, 89.6-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The press reported that Cosmos 656 was probably a test flight of a Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May. (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, Fbis-Sov, 29 May 74, Ul; O’Toole, W Post, 30 May 74, A18) ' 29 May—19 June: The U.S.S.R. launched Luna 22 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 1:57 pm local time (4:57 am edt). The automatic station was separated from a platform rocket system in earth orbit and put into a close-to-planned trajectory for the moon. A flight-path correction maneuver 30 May aimed the spacecraft toward a selected area of near-moon space. Luna 22 went into circular orbit of the moon 2 June, with a 220-km apogee, 220-km perigee, 130.0-min period, and 19.6° inclination. The Soviet press reported 3 June that all instruments aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally and scientific investigation of the moon had begun. Luna 22 was transferred into an elliptical orbit with a 244-km apogee and 25-km perigee 9 June to take detailed TV photos of the lunar surface and to study surface relief using an onboard altimeter. Chemical composition of rocks was obtained by determining the gamma radiation. After completion of the photography program the spacecraft was moved to an orbit with a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee. By 19 June Luna 22 had completed 187 orbits of the moon; all equipment continued to function normally, (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 May 74, Ul; 4 June 74, Ul; 20 June 74, Ul; SF, Nov 74, 434) 30 May—28 June: NASA launched Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite from Eastern Test Range at 9:00 am edt on a Titan TlIC launch vehicle. The booster ejected the transtage and spacecraft into an elliptical parking orbit with a 626-km apogee and 152-km perigee. At the second equatorial crossing the first bum of the transtage placed the spacecraft in a transfer orbit. Launch, parking orbit, and transfer orbit were close to the program plan. At 3:29 pm EDT, Ats 6 was injected into geosynchronous orbit with a 35 845.6-km apogee, 35 774.1-km perigee, 23-hr 57-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The near-perfect orbit eliminated need for corrections, leaving nine kilograms of fuel for operational contingencies. The spacecraft separated from the transtage at 3:33 pm EDT. An orbital correction 7 June changed the 0.27°-per-day westward drift to a 0.05° eastward drift. Checkout of spacecraft systems and onboard experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. The mission was adjudged a success 26 Sept Primary objectives of the mission were to inject the spacecraft into near-geostationary orbit, erect and evaluate a nine-meter antenna to provide a good-quality signal to small inexpensive ground receivers, stabilize the spacecraft using a three-axis control system, and support user-oriented applications experiments. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate new technology in aircraft and maritime traffic control and infrared earth observations; acquire system data for communications applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay; test spacecraft control; and measure particles and radiation. The 20 experiments included a health-education telecommunications experiment to broadcast programs in several languages simultaneously to citizens in remote areas of the country. The satellite also would aid in remote medical telediagnosis and teleconsultation, transmitting patients’ medical records to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. One year after launch Ats 6 would be moved over Lake Victoria in Central Africa. India would then use the satellite to broadcast programs teaching agricultural techniques, family planning and hygjene, school courses and teacher education, and occupational skills to 5000 villages. The $600 ground receiving terminals each consisted of a receiver, converter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. Ats 6 was the sixth in a series of ATS satellites developed to advance technology in design, propulsion, and stabilization systems; meteorological concepts; applications; space environmental studies and measurement systems; and communications. Ats 1 (launched 6 Dec. 1966), Ats 3 (5 Nov. 1967), and Ats 5 (12 Aug. 1969) were still transmitting useful data. The ATS program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. (NASA mors, 24 May, 3 June, 8 July, 2 Oct. 74; NASA prog off, interview, 5 Feb. 74; NASA Release 74-111)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 672—an unmanned Soyuz spacecraft testing docking systems for the July 1975 Apollc-Soyuz Test Project mission—from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam. The satellite entered an orbit with 277-km apogee, 142-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.8° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, Soviet chief of cosmonaut training, identified the mission and that of Cosmos 638 (launched 3 April) at a 9 Sept. Johnson Space Center astp press briefing, saying that both had successfully tested the systems. Cosmos 672 reentered 18 Aug. (gsfc SSR, 31 Aug 74; JSC briefing transcript, 9 Sept 74; SF, Feb 75, 76)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was “one of the few tangible survivors of that champagne-bubble atmosphere of detente along with the badly tarnished SALT [Strategic Arms Limitations Talks] agreements,” Aviation Week and Space Technology said in an editorial. From the Soviet viewpoint the goals were obvious: to tap into the mainstream of U.S. technology, to blur the international image of U.S. superiority with the appearance of parity by flying a joint manned mission, and to develop the technical base for international space rescue capability. U.S. goals remained obscure. The mission would provide the answers to some experimented questions: Could the U.S. and U.S.S.R. work together in a joint space program? Could an international rescue capability be developed? Could the ASTP experience be expanded to future joint space ventures? That ASTP had survived to the final countdown was a tribute to the flexibility, stamina, and ingenuity of the technical working groups of both countries. A formidable series of technical, philosophical, linguistic, and operational problems had been solved and the investment by both countries had been substantial. ASTP had been “partially worth the effort.. . to have a sizable group of NASA and industry technicians get some practical hard-headed experience in working with their Soviet counterparts and acquiring a realistic view of their technical capabilities and philosophy. We think the rest of the value of the mission will come from determining just how serious the Soviets are about future joint ventures in space and how much they really want to give and how much they want to take.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5 May 75, 7) U.S. communications equipment checkout and docking target alignment tests were completed at the Baykonur cosmodrome by midMay, in time for Dr. Low and a group of NASA officials to take an inspection and orientation tour of the cosmodrome. The group visited the launch pad from which the ASTP Soyuz spacecraft would be launched and the Soviet equivalent of Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) where the group inspected the prime launch vehicle and prime backup Soyuz spacecraft. At the 22 May flight readiness review (FRR) chaired by Dr. Low and Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, acting president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences replacing the ailing Mstislav V. Keldysh, Soviet and U.S. space officials signed the report indicating that the “Apollo-Soyuz Test Project was proceeding in accordance with the agreed schedule and ready to proceed toward the launching planned for July 15,1975.” Before the signing, U.S. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney and his Soviet counterpart Konstantin D. Bushuyev gave a 5-hr review of the technical histories of their respective spacecraft. Reporting that no major problems remained, Lunney and Bushuyev said that 133 documents had been negotiated and signed and only the postflight review, remained to be prepared. Working Group chairmen made their final presentations indicating that all major tasks had been completed. (NASA Release 75—156; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285—301; Reuters, NYT, 23 May 75, 33)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
NASA’s Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite (launched 30 May 1974 into geosynchronous orbit) began a 6-wk move from its position 35 900 km over the Pacific Ocean west of the Galapagos Islands to a new location above Lake Victoria in eastern Africa. The satellite, which was expected to reach its new location by 1 July, would be checked out in time to participate in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in mid-July. During that mission Ats 6 would track the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft and relay TV and data from the two spacecraft to earth, marking the first time a satellite had been used to relay TV from a manned spacecraft. The new location also would bring Ats 6 within range of India for the 1-yr Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) scheduled to begin 1 Aug. During the experiment—a cooperative effort by NASA and the Indian Space Research Organization—the Indian government would relay daily educational TV programs to 5000 villages and cities throughout India. After the experiment, the satellite would be moved back to a position within range of the U.S., where it would be used for further experimentation. (NASA Release 75-153)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
President Ford, in a White House ceremony, presented the National Space Club’s Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Skylab 4 Commander Gerald P. Carr on behalf of the nine astronauts who inhabited the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched 14 May 1973) during periods in 1973 and 1974. The astronauts were cited for their “exceptional accomplishments in the Skylab program .... When the entire mission was jeopardized the first crew, through uncommon ingenuity, saved the mission. The scientific content of the program is of extraordinary significance, in all disciplines. The demonstration that men can live and work in space for extended periods sets the stage for future exploration of space.” At the Space Club’s 18th annual Goddard memorial dinner, the following awards were presented: Award Recipient (Affiliation) Citation Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Memorial Trophy NASA Skylab Astronauts Charles P. Conrad Joseph P. Kerwin Paul J. Weitz Alan L. Bean Owen K. Garriott Jack R. Lousma Gerald P. Carr Edward G. Gibson William R. Pogue For their exceptional accomplishments in Skylab program Astronautics Engineer Award John M. Thole (NASA) For direction of the OSO and ATS programs Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award NASA-Fairchild Industries Ats 6 team For demonstration of a significant advance in space communications Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship Dr. Bruce F. Smith (NASA) For demonstrated abilities in addressing, theoretically and experimentally, a broad range of astrophysical problems Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Scholarship Alice K. Babcock (Georgetown Univ.) To continue higher scientific education Dr. Robt. H. Goddard Historical Essay James E. Oberg (USAF) For essay, “Russia Meant to Win the Moon Race?” Nat’l Space Club Press Award Roy Neal (NBC) For resourcefulness in reporting the U.S. space effort {PD, 14 April 75, 372; program)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, relaxing on the eve of their launch for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, viewed the film White Sun of the Desert. The film, following a tradition set by the cosmonauts’ predecessors in space, was a Russian action movie set during the civil war after the Bolshevik revolution in 1917. (Wren, NYT, 16 July 75, 1)
A Soyuz spacecraft, launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome and carrying Cosmonauts Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov, was returned to earth shortly after launch when the launch vehicle failed to perform normally. Tass reported, “On the third-stage stretch the parameters of the carrier rocket’s movement deviated from the preset values and an automatic device produced the command to discontinue the flight under the program and detach the spacecraft for return to earth.” Tass also reported that the purpose of the mission had been to continue experiments aboard the Salyut 4 space station (launched 26 Dec. 1974). The Soyuz softlanded southwest of Gorno-Altaisk in Western Siberia. The search and rescue service brought the cosmonauts, both in good condition, back to the cosmodrome. During a telephone conference on 8 April, Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R. technical director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, told his U.S. counterpart, Glynn S. Lunney, that the launch vehicle that failed was not the version of the booster that would be used for the July ASTP launch. He promised to provide Lunney with additional details on the failure after they became available. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 7 April 75, Ul; NASA Release 75—97; W Star, 7 April 75, A4)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 782, a biological satellite carrying 4 U.S. experiments as well as materials from Russia, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, to be recovered in Soviet territory in about 3 wks. Launched from Plesetsk into an orbit with 405 km apogee, 227 km perigee, 62.8° inclination, and 90.5 min period, the satellite provided an opportunity for U.S. scientists to fly biology and weightlessness experiments that would otherwise have had to await flights of the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Last U.S. biology research spacecraft, Biosatellite 3, had been launched in 1969. Cosmos 782 was the first satellite equipped to simulate gravity in space, to compare effects on biological processes with those of weightlessness. A specially constructed centrifuge, consisting of a small disk that would rotate at a constant speed, would create a centrifugal force equal to gravity on earth for packages placed at the right spot on the disk. Comparing the specimens exposed to lack of gravity during orbital flight with similar specimens feeling the pull of gravity would prove any effects had resulted from weightlessness. Results of the experiments should be available in about 90 days, according to the Tass news agency. Ames Research Center managed the U.S. participation in the Cosmos 782 flight. It had had no advance notice of the launch date, place of launch, or mode of orbital operation, although life limitations of the biology materials had dictated a launch near this date. NASA had been invited to participate in a second Soviet biosat mission in 1977, and had planned to fly Russian experiments on its Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (NYT, 27 Nov 75, 62M; NASA Release 75—292; SBD, 28 Nov 75, 145; Aero Daily, 28 Nov 75, 148)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov* one of the Soviet Union’s leading space scientists, died in Moscow at the age of 80. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Commission for Space Research and head of the State Research Institute of Engineering Studies, was one of the key scientists responsible for launching the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, 4 Oct. 1957. Blagonravov had begun his career in the military and much of his early work was on the development of automatic infantry weapons. He later turned to the development of spacecraft, making major design contributions to the Soviet Union’s Lunik I, launched 2 June 1959, as the first man-made object to fly by the moon. Blagonravov also represented the U.S.S.R. in many international organizations: He had been vicepresident of the International Space Research Committee, permanent U.S.S.R. representative on the United Nations Scientific and Technical Subcommittee for the Peaceful Use of Space, and permanent deputy Soviet representative on the U.N. Space Committee. In 1962 Blagonravov held discussions with Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, during which details for exchange of satellite data were worked out. (Moscow Domestic News Service, FBIS—Sov, 7 Feb 75, Ul; WPost, 7 Feb 75, C8; McElheny, NYT, 6 Feb 75, 34)
The development of space law, which had begun about the time of the launch of U.S.S.R.’s Sputnik 1 in 1957, was a unique process. “The problems are both literally and symbolically out of this world,” NASA General Counsel Neil S. Hosenball said in an interview with the Orlando Sentinel Star. Does any state have the right to claim the natural resources of celestial bodies? Were earth’s criminal and civil laws applicable in space? What was the difference between establishing a planetary base and planting a nation’s flag? Which court would rule on extraterrestrial squabbles? These were some of the questions lawyers and politicians would have to consider in the space age. Few precedents existed, and no judge had yet heard a case in a legal dispute originating outside the earth’s atmosphere. In fact, a world court, recognized by all major powers, did not exist. In 1962, a United Nations ad hoc committee on peaceful uses of outer space had developed principles later incorporated into the 1967 Outer Space Treaty. These included a ban against military activity in outer space and against any nation’s claiming a section of space or a planet as its own. Other treaties dealt with specific points such as the rescue of astronauts and the registration of spacecraft and space stations. Hosenball stressed that most charters and treaties were drawn up ahead of time in anticipation of problems likely to occur as space exploration expanded. The Sentinel quoted G. P. Zhukov, chief legal counsel of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, as saying that detente between , the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had been assisted by the success of “legal regulation in space. . . . Man’s foot had not yet stepped on the surface of-the moon and we had already formulated what man could and could not do on the moon. The law was ahead of science.” (Orlando Sentinel Star, 12 Aug 75)
Flight Research Center pilots began flight tests as part of a cooperative industry-government program to measure noise levels of five business-class jet aircraft during various landing approach maneuvers. Object of the tests was to define noise characteristics for this class of aircraft and the effectiveness of alternate landing-approach procedures in reducing community noise levels. Using a Rockwell Sabreliner, Grumman Gulfstream II, Gates Learjet, Beech-Hawker 125 provided by the National Business Aircraft Association, and Lockheed Jet Star provided by NASA, FRC pilots flew four landing approaches over a microphone array. A normal 3° approach provided baseline information; a 3° decelerating approach with engines at reduced power, a 4° approach with normal power, and a two-segment approach starting with 6° angle and shallowing into a 3° approach provided additional data. (NASA Release 75-103) During practice sessions similar to those held in the U.S. 7 Feb.— 1 March, the participants practiced communications skills, transfer procedures, joint activities, and contingency situations, using the Soyuz simulator at the Gagarin Cosmonaut Center in Star City. On 19 April the crews visited the mission-control center at Kaliningrad and, on 28 April, became the second group of westerners to visit the Baykonur cosmodrome (French President Charles de Gaulle had been the first western visitor when he witnessed the launch of Cosmos 122 on 25 June 1966). At Baykonur the U.S. crewmen saw the actual flight hardware as well as the primary launch pad 2 km away, and the prime and backup crews each spent an hour in the Soyuz spacecraft. The astronauts later reported to the press that they had found no significant differences between the actual spacecraft and the simulators used during training. (Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 278—280; JSC Releases 75- 22, 75— 25; WPost, 30 April 75, A21 ,SBD, 18 April 75, 273; A&A 66, 223)
Allegations that the Soviet Union had been testing a laser system to blind U.S. spy satellites were discussed in an article in the Christian Science Monitor. A satellite watching Russia from a spot in the sky over the Indian Ocean had set off false alarms of a missile attack 18 Oct. when its sensitive instruments detected heat such as might result from the firing of missiles. The heat had originated from a fire caused by breaks in a natural gas pipeline, as later satellite photographs confirmed, but between the alarm and the photographs U.S. intelligence had speculated that the Soviets had trained lasers on the satellite to prevent detection, in violation of the U.S.-Soviet agreement on arms. The gas fires had set off other warnings after 18 Oct., apparently because the ruptures and fires occurred at different times and places in Russia in both October and November. CSM quoted an article in Aviation Week magazine questioning whether lasers could be used to prevent monitoring of military activity on the ground by satellites, noting that officials at the U.S. Arms Control Agency had discounted the reported incidents. Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were known to be spending large amounts on laser research, and the December issue of the authoritative Jane’s Weapon Systems had discussed the implications of laser research for military uses in both countries. (CSM, 18 Dec 75, 3; Miami Herald, 24 Dec 75, 8A; Ft. Myers News-Press, 28 Dec 75, 1)
Final joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. simulations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crews and flight controllers began at Johnson Space Center and at the Moscow Mission Control Center at 6:30 am CDT. The simulations picked up the count at 47 hrs 10 min into the mission and continued for 56 hrs, covering the joint portion of the mission including rendezvous, docking, crew transfers and joint activities, and undocking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. U.S. and Soviet crewmen participated in simulators in their respective countries while both flight-control centers were fully staffed. The U.S. crew would also participate in the countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center on 3 July. (JSC Release 75—61; Ezell eta/., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Soviet officials gave western newsmen their first glimpse of a Soviet space center during a tour of the main Soviet flight-control center 24 km from Moscow. The Washington Post reported that the group led by the center’s technical director, Dr. Alberty V. Militsin, toured a 5-yr-old six-story brick and sandstone building acknowledged by Dr. Militsin to be one of several space facilities near Moscow. The operations room, which was similar to the control room at Johnson Space Center, contained five rows of consoles, each with telephones and closed-circuit TV screens. Mission Control Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev told the newsmen that the consoles were staffed during missions by from 15 to 24 officials and technicians. An illuminated world map on the wall showed tracking stations and the orbited paths of spacecraft. Electronic screens flashed flight information. Other support consoles, communications systems, and computers were located elsewhere in the building. Dr. Militsin said that the center had contact with Soyuz spacecraft in .each orbit for 5 to 25 min, depending on the orbit. The newsmen also visited the three-room suite near the main operations room assigned to nine U.S. technicians for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Osnos, W Post, 13 May 75, A10)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
Discrepancies in forecasting the size of the 1976 Soviet grain crop underlined the difficulty of accurately predicting worldwide harvests and food needs, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture estimated 22 June that the USSR would produce 190 million tons of grain; other sources objected that the estimate was several millions of tons below the figure set by the Central Intelligence Agency and between 4 and 10 million tons higher than estimates by 2 private firms (Cargill Investor Services of Chicago, and Schnittker Associates of Washington). The size of the Soviet crop was a crucial statistic, the Post noted, because—if low enough—it could send world grain prices on a rapid rise; the price of grain would affect the U.S. economy, triggering higher food prices and adding to domestic inflation. The world had had no excess food stocks since 1972, so that faraway droughts or political developments affecting food trade could make U.S. grain prices fluctuate wildly. Government and industry had invested millions of dollars to get information from satellites, computer banks, private weather consultants, translations of foreign broadcasts, and tipsters, the Post said. Banks, shipping companies, railroads, and other enterprises in agricultural trade or investment had increased their research in crop data to be ready for price changes or sudden shifts in markets. Despite the flood of information, global agricultural predictions remained inexact. A satellite equipped for crop surveys swept across the Soviet Union last year and “helped government analysts assess a major Russian crop disaster,” the Post noted. The information, fed into complicated computer models that collated soil moisture and temperature data with other inputs, produced a projection of Soviet grain production; however, the computer models of the Dept, of Agriculture and the CIA last year produced differing estimates. (W Post, 8 July 76, A-2)
ERDA announced selection of Clayton, N.M., as the first municipal utility to field-test its 200-kw wind-turbine generator. The Clayton utility would operate the modern windmill for 2 yr beginning late in 1977, and would assemble test data on the performance and economics of wind-energy systems connected with conventional power plants and providing power through existing utility lines. Clayton, a 3000-inhabitant town located in an area of the Great Plains with high average wind speeds, would be the first U.S. locality in more than 30 yrs to generate electric power for public consumption through the use of wind. Its conventional utility system used both gas and oil generators. Integration of the wind-power system would be supervised by technicians from NASA’s LeRC at Cleveland, 0., who would train the municipal utility employees in operating the wind turbine. (ERDA Release 76-348) Astronautics and aeronautics, 1976 Defense Donald Rumsfeld had stated that the U.S. satellites had been damaged by the glare of natural gas fires along a pipeline in Western Russia, but did not deny that lasers might have caused the damage. Newsweek said the U.S. had already developed chemical lasers requiring no electrical power, and described a possible fleet of U.S. “dark satellites” with radar-absorbing exteriors that would be invisible to Soviet detection. It also predicted that a full-scale war in space—a science-fiction type of clash of hunter-killer satellites, manned orbital shuttles, and laser death rays—could “leap off the drawing boards” in the 1980s. Reporter Tad Szulc said in the current Penthouse magazine that the U.S. government had not publicized the attack on its satellites used to police the 1972 arms pact with the USSR for fear of endangering negotiations with Moscow on a new strategic arms pact. He said Washington was perplexed by the Soviet effort to interfere with satellites that were verifying compliance with the 1972 treaty. The NY Times noted that spokesmen for both the State Dept, and the Dept, of Defense had denied the magazine reports of interference with U.S. satellites, although DOD had verified that the USSR had been attempting to intercept its own satellites already in orbit, not always successfully. Pentagon sources told the NYT that the Soviet hunter satellites used conventional explosives, although shockwaves from an explosion would not proliferate in the vacuum of space and a hunter would have to be accurate enough to close in and destroy a target with debris. A NYT editorial 26 Nov. said the “vast sums” needed for space weapons would be more wisely spent on peace and good relations on earth. (C Trib, 23 Nov 76, 4-15; NYT, 23 Nov 76, 15; 24 Nov 76, 12; 26 Nov 76, A-22)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
U.S. intelligence sources reported the third failure of the USSR this year in testing an antisatellite system, when a Russian Hunter satellite failed to stay in orbit 21 July. The Hunter’s mission was to destroy the Cosmos 839 launched into orbit 12 days earlier; U.S. analysts did not know what was causing the Soviet problem. Soviet efforts to develop an antisatellite system dated back about 10 yr, with only 5 successful launches out of more than 20 attempts before testing stopped in 1971. All 3 attempts since testing resumed in Feb. 1976 had been failures, the U.S. intelligence sources said. The satellite-destroyer was reported to be about 8 m long and to weigh about 2.5 tons at launch; equipped with 5 main rocket engines, the interceptor was said to be able to close on a target at about 4 km per sec and to get as close as 30 m to the target before exploding on ground command. The Associated Press report noted that the U.S. had not tried to develop a similar system since the 1960s; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said last winter that “we are very much concerned about satellite vulnerability.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-2; C Trib, 27 July 76, 2)
A Russian system for intercepting and destroying satellites apparently was unsuccessful this week, U.S. intelligence sources said. The test involved Russian satellites only, and posed no threat to any U.S. satellites in space. A target spacecraft (Cosmos 803) launched from Tyuratam 12 Feb. was the object of the test, carried out by an interceptor spacecraft (Cosmos 804) launched 4 days later. Observers differed on whether the interceptor had been maneuvered close enough to destroy the target, although a routine announcement by the USSR said the second launch had successfully completed its mission. In 5 tests between 1968 and 1971, USSR interceptor satellites had blown up on radio signal after approaching the targets in orbit, and the explosions had destroyed both interceptors and targets; Cosmos 804 had not blown up. U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger had said that the 1972 nuclear arms limitation agreement with Russia forbade the 2 countries from interfering with each other’s satellites, but did not prohibit tests of an antisatellite system. (B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A— 1; W Star, 21 Feb 76, A-3)
In a close race to tame the hydrogen-bomb reaction process—fusion—to make electricity, the U.S. and USSR were both ready for larger engineering units to demonstrate the practical production of electricity by the mid-1980s, reporter Robert Toth said in the Los Angeles Times. The Kurchatov Institute in Moscow had announced earlier in Feb. a “breakthrough” in the first successful test conducted in its Tokamak-10, the last purely experimental machine intended to prove feasibility of the approach. Last November, U.S. had announced a comparable achievement with the Alcator Tokamak at the Mass. Institute of Technology, described as a major development in fusion research. Although U.S. scientists claimed a fusion process had been first tested at Los Alamos 20 yr ago, it was not seriously pursued, whereas the late Dr. Lev Artsimovich of the USSR had worked along the same line independently and given the machine its name—a Russian contraction for current-machine chamber—upon achieving the first success. Advantages of the fusion process were that it was the most efficient reaction known, producing 180 times more energy than consumed; fuel, the heavy forms of hydrogen, would be as inexhaustible as the seas; and the process left no radioactive waste like that from atomic-power plants based on the fission reaction. Fusion would require containment of the reaction in a magnetic field, which had been accomplished, and continuous production of energy would require temperatures of a million degrees Centigrade and a density of 100 trillion ions for a second— conditions beyond the capability of present machines. Both the U.S. and USSR results had been 5 to 10 times less than needed, although they were 5 to 10 times greater than previously achieved. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A— 1)
Soviet scientists studying the movement of Phobos and Deimos, moons of Mars, had discovered that the speed of revolution of Phobos was increasing, lzvestia reported. The USSR’s institute of theoretical astronomy had processed nearly 5000 observations of the Martian satellites from various observatories worldwide over the past 100 yr. Phobos was found to revolve at a distance of 9400 km from the center of Mars; Deimos was in an orbit 2.5 times further away. The acceleration of Phobos over the years was believed to be caused by a so-called tidal interaction with Mars, and meant that—“in several tens of millions of years from now”—it would fall on to the planet. (FBIS, 15 Sept 76) ment. Izvestia announced that the docking equipment had been removed and that Soyuz 22 would therefore make no attempt to dock with Salyut 5, vacated only 3 wk earlier by the Soyuz 21 crew. Soyuz 22 had been constructed as a backup vehicle for last year’s Apollo-Soyuz test flight, Izvestia said. (FB1S, Tass in English, 15-16 Sept 76; Inti Service in Russian, 15 Sept 76; IF Star, 15 Sept 76, A-4, 16 Sept 76, A-4; NYT, 16 Sept 76, 21; W Post, 16 Sept 76, A18; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 25) Moscow radio said 16 Sept, that Soyuz 22 photographed the earth’s surface and the upper layers of its atmosphere with the Zeiss multispectral camera built in East Germany for this mission. Pictures of the Soviet Union would be used in agriculture, forestry, and geology research; Anatoly Alexandrov, president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, said the new equipment promised much to the Soviet economy in those fields as well as in mineral prospecting. One unusual task was the study of color effects caused by cosmic-ray particles in light-sensitive cells of the eye. The cosmonauts also took samples of the cabin air to record changes in its composition during the flight. Tass reported 20 Sept, that Soyuz 22 had taken pictures of objects that had never been “targets of space photography”: the northern regions of the Soviet Union, with simultaneous earth and aerial photography to provide the fullest possible comparative data on surface phenomena and processes. The cosmonauts were concluding their final photography sessions 22 Sept, in preparation for their return to earth, the Moscow domestic service reported, packing tapes, logbooks, and other materials in the landing module and checking its engine. After spending 8 days in orbit, the crew of Soyuz 22 soft-landed 23 Sept, at 10:42 am Moscow time (3:42 am EDT) about 150 km northwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan. Cosmonauts Bykovsky and Aksenov were feeling well, Tass reported, and the flight data were being processed and studied. ! Soyuz 22's East German-made Zeiss multispectral camera did not survive the mission; it was built into the orbital module, normally jettisoned before Soviet reentry procedures. The flight director, cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, emphasized that the crew “enjoyed a large measure of independence in controlling the ship and in carrying out various investigations.” Vladimir Shatalov, in charge of cosmonaut training, said that Bykovsky (as commander of Soyuz 22) oriented and stabilized the ship so that Aksenov (as flight engineer) could position and operate the camera. The crew “carried out all operations ... by heart, so to say, without consulting their instructions,” Tass reported. Postflight medical checks performed at the Baykonur cosmodrome near Leninsk showed the Soyuz 22 cosmonauts to be in good health, Tass reported 27 Sept. One of the scientific directors of the mission said that all twelve of the photo cassettes brought back from Soyuz 22 were in good condition, and that the crew had completed “an immense amount of research” in space during their week-long expedition. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine noted that launching Soyuz 22 on a mission that did not dock with a Salyut space station contradicted an earlier statement by cosmonaut Pyotr Klimuk, commander of the Soyuz 18 mission to Salyut 4, who had told a COSPAR meeting in June that no more Soyuz vehicles would fly missions independent of the Salyut stations. (Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 20; FBIS, Moscow domestic service in Russian, 16 Sept 76,17 Sept 76,22 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76; FBIS, Tass in English, 17-20 Sept 76, 23 Sept 76, 27 Sept 76)
The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undisclosed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview, Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975) had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of the ionosphere. Vertikal 4 had reached the hydrogen region, or protonosphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76; Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 29 Oct 76) At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concentrate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals. Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or another.’,’ Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the off-design regime of [the] approach control system,” and the crew had been ordered to return to earth. The NY Times noted that this was “the first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)—almost exactly 48 hr after liftoff—the descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the 15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards, a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cosmodrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct. The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than planning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact, putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s failure,” said the NY Times. The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission: Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cosmonauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76, 6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76, 32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W Post, 15 Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17; 18 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76, 1-8; WStar, 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
A 2-yr comparative study of data on dust storms on Mars and earth revealed that Martian dust storms were much like severe ones on earth, “only more so,” the Jet Propulsion Lab. announced. JPL investigator Peter M. Woiceshyn used Lowell Observatory data to conclude that a wall of dust more than 50 km high swept down the slopes of the Hellas area on Mars in July 1971 at speeds greater than 480 km per hr. Mariner 9 occultation data verified that winds of extreme velocity would be required to raise surface dust in the low atmospheric pressure of Mars, where the air density was only 1/100th that on earth. When Mariner 9 arrived at Mars in Nov. 1971, another dust storm had been raging for several weeks, and dust-cloud tops were estimated to be 50 to 70 km above the surface. The JPL report said the two 1971 storms and another detected by astronomers in 1956 began in the same location on the slopes of Hellas, triggered by a cold jet stream from the Martian north pole funneling down a long valley across the planet’s equator. Similar storms on earth in Russia, in Iran, and on the U.S. plains east of the Rockies caused great damage from soil erosion, similar to that on Mars revealed by Mariner 9. More storm data from Mars would be sought by the Viking spacecraft scheduled to land there in July and Sept. 76. (JPL release 13 Apr 76)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
After a series of technical checks, the Ekran satellite launched in the USSR 26 Oct. had been activated, Tass annouced. Ekran, in synchronous orbit, had transmitted experimental television programs over “a vast territory in Siberia between the Surgut and Yakutsk meridians,” Tass said, describing the new service as a “gigantic telebridge.” USSR first deputy communications minister V. Shamshin said the new generation of comsats would provide a reliable and economical system of television communications throughout the Soviet Union. Ekran, whose transmitters were apparently more powerful than those of the Molniya series, would dispense with the need for 12-meter ground antennas used by the previous Orbita system, Tass said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 5 Nov 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 6 Nov 76)
U.S. observers were concerned about spiraling strategic arms programs in the USSR, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Heavy payload in the Soviet nuclear system and an expanded program of deploying multiple warheads had aroused fears of a possible “first strike” by the USSR against U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) systems. Intelligence experts estimated the USSR would have 1500 land-based missiles by summer, compared with 1054 for the U.S.; an article in Foreign Affairs magazine by Paul Nitze—Secretary of the Navy in the Johnson administration—had stated the Russians believed they could “win” a nuclear war, whereas popular feeling in the U.S. was that all participants in a nuclear exchange would be destroyed. A Russian “cold launch” system for missile launching that did not damage the silo was contrasted to the U.S. “hot launch” system that damaged the silo during launch. The Pentagon had sought $78 million for development of a new ICBM called “MX,” and a FY 1977 budget of $9.4 billion for strategic forces. (CSM, 19 Feb 76, 6)
plane that flew around the global poles had previously been carried around the world on a balloon that came down in Central Africa, where a French member of the World Health Organization found it hanging in a tree and returned it to NASA; after the airplane trip, the unit served another year on a buoy before being retired from service. A 1914 Model T Ford originally scheduled to carry the tracking device [see 15 Feb.] was withdrawn from the race by its owner. (NASA Release 76-126) 17-19 July: Project scientists said the high proportion of argon in the Mars atmosphere might damage the life-detection instruments on Viking 1. In March 1974, a spectrometer pump on a Mars-bound spacecraft failed to work properly and Russian scientists concluded the problem was caused by argon, an element reluctant to form chemical compounds; the Russian pump apparently could not handle the high argon content of the Mars atmosphere. Viking l’s gas-chromatograph mass spectrometer contained filter material to screen out carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide in the search for organic compounds in Mars air and soil samples, which would be heated in the instrument to produce gas for analysis by the chromatograph; the high argon content might interfere with the readings. (NYT, 17 July 76, 24) JPL flight directors were checking out the instruments on Viking 1 for its Mars landing scheduled for 20 July. Immediately upon landing, the spacecraft would measure air temperature and pressure and wind speed and direction, and would detect any interior motions of the planet such as moving lava or shaking of the crust. It was also scheduled to take 2 photographs, one downward to record the terrain of the landing site and the other a panorama shot to show the general surface of Mars. Life-detection experiments would not begin until about a wk after the landing. (W Post, 18 July 76, A-10) Commands from JPL to turn on the $ 153-million instrument package to be landed by Viking 1 on the Plains of Chryse took between 17 and 18 min to reach the spacecraft nearly 346 million km away from earth. First spacecraft responses to the signals indicated the instruments and navigational equipment were in working condition. Landing was scheduled for 8 am EDT on 20 July; Viking 1 would separate early in the morning into 2 components, 2300-kg orbiter and 590-kg lander. The orbiter, powered by purple solar cells on panels, would remain in orbit to serve as a radio relay for the lander and to photograph nearly half the Martian surface over the next 12 mo. The lander, powered by an atomic battery, would coast for about 3 hr, slowed by a parachute and braking engines, and land on 3 aluminum legs at about 8 kph, more gently than most parachutists land on earth. (W Post, 19 July 76, A-3) Odds were heavily against existence of any form of life on Mars, said a Washington Post editorial, and against Viking 1 ’s finding evidence of it even if it were there. The Viking flights were “in some ways more remarkable an undertaking” than the Apollo flights because the spacecraft was on its own with no humans to correct errors and a sizable time lapse between sending and receipt of radioed instructions. The mission, said the Post, was “already a stunning accomplishment.” (W Post, 20 July. 76, A-16) The Viking spacecraft was “a breed apart,” the Wash. Post reported, as different from previous spacecraft “as a Cadillac from a Pinto.” Almost nothing on the lander had flown in space before; almost everything had to be built super-small to save weight. As the first tl.S. spacecraft to land on another planet, the Viking had to be designed to withstand chemical and heat sterilization to avoid contaminating Mars with earth organisms. The tape recorder, for instance, had to be made of bronze coated with phosphor, because no plastic tape could have survived the heat. (W Post, 20 July 76, A-2)
A new political-economic battle between the U.S. and Britain was expected as bilateral talks were scheduled in London for Sept, on renegotiation of the “Bermuda Agreement” of 1946 regulating airline operations between the U.S. and Britain, in the Caribbean, and in and out of Hong Kong. Britain had announced 22 June it would withdraw from the agreement. The pact (which originally settled wrangling between wartime allies over peacetime air commerce, and served as model for more than 60 bilateral air-travel agreements between the U.S. and other nations) specified the routes the two countries’ airlines could fly and prevented competition on prices. At the time, U.S. carriers had the advantage of new equipment to fly the North Atlantic, and Britain and other war-poor European countries were looking to tourism to bolster their economies. Britain’s objectives in renegotiation would be an equal share of traffic instead of the present 65 to 35% split in favor of the U.S., as well as a cutback in the number of North Atlantic flights. Constantine Menges, director of the international division of the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board, said the British were interested in equality of results rather than equality of competition, and warned that encouraging airlines to equalize their shares of the market would endanger consumer interests by allowing the airlines to neglect measures that would increase their markets. Political factors would govern any decision: most non-American airlines (including Britain’s) were state-owned and symbols of national prestige. On many international air routes, competing airlines pooled operations and shared revenues and expenses. This cartel philosophy had not applied to North Atlantic routes because of the Bermuda principles; however, Britain now wanted to reduce the number of flights (now involving 28 airlines) that had became destructively competitive, with an estimated equivalent of 8 jumbo jets flying empty between the U.S. and Britain every day. The British view was that restricting the number of flights would enable each nation’s airlines to fly more profitably, eventually benefitting the consumer by easing the pressure for higher fares. On the other hand, U.S. legislation that created the CAB in 1938 had exempted international routes from regulation by subjecting CAB decisions affecting them to presidential review, leaving room for political influences. Whereas the U.S. airlines would be sympathetic to restrictions on flight numbers, the U.S. ideological commitment would uphold free enterprise and unrestricted competition. However, renegotiation might offer the U.S. some advantages: changes on other transatlantic routes where it was now at a disadvantage against European national carriers, increasing the use of charter groups to fill empty seats on scheduled flights, and securing greater equality in so-called fifth and sixth freedoms that permitted European carriers to lure transatlantic passengers with cheap stopovers in and transport to and from other cities besides the basic destinations. Dr. Menges suggested that the U.S. might best negotiate with the European Common Market as a whole, instead of with any one nation; the British rejected this idea as an affront to national sovereignty. (NYT, 8 Aug 76, 3-1) a preset point in near-moon space; a braking operation 14 Aug. put the probe into a circular selenocentric orbit 115 km from the moon’s surface, with 120° inclination and 1 hr 59 min period. (NYT, 11 Aug 76, 37; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 9 Aug 76, 14 Aug 76; Spacewarn bulletin, 17 Aug 76, 1; P lnq, 10 Aug 76, 6; LC S&T Alert #3407, 31 Aug 76) At 6:36 GMT (9:36 Moscow time) 18 Aug. the probe landed on the moon in the Sea of Crises (Mare Crisium) at 12°45/N and 62° 12/E, about 40 km from a northern isthmus between the moon’s 2 seas, where the oldest rocks (about 4.5 billion yr) on the moon might be sampled. The area differed from the Sea of Felicity—site of landings by Luna 16 (1970) and Luna 20 (1972)—not only in age but also in the presence of mascons, gravitational anomalies caused by mass concentrations of extremely dense materials. (The U.S. Lunar Orbiter 5 had discovered 5 such concentrations on the moon in 1968.) The USSR’s 8th successful unmanned landing on the moon in 6 yr was expected to make up for the failure of Luna 23, which sustained damage when it landed on the moon 8 Nov. 1975 and was unable to carry out its mission. The U.S. had not probed the moon since 1972, date of the last of 6 manned lunar landings. Luna 24 weighed 1880 kg upon landing; early reports contained no description of the probe, but photographs of it appeared in Oct. in Aviation WTc and Space Technology magazine, with comparisons of the earlier probes. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 18 Aug 76, 13 Oct 76; UPI, Denver Post, 19 Aug 76, 14-F; NYT editorial, 26 Aug 76; Science News, 28 Aug 76; Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 53) Tass announced 19 Aug. that, after being on the moon 22 hr 49 min, Luna 24 had blasted off the moon’s surface at 5:25 GMT (8:25 am Moscow time) and was on its way back to earth with a sample of moon soil obtained by a device that drilled to a depth of about 2m and put the core sample into a hermetically sealed container in the return module. The bulk of the spacecraft remained on the moon’s surface; the New York Times noted there was no mention of a robot vehicle like the Lunokhods landed previously. Lunokhod 1 (on Luna 17) had spent 10 mo on the moon in 1970-1971, traveling about 10 km; Lunokhod 2 (on Luna 21) roamed the Lemonnier crater in the Sea of Serenity for 6 mo in 1973. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, 19 Aug 76; NYT, 20 Aug 76, A-19; UPI, Denver Post, 20 Aug 76, 10; LA Times, 20 Aug 76, 3) On 22 Aug. the Luna 24 return craft parachuted to earth in a “forest site” 2400 km northeast of Moscow, soft-landing at 17:55 GMT (20:55 Moscow time). The landing craft and sample were flown to Moscow from the site. Research on the comparatively large moon sample would proceed at the Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow, where lunar samples returned by Luna 16 and Lunar 20 had been studied. Pravda was quoted as stating that the 1970 mission of Luna 16 brought back particles of lunar iron that “does not rust”; learning how to manufacture such a metal under earth conditions “would repay all the expenditures for space study,” the newspaper said. Metallurgy stations might be established in space or on the moon to make nonrusting iron in commercial quantities, a process requiring a powerful vacuum like that in space which would be difficult to establish on earth. The gray-brown lunar material was said to resemble the Luna 16 sample, also taken from a lunar “sea” area. Mineralogists studying the top of the 30-cm-wide column of material said they expected to find the same Mendeleyev elements existing on the moon as on the earth, but in different proportions because of fewer volatile materials. Scientists would search the lunar sample for any sign of water vapor, regarded as important “not only for space physics but also for the future exploration of space,” Tass said. The Luna 24 landing craft, still on the moon, would continue to function and flight controllers were still communicating with it. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Serv in Russian, 21 Aug 76; Tass in English, 25 Aug 76; CSM, 24 Aug 76, 1; B Sun, 24 Aug 76, 5; SBD, 31 Aug 76, 223)
The USSR would be able by 1980 to produce a thermonuclear reaction by using a powerful laser, according to scientists at the Lebedev Physics Institute quoted in the USSR’s Academy of Sciences journal Priroda. Institute Director Nikolai Basov (sharer of the 1964 Nobel prize in physics, for work in laser amplification) emphasized that Soviet science had been first to begin work on this problem, which would be the basis of power engineering in the future. Scientists were using two approaches: building powerful installations called Tokamaks, in which a reaction would proceed continuously; or using a laser beam to compress a small quantity of material such as deuterium to “a hundred trillion atmospheres, thousands of times as great as inside the sun,” with accompanying rise in temperatures until a microexplosion occurred, to produce current for future power and heat stations. Unlike the Tokamak, this line of research could lead to production of transportable nuclear-power stations for delivery to remote areas, the article said. (FBIS, Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 14 Nov 76; A&A 64, 367)
Images from NASA’s Landsat 1 earth-resources survey satellite helped Alaskan Indians to choose the best areas of timberland and mineral deposits in compliance with the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, NASA announced. The act set aside 99 million acres from federal public lands so that more than 200 native village corporations and 12 native regional corporations—representing about 100,000 Indians, Eskimos, and Aleuts—could settle claims going back to the U.S. purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867. A regional corporation—Doyon, Inc.—asked the Univ. of Alaska to recommend the best land out of inaccessible, irregularly shaped tracts scattered over the huge state. Though known to be rich in minerals and commercially profitable forests, the area had no detailed maps and few settlements, roads, or airfields. Scientists at the university’s Geophysical Inst, used Landsat images, combined with limited ground and aerial data, to map 7 million acres of which Doyon chose 2 million. The Doyon selections were based heavily on the Landsat maps; the university reported that application of Landsat data “at least doubled the value of the land selected . . .” (NASA Release 76-63)
The USSR Ministry of Higher and Specialized Secondary Education had announced plans to build an Institute of Nuclear Energetics at Obninsk, in central Russia, site of the “world’s first industrial atomic power station,” the Tass news agency reported. First Soviet educational institution of this type, the new center would train engineers in design and use of nuclear power stations. In accordance with a new program of constructing nuclear power stations, Tass said the present 6-million-kw capacity would be supplemented by an additional 13 to 15 million kw; new stations were being built at Kursk, Smolensk, Kalinin in central Russia, and in the southern Ukraine. The Obninsk center would be the 860th higher education institution in the USSR, Tass noted. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Dec 76)
President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr previously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roosevelt during World War II, the position lapsed until 1957 when President Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council. (W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
Newest international organization created to exploit space technology “for the benefit of mankind,” the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) was chartered in London after 4 yr of study and negotiation. A 1958 United Nations subgroup called IMCO—the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization—had been responsible for nautical matters of common concern to seafaring nations. The UN Secretariat first report on space activities and resources in 1972 noted IMCO’s interest in space for maritime purposes, particularly distress systems, safety of navigation and position determination, operation of maritime mobile services beyond the scope of existing methods, and improved maritime communications. IMCO proposed a new international maritime satellite system for exchange of telephone, telegraph, and facsimile messages and improvement of navigation. IMCO’s Maritime Safety Committee in March 1972 had formed a panel of experts to study and recommend a program of experiments and development work that would be necessary to form a new organization. The panel examined the financial, legal, technical, and operational problems of creating a new entity, reporting yearly to the safety committee. As the consensus favored formation of a new organization, the IMCO assembly resolved in November 1973 to convene an international conference early in 1975 to set up an international maritime satellite system. IMCO’s secretary general was to invite all UN member states and interested intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations. The international conference, 23 April to 9 May 1975, was attended by delegates from 45 nations and observers from 15 international agencies and other organizations. The conference set up two working committees, one to discuss relationships between governments and their telecommunications and maritime entities and the distribution of powers between the member states and the INMARSAT council; the second working group would consider procurement and financial policy. The conference concluded that an international intergovernmental organization was needed to administer a worldwide maritime satellite system. It agreed to reconvene early in 1976, appointing an intersessional group to draft recommendations on four points: relationships between governments and designated entities, distribution of powers between assembly and council, type and number of appropriate international instruments, and procurement policies. The first conference concluded with a recommendation that all countries permit operation of ship stations (onboard terminals) in certain radio-frequency bands within harbor limits and other waters within national jurisdictions. As the first session ended, representatives of 13 Western European countries and the United States agreed on major elements of the organizational arrangements that would form the proposed system. The arrangements envisioned the designation by a government of an entity to assume its responsibilities with INMARSAT, vesting of management in a strong governing body with investors making policy in proportion to their use of the system, and a procurement policy awarding contracts on the basis of price, quality, and most favorable delivery time. These issues had been debated during the organization of INTELSAT. INMARSAT differed, however, because of the maritime interests involved (ship owners, maritime unions, national maritime ministries and regulatory bodies) and the presence of the USSR historically had favored international organizations composed of governments only, having been reluctant to enter “mixed” organizations involving states and private enterprises, such as INTELSAT. The working group’s first session in London in August 1975 included representatives of 37 countries and 8 international organizations. The U.S. and the USSR reached an agreement on the basic roles of governments and operational entities, adopted by the session, which also developed a procurement policy. At the second session in October 1975, 31 countries and 6 international organizations were represented; this session discussed membership rules, investments, and information policy. The third session, held in December 1975 at Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was attended by representatives of 26 countries and 4 international organizations. It set up two committees, one to deal with financial, the other with nonfinancial, matters. The U.S. representative commented on “the cooperative spirit” shown at the three sessions. The international conference resumed in London in February 1976 with representatives from 47 countries and 16 intergovernmental agencies and international organizations. Texts of two documents—a convention to be signed by governments, and an operating agreement to be signed by signatories (governments, or their designated entities)—were adopted in large measure, with some revisions. Three articles of the convention not decided were the maximum voting power of each council member, the question of permitting reservations to the convention, and the official and working languages to be used. The conference agreed to a third session to resolve these points, setting up a preparatory committee for the formal establishment of INMARSAT. The third session of the conference, called on Sept. 1, 1976, was attended by delegates from 47 countries and observers from Yugoslavia, as well as delegates from 23 international agencies. The delegates agreed that no reservations would be made to the convention or the operating agreement, and decided to omit the matter of language from the convention. Preconference negotiations had led to a consensus on the ceiling permissible on a council member’s vote, setting 25% of total voting participation as an upper limit; this wording was accepted by the conference. Observers noted significance in the languages in which the new convention was printed: English, French, Spanish, and Russian. (Stephen E. Doyle, INMARSAT . . . Origins and Structure, 13 April 77) As the long-awaited picture transmission from the Viking 2 landing site on Mars finally appeared at JPL, scientists were surprised to see rocks and more rocks in the Utopia region where they had expected steep sand dunes. Boulders were so numerous that driving a vehicle across the Utopia plain would be a challenge, Walter Sullivan wrote in the NYT. The scientists had hoped that the damper climate at the Viking 2 site might give more definite clues to organic life than the ambiguous reports from the Viking 1 lander experiments. They said they were delighted with the clarity of the photographs and the speed with which they were transmitted once the communications problem was solved. A tilt in the horizon appearing in the pictures meant either that one footpad of the lander was resting on a rock (according to Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, head of the surface-imaging experiment), or that the lander was on a slope (according to Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.). Martin expressed concern about getting the second lander back on schedule after the difficulties it had encountered on descent. Although communication had been reestablished with the orbiter’s main antenna after an unexplained stability problem had pointed its transmitters out of earth’s range for about 12 hr, the lander might have suffered from a rocky landing when one shock absorber failed to function. An apparent tear was visible in the rim of the 76.2-cm aluminum dish on the Viking 2 lander, which Martin said probably resulted from the landing, but did not affect the radio signals to earth. Only direct communication with the lander would show whether damage had occurred to the body and its electronics systems. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. pointed out that both Viking landing sites had been chosen purposely “for their blandness,” as free as possible from geological hazard; the rocks visible in the Viking 2 transmission were evidence of “an enormous exuberance of geological processes.” Meanwhile, two of Viking 1 ’s three biological instruments repeated their samplings of Mars soil from the plain of Chryse, with ambiguous results. The experiment that used nutrients to detect life processes in the soil registered about the same number of radioactive counts (suggesting that the nutrient was being metabolized) as the first trial had. The photosynthesis detector registered only a third as much activity as the first sample, however. The NYT pointed out that the Viking 2 lander would deploy its instruments in an environment different from that of Viking 1. Utopia, nearer the Martian north pole than Chryse, was expected to have a layer of water-containing permafrost underlying the surface; as the Martian summer was at its warmest in the Utopia region, scientists hoped for a better chance of life-identifying experiments at the Utopia site. Exobiologists had noted that, if Viking 2 results were more suggestive of life, they would feel encouraged; if the results were the same as those from Viking 1, this at least would show that the first reports were reliable. {NYT, 5 Sept 76, 1, 4-5; WStar, 5 Sept 76, A— 1; WPost, 5 Sept 76, An editorial in the NYT said the Viking engineers from government and private industry had needed luck to achieve two successful landings in two attempts; luck would have been inadequate without the “superb design and technical foresight” that had anticipated and forestalled many problems. {NYT, 6 Sept 76, 14) Project Manager Martin reported 5 Sept, that what had appeared to be a tear in an antenna was probably dirt, spattered up when Viking 2 landed. The successful uncaging of the Viking 2 seismometer met with cheers from the geophysicists on the project who had been marking time since the Viking 1 instrument failed to unlock. Dr. Nafi Toksoz, a seismologist from MIT, said that lack of data from more than one point on Mars would make triangulation (and precise location of seismic disturbances) impossible, but even one instrument might answer questions about the nature of the planet’s interior and the level of tectonic activity. He predicted that Mars would be “more active than the moon and less active than the earth.” {W Star, 6 Sept 76, A-3) As Viking 2 prepared to reach for soil samples, project scientists speculated on the possibility of mobile landers to explore the terrain and collect samples for study on earth. Dr. Elliott C. Morris of the U.S. Geological Survey said he felt like a child with nose pressed against a candy-store window, the “goodies forever beyond his reach.” Like the Soviet Lunokhods that moved about on the moon, Mars landers with wheels or tractor treads could be set down in a relatively flat area and sent into mountains, canyons, and craters far more dramatic than similar features on earth. Project Manager Martin noted that such a mission could be launched in 1981 to land on Mars the following year: a backup lander in storage at Martin Marietta’s Denver plant could be modified to make it mobile, and a spare orbiter was in storage at JPL, control center for the Viking missions managed by LaRC for NASA. Walter Sullivan of the NYT commented that the vivid detail in the panoramas transmitted from the cameras on the two landers had given the viewers the urge to go on over the horizon to see what lay beyond. (NYT, 7 Sept 76, 21) The first weather report from the Viking 2 lander disclosed that Mars weather was almost the same in the northern latitudes as in the tropics this time of year, except that winds in the northern regions shifted more often. Dr. Seymour L. Hess of Fla. State Univ., leader of the Viking weather team, said the findings were as predicted, the winds changing in patterns similar to those in similar regions on earth. Bitterly cold temperatures on the Utopia plains—warmer than at Chryse, where the nights were longer—were no colder than Arctic or Antarctic temperatures at night on earth. The soil at Utopia appeared red in the Viking 2 photographs, but not as red as the surface at Chryse. The red color resulted from oxidation of iron in the Martian soil, which had an iron content of 14%, richer in iron than almost any soil on earth. The Viking scientists theorized that the paler soil at Utopia resulted from the presence of water, which would wash out some of the redness by forming hydrates or sulfates with other minerals in the soil. (W Post, 8 Sept 76, A-7)
An unmanned Soviet spacecraft that returned to the earth 17 Dec. in Soviet Asia after 18 days in orbit might have been the test vehicle of a new Soyuz designed to carry three cosmonauts into space, instead of the two that have flown on the 13 Soyuz missions during the past 5 yr. Thomas O’Toole, reporting in the Washington Post, pointed out that the Cosmos 869 had flown the same pattern followed by all Soviet manned space flights, and noted that the USSR had long followed the practice of disguising unmanned test flights of Soyuz spacecraft by using the generalized Cosmos designation. At least four unmanned Soyuz vehicles had flown under the name of Cosmos during the past 4 yr, the article said. The USSR had not attempted a three-man flight since 1971, when the three crewmen of Soyuz 11 suffocated on their return to earth; the crew could have survived had they worn space suits, but the vehicle being used had no room for three men in space suits. Officials said then that the spacecraft would be modified to accommodate three-member crews in space suits, and Western observers predicted that the Inter-Soyuz flights scheduled to begin in 1978 with Russians and non-Russians together would use three cosmonauts again. (WPost, 22 Dec 76, A-2)
A celebration in Moscow of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s flight into space heard a speech by A.P. Aleksandrov, president of the Academy of Sciences, reviewing Soviet firsts in space: launch of the world’s first artificial satellite, first manned flights and walk in open space, first flight to the moon and delivery to earth of lunar soil samples by automatic devices, creation of orbital stations, and unique experiments in the study of solar-system planets. Aleksandrov recalled that the first manned space flight occurred only 3.5 yr after launch of the first artificial satellite, which he said made the Russian word “sputnik” common to all peoples in all languages of the world. He reviewed Soviet progress in space research and applications, especially in communications, mentioning that the number of Orbita network ground stations to reach remote parts of the Soviet Union had now climbed to 68. He referred to the success of the Apollo-Soyuz joint experimental flight as “a significant contribution to the progress of world cosmonautics.” (FBIS, Tass report 13 Apr 76)
The Soviet Union’s earth satellites had added a new profession—that of printer—to those of meteorologist, cartographer, and communicator, the Tass news agency announced. A Molniya comsat tested in Khabarovsk had transmitted newspapers from Moscow to the Far East more economically and more rapidly than had been possible using the transcontinental cable. The high-resolution capability of the equipment had produced excellent images, the announcement said, adding that “papers received by Far Eastern subscribers will now be absolutely identical to those taken out of their letter boxes by the Moscovites.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Service in Russian, 27 Oct 76)
Information of value to the U.S. Pioneer mission to Venus scheduled for 1978 was published by the USSR in Pravda after 4 mo of analysis of the 2 Soviet spacecraft that reached Venus in Oct. 1975. Each of the Russian craft, weighing about 5000 kg, separated into an orbiting section and a landing capsule; the two landers transmitted the first panoramic photographs of the Venus surface to earth. U.S. scientists had debated the angle at which landers should enter the Venus atmosphere; the Russian report stated that Venera 9 entered at 20.5° and Venera 10 at 22.5° to the horizon. Besides the entry angle, the report included details of descent, amount of sunlight on the surface, wind speeds, rock chemistry, and character of surface erosion. Although the 2 landers failed under surface temperatures of 482°C and pressure 90 times that of earth— Venera 9 lander operated 53 min., Venera 10 65 min—the orbiters continued to transmit data on cloud cover and upper atmosphere. The U.S. planned to launch 2 spacecraft, an orbiter and a lander, toward Venus in 1978, the lander separating into 4 or 5 probes to relay data via the orbiter to the earth. {NYT, 29 Feb 76, 34)
An article in Moscow’s Krasnaya Zvezda reviewed the increasing use of satellites for military communications, especially in the U.S. Space communications had become available in Britain, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Canada, Brazil, and Norway, as well as other countries, and though basically designed for commercial purposes “there is no doubt” that most of the channels were used by the military, the article said. As an example, the national system of space communications in Iran was said to be developed to provide guidance for combat aircraft. Not satisfied with the potential of commercial systems, the Pentagon and the NATO command had established communications satellites exclusively for military purposes, the article said, quoting U.S. News and World Report as saying that since 1960 “the Pentagon has sent 83 communications satellites . . . into orbit but has not got what it wanted. Of all these satellites only 13 still continue in orbit, and not all 13 are functioning normally.” The Soviet magazine also pointed out that 6 launches of DSCS-2 satellites had been planned, but 2 had been lost during launch and 2 more had broken down in orbit; the 2 currently operating were over the Pacific and the Atlantic at about 36 000 km, and another 6 had been ordered, the first pair due for launch in spring 1977. As press statements showed that two thirds of the military communications with foreign countries were going through commercial systems, “foreign observers” had concluded that the military systems had proven less reliable than Intelsat; the Pentagon had explained that requirements on military satellites were considerably higher, as they had to work with small mobile stations in widely scattered locations, needed increased protection against jamming, and must be durable to withstand possible combat effects. The Russian commentator said the U.S. had begun developing a third generation of military satellites—the DSCS-3—with launch scheduled for 1981, and that these new spacecraft would be powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators with longer working life and greater capacity. Elimination of bulky solar panels would also make the new craft more difficult to detect in orbit. After describing the Fleetsat-com and Afsatcom systems, the article pointed out that “the creation of a manned multipurpose transport spacecraft” [the U.S. Space Shuttle] would have a major impact on communications-satellite systems; such spacecraft would be able to launch large mass and capacity comsats, eliminating “complex operations and devices [needed to prepare] the satellite for work following its injection into orbit,” and would simplify technical servicing and repair of the comsats while in orbit. Although many technical problems remained, space facilities had become the basis of military communications abroad, the article concluded. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda, 26 May 76, 3)
Tass announced that the yachts Rodina and Rossiya had left the port of Vladivostok in an attempt to repeat the route sailed by Russian navigators 250 yr ago on 2 expeditions to Kamchatka under the leadership of Vitus Bering (1681-1741). The 7-man crews of the ships would begin by visiting Okhotsk, the port where Bering built the ship that went to Kamchatka, then proceed to Kamchatka about 3700 km away. In 1977 and 1978, the expedition would cruise to the Bering Strait and go ashore in North America where Bering’s ship St. Peter visited 17 July 1741. (FBIS, Tass in English, 11 July 76)
FBIS carried the official report by L.A. Aleksandrov, chairman of the USSR-U.S. group on space meteorology, that the joint rocket launches over the Atlantic to compare instrument results [see July 1] had been a success. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda in Russian, Sept 4/77)
The moon landing effort was possible only because the U.S. had laid the basic theoretical groundwork in the 1940s and 1950s, the WPost reported, quoting Richard C. Atkinson, new head of the Natl. Science Foundation. The man who “probably controls more basic research spending than anyone else in the world” said that Americans should not hope science would come up with an overnight solution to the energy crisis that would preserve their current lifestyle—“Science just doesn’t operate with those turnaround times,” he said. The fact that many people expected such solutions indicated “a basic incomprehension of what science is all about,” an ironic byproduct of the mind-boggling scientific achievement in the past 20yr. “After Sputnik . . . there was a big rush to catch up here . . . They put in a lot of high-powered curricula . . . Now we have a small core of students really well educated in science and a huge group that just [drops out] . . . Those people never have any exposure again. Even college graduates now are really poorly informed on science matters.” Liberal education, Atkinson said, should include solid grounding in basic sciences so that citizens could understand issues like the fate of nuclear reactors and the gene-manufacturing possibilities of recombinant DNA. “I worry,” he said, “that the nation may turn to applied research so strongly that it neglects basic research, and basic research remains our fundamental commitment.” {W Post, June 19/77, C-4) Earlier unmanned tests of the piggyback orbiter in Feb. and March had gone smoothly; since then, engineers had installed control systems, guidance instruments, and power units whose repeated malfunctions had delayed the manned tests originally scheduled to begin May 26. The June 18 test had been delayed for 24hr by problems with the entry hatch and by the failure of guidance-system computers. The astronauts reported trouble with a cabin-pressure valve and with radio communications, and said they had experienced more airframe surface noise than expected. NASA had scheduled a second “manned inert” test for June 28, with the first free flight set for late July or early Aug. (WStar, June 19/77, A-6; C Trib, June 19/77, 1-3; NYT, June 19/77, 19; W Post, June 19/77, A-18; June 20/77, A-6)
LaRC announced that Sir Robert Mark, former director of New Scotland Yard (his official title was Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis), would be guest speaker at a center colloquium on terrorism and law enforcement as part of the public lecture series, “Our Future in the Cosmos.” The lecture would contrast philosophy and methodology of British and U.S. criminal justice systems, including the areas of capital punishment, terrorism, and political influence on police matters, reflecting the speaker’s feeling that a free society is governed by consent rather than by force. (LaRC Release 77-45) Officials had canceled Soyuz 25 only 26hr into the mission because of unspecified trouble, although the craft had come within 130yd of the Salyut 6. The Moscow domestic service in Russian said only that the linkup was called off “due to deviations from the planned procedure for docking.” The word that the flight was canceled came after 24hr of silence, which had caused fears for the safety of the crew. Tass said Oct. 12 that the capsule had returned safely, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:25am local time Oct. 11. U.S. officials speculated that, like Soyuz 15 in Aug. 1974 and Soyuz 23 in Oct. 1976, this mission failed because the cosmonauts had overshot the docking point and could not make another attempt because their battery power allowed insufficient time to correct the navigational error. When a crew last overshot its Salyut, 4mo elapsed before another crew made a docking attempt. (W Star, Oct 10/77, A-l; Oct 11/77, A-6; W Post, Oct 11/77, A-l; Oct 12/77, A-21; FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 9/77, Oct 10/77, Oct 11/77)
The USSR announced it had launched a 910kg Prognoz 6 to continue study of galactic energetic particles and of solar activity impact on the magnetosphere and the interplanetary medium. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 22/77)
FBIS reported that the USSR had opened a television station in Duki, town of Khabarov Krai on the Pacific coast of Siberia near Bering Strait and the Sea of Okhotsk, permitting reception of both central and local programs in all villages of the area. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Sept 23/77)
The Washington Post reported on Sputnik 7's 20th anniversary as observed in the Soviet Union. Sputnik had set off a “search for nationhood in the United States even as it seemed to confirm it in the Soviet Union . . . Ask any Soviet citizen above the age of 24 and each can tell you exactly where they were and what they were doing when they heard ... a Soviet satellite was in orbit.” The U.S. search ended “in a symbolic and reeil sense” with the moon landing 8.5yr ago. However, the certainty of power that Sputnik gave the USSR “has never quite materialized out of the void of space.” The A-2, early main launch vehicle for the USSR “civilian” program, was still that today. U.S. experts in the joint Apollo-Soyuz project had been “dismayed by the crudeness of Soviet space hardware”: one compared the Soyuz craft to a “hot water radiator ... it works, but that’s about all you can say for it.” An aviation weekly, interviewing the experts, said they rated the Soyuz with the Mercury capsule, first U.S. manned spacecraft. “Their scientists are every bit as good as ours,” said one U.S. physicist, “but the technical gap is still huge.” The article noted that the U.S. had dropped its space medicine program in the early 1970s but the USSR had kept on with its, and had maintained large space stations in orbit since 1971 manned with crews up to 63 days at a time. The Soviet space program had had less trouble than the U.S. program “because of the closed nature of the system ... no citizens groups or congressional critics to question the need for a manned space program.” Competition for limited resources was the same in both countries, but “lack of public debate allowed managers luxuries of continuity not available to their counterparts in a democracy.” (WPost, Oct 4/77, A-l)
FBIS reported on the 28th congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation in Prague, celebrating the 20th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik 1. Chairman Marcel Barrere of France reviewed at a press conference the “tempestuous impact of space exploration on the planet’s industry,” mentioning the joint U.S.-USSR approach to a manned flight project using the Shuttle and the Salyut orbital station. Presentations at the congress had included papers on the search for extraterrestrial civilizations, the U.S. scientists reporting on the Voyager mission, and the USSR on remote probes of planetary atmospheres for signs of gas exchange between soil and atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 24/77, Sept 28/77)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
The Space Age might not yet be out of its teens, the Chicago Tribune reported, but the two decades that would end Oct. 4 since the launch of Sputnik 1 had brought many wonders. The newspaper cited worldwide television; photographs from space of the blue-white earth in the vastness of space; color pictures of the surface of Mars; close-ups of the planet Jupiter; men walking—and riding—on the surface of the moon; astronauts living aboard a space station for 84 days; and men “walking” in space, outside their ships. Satellites had changed human life as few other objects (the wheel, the printing press, gunpowder) had changed it, and had affected everything from the educational system to politics, from ideas about ecology to ideas about humanity itself and about its future. Predictions of things to come in the next 20yr of the Space Age included weather modification, energy transmission from space, and permanent outposts in orbit and on the moon. People would use satellites to monitor air and water pollution, find minerals, chart water currents, predict earthquakes, map land use, keep tab on crops, look for fish, and make worldwide live television commonplace, the paper said. (C Trib, Sept 1/77, 1-7)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
FBIS said the USSR in 1978 would install a second generation of laser long-distance satellite rangefinders usable in daylight, increasing the range to 40,000km with an accuracy of ± 10cm. USSR engineers were working in Czechoslovakia on the new rangefinder. The report said Intercosmos engineers from Hungary, East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR had built a rangefinder measuring distances up to 3000km accurate up to ±5m; however, it could operate only at night. Ground stations in Poland, Egypt, Bolivia, India, and Cuba had used the device. (FBIS, Inti Serv in Russian, Oct 24/77)
Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. Ilyushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World War II to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or cause of death. Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931 devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design was the II-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level. The II-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to New York in July 1968. Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die: A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 supersonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K. Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the 11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A. Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY Times, Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
Launch of Cosmos 1000, reported FBIS, had led Soviet scientists to review highlights of the series. The research program using Cosmos satellites had used several types of unified apparatus, and the USSR had always referred to them as a “series” irrespective of their scientific missions. The virtually mass-produced output of satellites had greatly assisted the high turnover speed of the series, which had reached the 1000 mark within 16yr and 2wk, more than 500 launches having come in the past 6yr. The Cosmos series had begun Mar. 16, 1962, with the launch of an unnamed satellite (named Cosmos 1 only 3wk later, when Tass reported launch of Cosmos 2). The USSR had seldom announced the purpose of Cosmos launches, a ploy that permitted concealment of their purposes as well as of their failures. Observers had classified Cosmos 96, for instance, as a Venus probe left or stranded in orbit; Cosmos 146, which had arrived in orbit measuring about 14m long and by next day was only 9m long, after emitting 2 capsules, was probably a Soyuz precursor. Georgy Narimanov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Institute of Space Research said the USSR had used Cosmos satellites to test long-range communications systems, reentry installations, life-support systems, and assemblies for the Lunokhod moon-rover, as well as automatic-docking procedures. Lack of information had encouraged speculation about military applications, including hunter-killer tests. USSR comments had stressed the practical aspects of the Cosmos program, such as experience accumulated during geophysical experiments for use on the “Meteor” spacecraft; basic research by Cosmos 321 that had defined distribution of the magnetic field over 94% of the earth’s surface; and Cosmos investigations of the upper atmosphere, the aurora, and the magnetosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, April 4/78; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, April 1/78 [2 items])
Tass reported that, in an interview marking the first anniversary of the Salyut 6 launch, Pilot-Cosmonaut Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov had recommended designing a new orbiting scientific Salyut laboratory with a minimum of 7 or 8 docking units. The presence of only 2 docking units on Salyut 6 meant that, after a cargo vessel had arrived and its equipment was transferred, it had to undock to make room for another vehicle. This was irrational, Feoktistov said. When a cargo ship departed, the Salyut would lose one complete “room” of the cosmic house (with a volume of about 6m3) that could accommodate equipment and scientific instruments. To add even one more component to a Salyut was not simple, as virtually its entire surface was covered with solar batteries, windows, television cameras, and various sensors. The nose fairing covering the station in the active phase of the launch also had restricted designers. Feoktistov stressed, however, the need to equip future space stations with several mooring ports to handle units for specialized research: technological, astronomical, and geophysical. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 26/78)
MSFC announced it had successfully completed at the National Parachute Range May 23 an airdrop test of the parachute system designed to recover Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters after launch. This was the fourth drop test in which a dummy booster had been carried aloft beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft; the recovery system’s three main parachutes had all deployed, and all had functioned as expected. The dummy booster had landed virtually undamaged. NASA engineers planned two more airdrops before certifying the system for flight. (.Marshall Star, May 31/78, 2) During May: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that a 15-member U.S. aerobatic team would travel in Aug. to Ceske Budejovice, Czechoslovakia, to compete in the ninth World Aerobatic Championships sanctioned by the Inti. Aeronautic Federation (FAI). The 1978 U.S. team would be all male, as no woman had qualified in competitions to determine team members. Three-time U.S. national champion Leo Loudenslager, an American Airlines pilot, said, “We have high expectations. We have even better trained pilots and more sophisticated aircraft than we did in 1976, and we are more knowledgeable about what to expect.” The 1976 U.S. team had lost to the USSR the titles it had captured in France in 1972: top team, best male, and best female. Loudenslager would fly his experimental modified version of the 200hp Stephens Akro, the Laser 200. Henry Haigh might fly the modified Pitts Special biplane in which he had competed in 1976, basically the same design flown by the remainder of the team. The five aircraft for the competition, disassembled Aug. 8 at Kennedy Inti. Airport for transport to Frankfort, would be reassembled and flown to Peine near Braunschweig in West Germany for 2wk of intensive practice, then to Budejovice for the competition. The championship event would mark nearly two decades of U.S. participation in FAI-sanctioned precision aerobatic competitions, first held in 1960 in Czechoslovakia. The event also would commemorate two-thirds of a century since the first recorded aerobatic flight: Lt. Peter Nesterov of the Imperial Russian Air Service was credited with performing in 1913 the first inside loop in a Nieuport monoplane. NAA, the aero club representing the U.S., had sanctioned as the official team representing the U.S. at the world championships the group selected by the Aerobatic Club of America, which would also be the only team competing in Czechoslovakia without government financing. (NAA newsletter, May 78, 1)
FBIS reported the Soviet Union’s Venera 11 had reached Venus Dec. 25, and its descent module had made a soft landing some 800km from where Venera 12’s descent module had landed. Main task of Venera 11 and 12 was to examine the characteristics of various areas of Venus. After the descent module separated from Venera 11 Dec. 23, the spacecraft had proceeded on a flyby trajectory some 35 000km from the planet’s surface. The Venera 11 module, during descent and while on the planet surface, had performed research similar to that done by the Venera 12 module (scientific and technical experiments and exploration of Venus’s surface at 446°C and pressure of 88 atmospheres) for 95min. Descent-module data received by Venera 11 were relayed to earth. After leaving the zone of radio visibility and completing receipt of data, Venera 11 would continue in a heliocentric orbit. Scientific measurement and research begun on the earth-Venus interplanetary route would continue during the flight of Venera 11 and 12. Data obtained from the two spacecraft would be processed and studied in the institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Dec. 25/78)
Cosmonaut Valery Kubasov had spoken of the possibility of joint experimental flights by the USSR’s Salyut-type orbital station and the U.S. Space Shuttle, according to a Tass report. Kubasov noted that such flights could use the joint approach and docking procedures worked out for the Apollo-Soyuz test project and tested during the joint Soviet-U.S. flight of Apollo and Soyuz in July 1975. A new agreement between the USSR and the U.S. on cooperation in space research for peaceful purposes had came into force the previous May, Kubasov pointed out. He added that millions of Americans, like the citizens of the USSR, had viewed the Soyuz-Apollo program as a display of goodwill by the two nations and the beginning of great cooperation between nations in space. However, Av Wk reported that any U.S. Space Shuttle/Soviet Salyut space station joint mission was in deep trouble, if not already dead, because of increased U.S. concern over technology transfer to the Soviets and the current abrasive political climate between the two countries. A NSC interagency committee had reevaluated the entire joint mission idea, while U.S./Soviet discussions on the project were in limbo. The project probably would have been discussed during a planned technology-oriented trip to the USSR by presidential science adviser Frank Press, but the White House had canceled the trip in disapproval of the Soviet treatment of dissidents. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, July 12/78; AvWk, July 17/78, 13)
Using a multichamber furnace delivered to Salyut 6 by the Progress 1 unmanned tanker/freighter, Soviet cosmonauts had begun major spaceprocessing experiments, Tass reported. Operated in a Salyut airlock to vent into the vacuum of space, the furnace had three areas: one maintaining heat up to 1100C, a “cold” area maintaining 600 to 700C, and a “gradient” area allowing linear temperature change between maximum and minimum furnace-heating capabilities. The Salyut space-processing system, designated “Splav” (alloy), would use material samples in capsules, each containing 3 crystal ampules to fuse when heated in the furnace and form monocrystals in the “gradient” area, with 3-dimensional crystallization in the hot and cold sections of the furnace. Combinations of materials heated to form new substances not possible in earth gravity would be aluminum/antimony, aluminum/tungsten, molybdenum/gal-lium, copper/indium, and indium/antimony. Some of the alloys might have semiconductor properties, suggesting that Soviet interest would be in specific applications in earth orbit rather than in theory. The cosmonauts had also reported a major technology experiment using a closed-cycle cryogenic system designed to provide temperatures comparable to liquid helium (- 269C) but did not say whether or not the test actually used liquid helium. Cosmonauts had also used cryogenics to cool the receivers of a “submillimeter telescope,” Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 15/78, Feb 16/78; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Feb 21/78; AvWk, Feb 27/78, 21)
FBIS reported the answer of Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov, USSR pilot-cosmonaut, when queried on the future of orbital stations. Feoktistov said they would develop as multipurpose scientific laboratories for extra-atmospheric astronomical observations, and for technological experiments to produce materials unobtainable under earth conditions. Orbital stations could seek out the most effective systems to develop methods for research and development and the design of scientific instruments and equipment. He went on to say: “Very broad prospects are opened up for manned stations if they are examined above all as the basis for industrial construction in space. Not everyone shares this view, but I personally believe that within the next few decades the development of technology will make it possible to actually set the task of creating power plants in space.” Feoktistov noted that such technology would mean putting millions of tons of diverse equipment into space to assemble enormous and complex structures. Such work could never be fully automated, he pointed out, and would require many people to control the equipment and carry out installation work. This would not happen quickly, he concluded, but it should not be relegated to the realm of fantasy. “After all, 17yr ago Yuri Gagarin’s flight also seemed a fantastic achievement.” (FBIS, Moscow Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya in Russian, Apr 12/78)
NASA announced it had planned, weather permitting, to have its Project Cameo release large bluish-white luminescent clouds of barium in the skies over Alaska beginning Saturday, October 28, and lithium over northern Scandinavia at a later date [see Sept. 19]. The agency said Project Cameo clouds should be visible to residents of Alaska, eastern Russia, western Canada, and the northwestern U.S. The chemicals would have been released from the orbiting second stage of a Delta rocket that would have launched the Nimbus 6 satellite into polar orbit Oct. 24. Of the many high-altitude sounding-rocket chemical-cloud launches conducted by NASA throughout the world, this would be the first from an orbiting vehicle; the Delta second stage was in a circular near-polar orbit at about 950km (590mi) altitude. (NASA Release 78-169)
FBIS reported the USSR interplanetary spacecraft Venera 12 had reached Venus Dec. 21 after a 98-day flight covering over 240 million km. The descent module had entered Venus’s atmosphere at 11.2 km/sec and soft-landed, transmitting scientific information from the planet’s surface for llOmin. During descent, the module made precise chemical analyses of the composition of the atmosphere and clouds, a spectral analysis of solar radiation scattered in the atmosphere, and a study of electric charges in the atmosphere from 62m above the planet’s surface. Scientific measurements continued after the module landed. The Venera 12 station was continuing its flight in space, carrying a Soviet-French experiment for studying solar and galactic gamma flares. Venera 11, launched 5da before Venera 12, would reach Venus Dec. 25. (FBIS, Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Dec 21/78)
FBIS reported on the status of the Soyuz 32 crew in its continuing flight aboard Salyut 6. Since launch February 25, Vladimir Lyakhov and Valery Ryumin had done daily exercises and physical tests, noted by Soviet press services as “the cosmonauts are feeling well.” Their May 3 activity was experimenting on the Kristall equipment, making “semiconductor monocrystals” of indium arsenide. On May 4 they operated a “submillimeter telescope” gathering data to predict cyclones in tropical zones of Earth. A commentator noted that this equipment was complicated, requiring exact calibration each time it was used, and could be aimed only by turning the entire station. On May 6 they used a “gamma telescope” to measure gamma radiation and charged particles in near-Earth space. On May 8 they replaced their television transmitter with a new one brought by Progress 5. On May 9-10 they used the Kristall to experiment with cadmium sulfide. Tass reported May 13 the launch of Progress 6; a commentator said that the cargo ship contained “an unusual present” to the crew, a tulip scheduled to bloom in space. An ongoing task was to study the efforts of weightlessness and “other space flight factors” on plant growth; small hothouses aboard the Salyut could provide fresh food containing vitamins. The crew was growing green onions; they had reaped their first harvest and “ate it with the permission of biologists.” They also had fennel, parsley, and garlic; Tass noted that “Despite successes of chemistry.. .scientists have not yet managed to create the same vitamins as in nature.” The cosmonauts on Soyuz 29 had repeatedly described the mushrooms they were picking as “really strange.. .their form was unusual with curly stems...”. “Nevertheless,” Tass said, “[the crew had been] greatly pleased. All living things evoke their enhanced interest. . .a psychological backup in their difficult work.” The tulip in outer space, “merely an experiment to scientists,” was for the cosmonauts “a symbol of spring” and an expression of solicitude for the crew that had been working for a long time in isolation. Progress 6 docked May 15, and the crew was unloading cargo and reloading used equipment for the next fortnight. The major job was refueling, difficult and complex in space, but the crew had completed it by May 28. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Dom Svc in Russian, Inti Svc in Russian, May 3-28/79)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 35 at 1638 hours Moscow time April 9 from the Baykonur site into an orbit with 346-kilometer apogee, 336-kilometer perigee, 91.3-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Headed for a linkup with the obiting station Salyut 6 were two cosmonauts, engineer Valery Ryumin, 40, who spent 175 days there last year, and rookie Lt. Col. Leonid Popov, 34, a former jet fighter pilot. The cargo carrier Progress 8 launched March 27 had automatically docked March 29 with Salyut 6, which used the Progress engine to adjust its orbit. The supply ship was still docked to Salyut, waiting for the new arrivals to unload it, Salyut 6, launched September 29, 1977, had been in orbit for more than 30 months; when the Soyuz 35 crew docked with it at 6:16 p.m. Moscow time April 10, Ryumin said in a telecast “Look, the station is absolutely in the same condition as we left it.” Tass said the crew would clean, repair, and restock the station and resume research on medical and biological effects of long-term spaceflight. The Soviet television program said that Ryumin was a last-minute choice for this flight, apparently taken from a backup crew to replace an unidentified flight engineer who “had trouble during his physical exercises.” First task was to turn on station systems: lights, air and water regeneration, communications, and control desk, all of which had been off for seven months while Salyut 6 was unmanned. The crew began April 11 to unload Progress 8 and activate systems and instruments including plant-life installations Oaziz, Vazon, and Malakhit, the latter an orchid-growing greenhouse the crew had brought with them on Soyuz 35. Ground control said that observing growth of the orchids would encourage “good spirits” in the crew. By April 15 the crew had dismantled and replaced apparatus that had worn out, putting the used equipment into the freight compartment of Progress 8. They had installed new storage batteries and replaced solar batteries in the attitude-control system and parts in the water-regeneration system. They had also prepared to refuel the propulsion unit. At the end of their first week, Dr. Anatoly Yegorov said that the cosmonauts were adapting “more quickly than expected” and were working ahead of schedule, “the most convincing proof of their physical wellbeing.” [Nature magazine reported speculation that Ryumin’s return flight meant the Soviet Union might be preparing for a manned mission to Mars. “Classical” Soviet projects for space exploration, following the lead of Tsiolkovsky, assumed the establishment of a permanent orbital station staffed by “several tens” of male and female crew and scientists for several months at a time; lunar and planetary exploration, for this century at least, would be left to automatic vehicles. However, Soviet experts had shown considerable interest in biological effects of long-term spaceflight; they had found “no significant organic changes” that might limit the duration of future flights. Sending Ryumin aloft again after his record 175-day flight (which Nature called “serendipitous”) should have especially interesting results. Nature quoted a Tass report that Ryumin was included at the last minute when “Flight Engineer Lebedev” hurt his leg.] By April 22 the crew had almost finished unloading the freighter and had refueled the joint propulsion plant, preparatory to filling the station with oxidizer. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov said that the most productive period of cosmonauts in space would begin one month to six weeks after a mission started; the Soyuz 35 crew had been doing repair and fault-prevention work so far, but had also begun to resume experiments. They used Progress S’s propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment April 24. On April 25 they separated the freighter from the Salyut-Soyuz complex; on April 26 they ignited the propulsion unit at 9:54 Moscow time to put it into a descent trajectory over the Pacific Ocean, where it “ceased to exist.” On April 27 the Soviet Union launched Progress 9 at 9:24 p.m. Moscow time; it docked with the Soyuz-Salyut complex at 11:09 a.m. April 29, bringing more apparatus and equipment, materials for the life-support systems, additional fuel, and mail for the cosmonauts. As usual, the report ended with the statement that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” (Tass in English, Apr 3-29/80; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Apr 3-29/80; W Post, Apr 10/80, A-18; W Star Apr 10/80, A-15; Apr 12/80, A-10; NY Times, Apr 11/80, D-15; Nature, Apr 17/80, 585)
Cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, veteran of Soyuz 5, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 10, told a press conference that the flight of Ryumin and Popov on Salyut 6 “is coming to an end. The flight will be completed in the first half of October and no more Soyuz expeditions will visit.” “The station today,” he added, “is in a perfectly good state and the question of its being manned in the future may be answered in the affirmative.” (FBIS, Mosc Dom Svc in Russian, Oct 4/80)
Nature reported that the ESA council voted to transfer launch capability to the private firm of Ariane-Espace, which would handle production and launch of all future ESA satellites. (Nature, Jan 31/80, 422) During January: The Washington Post reported the death January 13 of James J.	Donegan, 63, “a pioneer in space technology” at NASA since 1958. An aeronautical engineer specializing in spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and computing techniques at GSFC, Donegan was an original member of the ground instruments unit attached to the first Space Task Group (STG) formed in 1958 to meet the challenge of Sputnik. He was a designer of the original manned spaceflight network and directed GSFC’s manned spaceflight activity until 1973, when he became head of a new Operations Support Computing Division responsible for computer support to both manned and unmanned scientific spacecraft. He was operations director for Project Mercury and coordinated instantaneous computer services for Gemini and Apollo flights, receiving NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1969 for his work on Apollo. {W Post, Jan 18/80, C-10)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 36 May 26 at 9:21 p.m. Moscow time (2:21 p.m. EDT) carrying a Russian commander (Valery Kubasov, 45, veteran of three space missions) and Hungarian engineer (Bertalan Farkas, 30) to the orbiting Salyut 6 station already occupied by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (W Star May 27/80, A-8)
FBIS reported further comment on the joint flight of Soyuz T and Salyut 6, predicted to continue “for several months” so that experts could test systems and operations before proceeding to build the new spacecraft “in series.” The propellant tanks used by the engines for cruise and for docking now formed a single system; in the past, overuse of propellant in attitude control meant a Soyuz would have to return to Earth even if plenty of propellant was left in the cruise engine. This would not be so in the new engine. The on-board computer now carried out duties previously handled by the crew, such as data processing and flight or system control. Also, Soyuz T had a panel of solar batteries, which previous spacecraft did not have. The commentary said that previous Soyuz spacecraft would continue to be used for the immediate future, the present trial flight serving as dress rehearsal for the “many novel technical features.” (FBIS, Moscow Wrld Svc in Russian, Jan 8/80)
Press reports said that two the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting space station Salyut 6 for 75 days had returned safely at 4:38 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-4 to a landing site in Kazakhstan. Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, flight commander, and flight engineer Viktor Savinykh had two sets of visitors during their mission: Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Mongolian cosmonaut Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz 39 in March and Leonid Popov and Romanian cosmonaut Dumitru Prunariu of Soyuz 40, just a week ago. The New York Times said that this was the final mission for Salyut 6, which would probably be abandoned. Launched in 1977, it had been the base for nearly four years of record-setting tests of human endurance. Last week, Popov said that the Soviet Union would also retire the old-model two-person Soyuz spacecraft used for the past 14 years in favor of the Soyuz-T, a three-man version more maneuverable and sophisticated, with four successful flights, including the one just ended. (NYTimes, May 27/81, A-l; W Post, May 27/81, A-14) During May: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported unofficial records set by Columbia’s first flight, pending review for world certification. As the official U.S. certification authority for aerospace records since 1905 and sole U.S. representative of the Federal Aeronautique International (FAI), NAA gave the following figures: duration, 54 hours, 20 minutes, 52 seconds; maximum altitude, 209 kilometers; distance, 1,144,709 kilometers; mass carried into orbit, 95,201 kilograms; payload mass to altitude, 4624 kilograms. NAA said that Columbia was “the world’s first and only aerospacecraft.. .capable of operating in space or in the atmosphere.” NAA had awarded the Voyager mission team represented by Dr. Edward C. Stone the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, for space exploration achievement peaking in the close examination of Saturn after a comparable visit to Jupiter the previous years. Established in 1911 and first presented to Glenn Curtiss for development of a seaplane, the Collier Trophy was awarded yearly for achievement demonstrated by actual use. (NAA newsletter, May 1981)
FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China successfully launched “another scientific experiment satellite.” This was the People’s Republic’s 12th satellite (the first was launched in 1970) and was timed for the opening of the national congress of the PRC Communist Party. Later reports said that the satellite had “landed with precision at the predetermined recovery site” on September 14 at 2:00 p.m. Beijing time. (FBIS, Xinhua in English/Dom Svc in Chinese, Sept 9/82, Sept 14/82; Pravda in Russian, Sept 10/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 14/82) ESA began investigating the failure. First reports said that the problem was in third-stage turbopump parts in the casing or the lubrication system. The first and second stages operated correctly, as did the separations and jettison of the fairing. The third stage ignited and ran for 275 seconds when rotation speed dropped, reaching zero at 325 seconds. The drop in thrust and engine cut-out led to a downward trajectory. (WPost, Sept 10/82, A-l; ESA Info 27, 29, 30)
At 8:30 p.m. Moscow time (4:30 p.m. GMT), the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-6 carrying cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Alexandr Ivanchenkov, with French “spationaut” Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, to spend a week with cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, the Soyuz T-5 crew who had been occupying orbiting laboratory Salyut 7 since May 13. This was the first time a five-man crew would occupy an orbital station. Initial orbit elements were 277-kilometer apogee, 248-kilometer perigee, 89.6-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Chretien, who had trained with his French backup Maj. Patrick Baudry in the Soviet Union for 21 months, was the first westerner to take part in a Soviet space mission. (The last east-west venture was the U.S.-Soviet Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975.) The mission had been approved by French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing in 1979. This was also the first Soviet life television coverage of a launch, beginning two hours before liftoff with taped views of crew training, Salyut assembly, Soyuz rollout, departure of the crew by bus, interviews with the crew orbiting in the Salyut, and ending with a live broadcast of the liftoff plus 10 minutes. During the two-hour broadcast, all three crew members gave speeches praising the trip as symbolic of friendship between French and Soviet peoples. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, June 24/82, June 28/82; Mosc DomTVSvc in Russian, June 24/82; NY Times, June 25/82, A-9; W Post, June 25/82, A-22; Spacewam SPX-344, June 29/82)
The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon. The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	. President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?” Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED INTFNU0NAUt RUN* “abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.” One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-1 in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator. Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications. Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53) During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release —Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82) On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site. Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13) Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)] Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.” On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.” U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.) The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
The Soviet Union launched Cosmos 1374 from Kapustin Yar into a “round orbit” at 225-kilogram altitude and 50.7° inclination. Press reports said that Australian aircraft watched a seven-ship Soviet task force retrieve from the Indian Ocean an object that might be either a nuclear test craft or a “fairly small” shuttle. United Press International (UPI) said an Australian spokesman claimed to know what kind of craft was recovered but gave no details because the information was “classified”; also, U.S. scientists said that the spacecraft had “an unusually low trajectory.” Associated Press (AP) quoted U.S. government sources “who asked to remain anonymous” that the Soviet Union had launched and recovered, after 1 1/4 orbits, its first space-shuttle type of vehicle; they did not know whether the craft was manned. A Reuters report said that Maj. Gen. Alexey Leonov, who had been one of the cosmonauts on the Apollo-Soyuz mission, hinted that the shuttle guess was right but would give no details. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 4/82; W Post, June 9/82, A-7; June 10/82, A-26; June 11/82, A-35; W Times, June 11/82, 6; AvWk, June 14/82, 18-19)
The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Soviet Union had launched space station Salyut 7 apparently to replace Salyut 6, home in space for cosmonauts since September 1977, for a joint French-Soviet manned flight this summer. Orbital parameters were 278-kilometer apogee, 219-kilometer perigee (between 136 and 172 miles), 89.2 minute period, 51.5° inclination. Agence France-Presse said that a Soviet-French team would shortly be launched in a Soyuz-T craft to link up with Salyut 7. Lt. Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, France’s “spacecraft” who had had “intensive training in Soviet facilities” with his backup, Col. Patrick Baudry, would fly to Salyut 7 with two Soviet cosmonauts about June 22. The report said that the French preferred the neutral word spacenaut because the Soviets used “cosmonaut” and the Americans “astronaut.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/82; Paris AFP in English, Apr 20/82; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-18) The New York Times reporter in Moscow said that the French-Soviet mission would be the first launch of a noncommunist in a Soviet spacecraft and the first East-West spaceflight since Apollo-Soyuz in 1975. Flight commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov would occupy Salyut 7 a few days earlier. An three-man crew on another spacecraft—two cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim and Vladimir Solovyev, and Jean-Loup Chretien—would join them. The Soviet Union had released few details on the mission. The USSR’s goal was said to be deployment of a 12-man station weighing more than 100 tons, permanently occupied by rotating crews. Salyut 6’s lifetime had included two “marathon missions” of 185 and 175 days; the U.S. record was 84 days during the Skylab program of 1973 and 1974. Soon after the last mission on Salyut 6 the Soviet Union had sent a large craft (Cosmos 1267) to link with it and test “methods of assembly of orbital complexes of great size and weight.” No one said what would become of the Salyut-Cosmos; Western observers believed that the assembly, even with a combined weight of 36 tons could safely burn up on reentry. The U.S. Skylab that scattered debris on western Australia in 1979 during its uncontrolled plunge to Earth had weighed 77.5 tons. (FBIS Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/83; NY Times, Apr 21/82, A-12)
The Soviet Union said that Soyuz T-5 cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, in their fourth week aboard Salyut 7, had finished unloading Progress 13, launched May 23 to refuel and replenish the orbiting station, and undocked it to make room for a spacecraft carrying a French-Soviet crew later in June. Progress 13's propulsion unit had served twice to adjust the orbit of the Spyuz-.Salyut complex. Tass reported that ground control had reoriented the Progress June 6 to reenter and burn up over the Pacific Ocean. (FBIS, MscWldSvc in English, Tass in English, June 4/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 6/82)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz T-9 descent module after a 150-day flight on board the Salyut-7-Soyuz orbital space station. The two landed at 3:00 p.m. EST (in the middle of the night in the Soviet Union), 16 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan in that country. U.S. intelligence sources said that the two were expected to return in September, when an exchange crew of cosmonauts was due to visit them. However, they were forced to stay in orbit an additional six weeks when an explosion at the launch pad almost killed the two other crewmen. And at about the same time that the launch pad accident forced the extension of their flight, the two cosmonauts had to deal with a fuel leak aboard the Salyut that left the space station with less than half of its normal navigating propellant. The two men had to live in space suits, because the fuel that leaked was nitrogen tetroxide, which was so toxic it might have killed them if it penetrated the cabin of the space station. Western space observers had noted that the six-week extension in space might cripple the Soyuz T-9 spacecraft because it had been in orbit longer than 115 days and this length of time could possibly cause its nonrechargeable batteries to burn out, allowing the corrosive nitrogen textroxide fuel the Soyuz used to navigate to eat through engine valves and jeopardize the flight home. Western space experts were also interested in the night landing. The cosmonauts, earliest day landing would have been December 15, which might have been too long for them to trust the Soyuz T-9 to return safely. The official Soviet news agency Tass said that, during the flight, the crew carried out a large volume of scientific-technical and medicobiological research and experiments and gathered data on the Earth’s natural resources, its atmosphere, seasonal changes, and the biological productivity of the world’s oceans. New research was carried out under the program of material studies in space. An Elektrotropgraf instrument on board the station provided data on the state of construction materials following exposure to open space. Tass also noted that an important part of the crew’s flight program was to carry out complex assembly work on the external surface of the Salyut 7 station. During two space walks of 5 hours and 45 minutes, the two cosmonauts installed additional solar batteries on the station, in addition to other construction tasks. Over the course of the flight, there were regular medical checkups of the crew, which confirmed the possibility of man’s active functioning in weightlessness. (FBIS Moscow Pravda in Russian, Nov 25/83; NY Times, Nov 3/83, A-8; W Post, Nov 12/83, A-2, Nov 24/83, A-12)
The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur two interplanetary spacecraft, Venera 15 on June 2 on Venera 16 on June 7. The spacecrafts first went into “an intermediate orbit of an artificial earth satellite”; then, an onboard engine sent them toward Venus, where they were scheduled to arrive in October. Venera 15 had no descent module, indicating that “a landing is not being planned” and that the spacecraft would conduct atmospheric and surface research from orbit. Tass said that Venera 16, “by its design and mission,” was “analogous to” Venera 15. Tass also mentioned the lapse of more than 20 years since the Soviet Union began its interplanetary program with the launch in February 1961 of Venera 1, which reached a heliocentric orbit. First probe to land on Venus was Venera 3, in March 1966; Venera 4 landed gradually and sent data on the planet’s atmosphere for 93 minutes. Venera 13 and Venera 14 soft-landed in March .1982 and returned photographs of the landing site. (FBIS, MoscDomTvSvc in Russian, Tass in English, June 2&7/83)
Tass reported that the fuel core for the nuclear-powered Cosmos 1402 entered the atmosphere over the Atlantic at 1:56 p.m. Moscow time and “burned up entirely.” Data from “competent Soviet organizations tracking the flight” said the Sputnik “totally ceased its existence.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7/83)
James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said. NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles. Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing. Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83) During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1. Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions. Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
Cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov returned safely to Earth after 237 days in space. Soviet television broadcast the return, showing a parachute bearing the crew coming down about 500 miles northeast of Tashkent in Kazakhstan at 1:57 p.m. Moscow time. The three crew members had lived on the Salyut 7 orbiting space station since February 9. In television interviews, the cosmonauts said that they were glad to be back with friends on the “warm earth,” although one commented he was sad to leave the empty space station behind. The Soviet media had indicated recently that the crew was growing weary and to save energy had their working day cut by one hour. However, a medical checkup given the day after their return found the three to be in good health. In an interview in the newspaper Socialist Industry, a medical specialist said that recent endurance flights showed humans could live in space a year or more. The cosmonauts spent their last days on board transferring material to their Soyuz T-ll spacecraft and mothballing scientific equipment on the Salyut. The space station, launched in April 1982, would continue in orbit. The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet awarded medals to the three cosmonauts; and Kizim, who headed a crew that linked up with an earlier space station in 1980, would be honored with a bronze bust, the Washington Post reported that Tass said. (W Post, Oct 3/84, A-23; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Oct 1/84, Oct 2/84; FBIS Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Oct 3/84)
Scientists at the University of Chicago announced that a U.S. experiment to analyze the dust of Halley’s comet was riding aboard the Soviet Union’s Vega-1 spacecraft. It was the first known Soviet-U.S. cooperative space venture since the docking of the manned Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. The cosmic dust analyzer—and a twin that would be launched aboard Vega-2—were built by university scientists under the leadership of John Simpson, one of the preeminent astrophysicists in the United States, who had designed, experiments for more than 30 space missions over the past 25 years. The joint project was bom at an international symposium in Holland in . September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly improved comet dust measuring methods. About'a month later, he said, the Soviets surprised him by inviting him to put the analyzer aboard their Vega. Simpson received Reagan administration approval and about $300,000 in NASA funds, which touched off a frantic search for components. “We scoured the U.S. and within two weeks got all the pieces,” Simpson said. Plugging U.S. electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual cooperation. Moscow shared telemetry coding data, and Simpson was able to conduct high-speed computer analysis of Soviet rocket launch characteristics to aid in designing the dust analyzer so it could survive blastoff and flight. “On May 7, we walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,” which were then bolted aboard the Soviet spacecraft by U.S. scientists, he said. Simpson said that he had received computer tapes from the instrument during Soviet tests of the device while it awaited launch from the Baykonur cosmodrome and added that the Soviets had invited him to br on hand in Moscow when the comet encounter would begin in March 1986. (W Post, Dec 21/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 21/84, A-l)
Grumman test pilot Chuck Sewell flew for its first flight the experimental X29 forward swept-wing jet overEdwards Air Force Base, Calif. He kept the landing gear extended and held the plane to 270 miles per hour for the flight, which was intended to determine that everything worked properly, not to see how fast or high the plane could fly. The flight lasted 58 minutes and remained confined to an area around Edwards at an altitude of 15,000 feet. The X29, which had the nose of an F5 fighter, would never fly as a fighter in its own right but was supposed to help the United States design fighter planes of the future. Not until space age materials like graphite became practical for aircraft construction could wings be built light enough and strong enough to reach into the oncoming flow of air as the plane sped along. It was hoped that the forward sweep would give the X29 and it successors advantages in maneuvering for the kill in a dogfight. (W Post, Dec/84, A-9) The Soviet Union launched December 21 Vega-2, which should, like Vega-1, reach the area of Venus in the middle of June 1985 and travel close to Halley’s comet in March 1986. The Vega-2 station should drop landing craft and balloons into the Venusian atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 15/84; FBIS, Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Dec 21/84)
Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov aboard Salyut 7 equaled the record of 211 days in space, set by cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev in December 1982. The increasingly long flights, coupled with Western intelligence reports that the Soviets were experimenting with rockets capable of lifting heavy payloads into orbit, indicated that the country was moving toward a goal of establishing a permanent, manned space station. Soviet reports said that the flight of Salyut 7 was proceeding normally and that there was no indication how long the flight would last. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT l&ldS§ During the flight the cosmonauts had spent 22 hours and 50 minutes outside the craft in 6 space walks, breaking the U.S. record for a single mission by 29 minutes. The three have been visited by six other cosmonauts, including an Indian and the first woman to walk in space, Svetlana Savitskaya, who during her space walk used a welding machine that space analysts said could be used for building large Space Stations. The three cosmonauts had focused on the psychology of long periods in space as well as carried out important repairs outside the craft, demonstrating the crew’s ability to maintain their spacecraft in an extended flight. In a televised ceremony, Soviet leader Konstantin U. Chernenko honored the cosmonauts taking part in the flight and spoke of the great advances in knowledge and equipment since the first manned spaceflight by Yuri Gagarin, 23 years previously. “In the successes of cosmonautics we see a blend of the daring thinking of scientists, the remarkable skills of engineers, technicians and workers, and the great courage of cosmonauts,” he said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 6/84; FBIS, Moscow Tass in Engligh, Sept 7/84; NY Times, Sept 6/84, B-10)
A working meeting, in Paris, of astronauts from the Soviet Union, the United States, and France concluded after participants expressed concern for mankind’s future and the need for cooperation, and they emphasized their desire to use their unique experience to promote space exploration and the use of space technology for the good of all people. Participating in the meeting were Soviet cosmonauts A. A. Leonov (Voskhod-2 and Soyuz Apollo), O.G. Makarov (Soyuz 12, Soyuz 27, Soyu T-3), and Yu.V. Romanenko (Soyuz 26, Soyuz 38); U.S. astronauts R. Schweickart (Apollo 9), E. Mitchell (Apollo 14), and D. Eisele (Apollo 7); and French astronaut J.L. Chretien. The participants agreed to set up an organization of those who had traveled in space, with the aim of studying the potential and promoting the constructive use of space to improve living conditions on Earth, formulating positive prospects for future generations, and promoting the establishment of broad contacts among people who had been in space to identify opportunities for cooperation and issues of common concern. (FBIS, Moscow TRUD in Russian, Sept 12/84; FBIS Moscow Tass in English, Sept 11/84)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
The USSR had launched Meteor-2, a meteorological satellite that would obtain global pictures of cloud cover and the surface below in visible and infrared frequencies in both the recorded and direct transmission mode and would observe penetrating-radiation flow in near-earth space, FBIS Tass International Service in Russian reported. The satellite also carried an earth-orientation system, equipment to automatically align solar panels to the sun, a radiotelemetry system for satellite monitoring, and a radio complex for transmission of data to earth. All equipment was functioning normally, the service reported. (Tass Inti. Service in Russian, Feb 7/85)
A Congressional Office of Technology Assessment report on space cooperation, commissioned by Sens. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hi.) and Claiborne Pell (D-R.l.), said the U.S. and USSR could conduct valuable scientific exchanges, but the U.S. must handle any renewal of exchanges carefully in order to protect national security, the Washington Times reported. The report, the release of which coincided with the 10th anniversary of the joint Soyuz-Apollo docking mission in space, said the U.S. space program could particularly benefit from Soviet expertise in the life sciences and planetary sciences and that cooperation could lead to "substantive gains" in some areas of U.S. space research and applications. In 1982 the U.S. cut off scientific contact between the two countries to protest the Soviet's invasion of Afghanistan, the declaration of martial law in Poland, and the exile of Russian human rights activist Andrei Sakharov. However, Congressional attitudes toward joint U.S.-USSR ventures had changed since then. The report addressed scientific and practical benefits of cooperation, the potential for transferring sensitive military technology and know-how, the foreign policy aspects of space cooperation such as reducing tensions, and perceptions about Soviet motivations and behavior with respect to overall U.S.-Soviet relations. Angelo Codevilla, an aide to Sen. Malcolm Wallop (R-Wyo.) and an expert on strategic space programs, said the key to cooperation with the Soviets is "to what extent do we give away the whole store" of the U.S. technology advantage. (VV Times, July 17/85, 2A)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
At a news conference to discuss the recent flights of cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgiy Grechko, Soviet space officials said today that they expected to have a permanently manned space station by 1990, but that the Salyut 7 orbital laboratory would not be the spacecraft that hosted the rotating crews, the NY Times reported. Oleg Gazenko, head of the health ministry's Biomedical Problems Institute, which oversaw space medicine, said no unresolved problems remained to block development of the permanent station and that the crew rotation on Salyut 7 showed that incoming cosmonauts performed their research work better when they were spared the start-up operations needed to reactivate the space laboratory. At about the same time, Soviet officials told a U.S. Congressional delegation headed by Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) [see U.S. Space Policy/International, Oct. 10] that it was building a new space station that would be ready for launch in 1986, Defense Daily reported. Because the Soviets did not want to have two space stations in orbit at the same time, timing of the launch depended on the condition of the orbiting Salyut 7station, which was nearly doubled in size in September by the orbiting and deployment of a large new module. Nelson said the Soviets gave no details of the new station, which, if it is designed to be permanently manned, would beat the planned U.S. space station by seven or eight years. (NYT, Oct 15/85, C11; D/D, Oct 21/85, 259) October31: The Soviet Union, which had kept its space program under tight military control since it launched in 1957 the first satellite, announced creation of a civilian space agency, the NY Times reported. The agency would be responsible for the design, construction, and use of spacecraft for scientific research, remote sensing applications such as surveys of resources and crops, and joint space programs with other countries. In making the announcement, the government newspaper Izvestia identified the new agency as the Main Administration for the Creation and Use of Space Technology for the Economy and for Scientific Research, the Post said. It would be known as Glavkosmos, an acronym for the Russian terms "main" and "space." Izvestia did not specify the position of the agency in the Soviet government's table of organization but did identify the head of the agency as A. I. Dunayev. The only other publicly disclosed space-related agency in the Soviet Union was the Space Research Institute, founded in 1965 and a unit of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Western officials generally regarded that institute as performing some civilian space coordinating functions. However, in announcing Glavkosmos, Izvestia said, "It goes without saying that the effective use of space technology is of interest to many government ministries and agencies and to scientific organizations. The space program has reached such scope as to require the creation of a special coordinating agency." According to the announcement, the new agency would consider proposals for projects, work out long-term plans, and administer programs. It would also be responsible for launching satellites on vehicles expected to be supplied by the military and for collection and dissemination of satellite information. Izvestia said the agency would administer the Intercosmos program and the search and rescue satellite program, an international effort of the Soviet Union, the U.S., Canada, and France. The announcement did not make clear whether the new agency would administer any manned flights; but the emphasis seemed to be on automated space vehicles concerned with remote sensing, which until then had been part of the Cosmos series, a mixture of nearly 1700 civilian and military satellites launched since 1962. (NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13)
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Georgi Grechko in the Soyuz T-13 spacecraft returned to earth September 26 from the Salyut 7 orbiting complex, making a soft landing 220 km northeast of Dzhezkazgan, the Washington Post reported. Vladimir Vasyutin, Viktor Savinykh, and Aleksandr Volkov remained onboard Salyut 7. The partial replacement of the crew, FBIS Moscow Domestic Service in Russian reported, for the first time provided for continuous use over a prolonged period of a manned space complex, thus substantially enhancing its efficiency. The present Soviet space effort was the fourth long-term expedition aboard the Salyut 7 station since its 1982 launch. The overlapping of crews meant that the Salyut 7 would not have to be shut down and restarted. Left empty after the previous mission ended in October 1984, the station suffered an electrical failure that created severe and dangerous problems for Dzhanibekov and Savinykh when they docked June 8 with the station. The Soviet space program emphasized endurance flights in space with the ultimate goal of establishing large permanently manned orbiting complexes. The previous Soviet space mission set a record for human endurance in space when three crew members lived aboard Salyut 7for 237 days. (W Post, Sept 27/85, A21; FBIS Moscow Service in Russian, Sept 26/85)
The USSR launched at 10:40 a.m. Moscow time today the Soyuz T-13 carrying cosmonauts Col. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, mission commander and a veteran of four previous space missions, and Viktor Savinykh for a rendezvous with the Salyut 7space station in the first Soviet manned launch in nearly a year, the Washington Times quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. By late evening, Soyuz T-13, fitted with new flight controls, was in an orbit ranging from 203 to 182 miles above earth. On June 8 the Soyuz spacecraft docked with the space station using the new flight controls and an onboard computer in the Soviet program's first known manual docking. The time between launch from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan and the rendezvous with Salyut 7 was twice as long as in previous Soviet space missions, leading observers to believe the time was spent testing the new flight controls. In the past, personnel on the ground and automated onboard systems controlled Soviet spacecraft docking with Salyut stations, while cosmonauts on board simply monitored the operation. But since there had been aborted dockings in recent years, the Soviets might have given more control to Dzhanibekov. The Salyut space station had been mothballed since the previous October when three Russians returned to earth after 237 days in space, a record. (W Times, June 7/85, 7A; NYT, June 8/85, 4; W Post, June 9/85, A27) During June: Although the Soviet Union in the past had responded to the introduction of every new U.S. weapons system by installing a corresponding system of its own and many observers assumed the same would be true with the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), there were increasing indications that the Soviet leadership might decide to restrict itself to taking countermeasures against the U.S. system and renounce the development of any Soviet counterpart to SDI, the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists reported. In 1983 Henry Trofimenko, head of the Foreign Policy Department of the Institute for the Study of the USA and Canada, said that in giving effective answer to the U.S.'s military program "the USSR is not going to match the U.S. in development of every new system of weapons, nor is it going to imitate it." More recently, a Soviet analysis by a committee of scientific and strategic experts of the implications of SDI stressed that Soviet countermeasures against a prospective U.S. system could be very effective, could be taken quite easily and quickly, and would cost much less than the system against which they were directed. Possible countermeasures discussed in the analysis included destruction of the space platforms (done by relatively small missiles, by land-based lasers, by armed satellites functioning as "space mines," or by "clouds" of obstacles set in their path; encasing missiles with material capable of absorbing laser beams or of reflecting them; masking missile launches by means of smokescreens; designing a pattern of missile launches over time that would force the lasers constantly to redirect themselves in haphazard fashion, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the system; or launching dummy missiles in order to use up the destructive power of the system. The Soviet scientists agreed with western investigators that an estimated total cost of SDI could eventually reach $2 trillion, and even at that expenditure SDI could not guarantee that at least a few missiles in a hypothetical Soviet first strike might not get through to their targets. The Bulletin also pointed out that Soviet scientists had noted that the technologies required for countermeasures were in a much more advanced state than those required for SDI itself; in fact, much of the necessary technology already existed. Well before SDI would be in place, "an effective means of counteraction" could be set up and would probably cost only 1 or 2% as much as the system it was designed to counteract. (Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, June/July 85, 38)
The Soviet Union launched what it said was a "third generation" Space Station named Mir, the Russian word for peace. The Mir was larger than their Salyut7 Space Station and had six docking ports for habitable modules. With the addition of Salyut laboratories, Russia would have an orbiting complex large enough for permanent crew habitation. (B Sun, Feb 21/86; W Times, Feb 21/86; W Times, Mar 4/86; CSM Mar 7/86)
The Soviet Union invited foreign correspondents into its mission control center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a live television interview with them. The Soviet Union set still another precedent when it allowed coverage of its space program by a large group of foreign press. The invitation followed a pattern of a more open Russian space agency, the televising of the recent liftoff of the cosmonauts on March 13, and the opening of the Soviet Space Research Institute to foreign visitors when the Vega spacecraft approached Halley's Comet were also first time events. (W Post, Apr 8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86)
The Soviet Union launched into orbit a Soyuz TM3 with two Soviet cosmonauts and a Syrian space traveler aboard. The liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome, in Soviet Kazakhstan, was the Soviet Union's third crewtended space launch since the U.S. Space Shuttle explosion on January 28, 1986. The Soyuz TM3, piloted by Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Alexandrov, was scheduled to dock with the Soviet Mir space station after two days of orbiting around the Earth. The Syrian space traveler, Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Faris, was the second Arab in space. The first was the Saudi Prince Sultan bin Salman, a nephew of Saudi Arabia's King Fahd. Prince Sultan bin Salman was a payload specialist aboard the (#U.S. Shuttle Discovery in 1985. (H Chron, July 22/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM6 spacecraft, with three cosmonauts on board, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The threeman Soyuz crew, which included an Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station on the weeklong mission. The physician, Valery Polyakov, was to remain aboard Mir after the departure of his Soyuz crewmates and continue monitoring the health of the Mir cosmonauts, who were in the eighth month of a recordbreaking yearlong endurance mission. (FBISSov88168, Aug 30/88; SSR 1988 075A; UPI, Aug 30/88; W Post, Aug 30/88; CSM, Aug 30/88; P Inq, Aug 30/88)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
A Soyuz TM7 spacecraft, carrying a joint SovietFrench crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, for a monthlong tour in the Mir space station. With French President Franois Mitterand in attendance, the threeman crew, which included French astronaut JeanLoup Chretien, lifted off from Baikonur on the second FrenchSoviet crewtended mission. '(0*Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The threeman Soyuz crew planned to join the twoman crew, aboard Mir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first West European to perform a spacewalk. (FBISSov88228; SSR 1988 104A; NY Times, Nov 27/88; W Post, Nov 27/88; CSM, Nov 28/88)
An untended Soviet Progress M2 module bound for the Mir Space Station was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Central Asia. In addition to ferrying supplies to the Mir crew, the Progress also carried a U.S. experiment designed to test crystal growth in weightlessness. (FBISSov89243, Dec 20/89; SSR 1989 099 A; W Post, Dec 21/89; WSJ, Dec 21/89; P Inq, Dec 21/89; W Times, Dec 21/89; CSM, Dec 22/89)
Two Soviet astronauts were successfully launched aboard a Soyuz TM8 capsule for a rendezvous with the Mir Space Station. The Soyuz TM8 capsule was launched aboard a Proton launch vehicle emblazoned with several commercial advertisements. Cosmonauts Alexander S. Viktorenko and Alexander A. Serebrov were scheduled to reoccupy the Mir station during a sixmonth tour and supervise the attachment of two new modules to the facility. Mir had been left unoccupied since April 27 because of funding constraints and delays in manufacturing of the new modules. (FBISSov89171, Sep 6/89; SSR 1989 071A; W Post, Sep 6/89; WSJ, Sep 6/89; C Trib, Sep 6/89; P Inq, Sep 6/89)
The Soviet Union successfully launched an untended Proton launch vehicle carrying an attachment module bound for the Mir Space Station from the Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan. The pressurized module, known as the Kvant2, contained additional crew living space as well as experiments and a "space motorcycle" intended for use in extravehicular spacewalks. (FBISSov89226, Nov 27/89; SSR 1989 093 A; NY Times, Nov 27/89; C Trib, Nov 27/89)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion of the merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology and the Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into the Office of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D. Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intended to combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives with innovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Truly felt should proceed under a strong central management. Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990. Headed by Martin P. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislative matters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters with Congress. (NASA Release 9032; 9033) During February: Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut, returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said the original untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, would never fly again. He also reported that the Soviets planned to launch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automatically dock it with Mir. The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)
A Chicago Tribune article reported on the progress of commercial space launch ventures that were born out of the Challenger disaster in 1986. McDonnell Douglas and Martin Marietta made their first successful launches of satellites in0*1989, and Orbital Sciences and General Dynamics were expected to follow this year. Hundreds of millions of dollars were invested by the corporations, and a backlog of missions was seen until 1995 when Japan, Russia, and China were predicted to compete with U.S. and European systems. The threat of so much competition was unnerving for the industry, but the promise of U.S. military contracts offered enough compensation for the continuation of their projects. (C Trib, Feb 19/90)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
The Los Angeles Times indicated that various scientific teams from the United States, Japan, and Europe, were trying to develop solar-sail spacecraft to race to the moon. At the time of writing, the Russian Federation was ahead of the other teams and planned to launch a test craft in October 1992. None of the research teams was government-sponsored and financing was a problem. Theoretically, the sail craft were to be propelled through space by tiny solar particles called photons. (LA Times, Dec 27/91)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, the Soviet space program was facing a difficult future. The main elements of the Soviet space program were concentrated in three republics: Russia, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan. Rockets were built primarily in Ukraine, control centers and instrument manufacturing plants were mainly in Russia, and the principal launch facility, the Baikonur Cosmodrome, was in Kazakhstan. Marcia S. Smith, the Soviet space expert on the staff of the Congressional Research Service, said those three republics agreed in early October they could operate by themselves. However, the economic situation became worse, causing increasing criticism. Nevertheless, communications satellites were essential to produce foreign investments and maintain a link with the outside world. Space research had technological spinoffs in areas such as computers, transportation, communications, and propulsion. Therefore, U.S. experts did not believe the former Soviet states would allow the space program to die. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Three U.S. scientists, including one from NASA's Ames Research Center, completed the first joint U.S./Russian Antarctic expedition since the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The purpose of the expedition was to investigate the physical, chemical, and biological properties of ice-covered lakes in the Bunger Hills Oasis of East Antarctica. This was the first time U.S. scientists had explored these lakes, which are near a Russian research station. (NASA Release 92-73)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
NASA announced that Charles F. Bolden, Jr. Col., USMC, would command Space Shuttle mission STS-60 in November 1993. Other crew members would be Pilot Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr.; and mission specialists Franklin R. Chang-Diaz; Jan Davis, Ronald M. Sega, and a Russian cosmonaut yet to be designated. (NASA Release 92-188; Space News, Nov 2-8/92)
A Russian industry grouping called the Space Regatta
Albert Parry, 92, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died in Los Angeles. In 1954, Dr. Parry warned in an article that the Soviets would soon be able to launch a space satellite, and in another article published in July 1957, he predicted the launching would occur on September 17. The Soviet Union launched Sputnik I on October 4. (NY Times, May 8/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
Russian space authorities reported that they had developed a new design for their Mir 2 Space Station and that initial production of the primary module had already started. The new Mir 2 design envisioned a core with five modules that were to be attached to the middle of a long beam. The officials said they expected Mir 2 to be launched in the mid-1990s and that it represented Russia's determination to continue its long-term plan of manned flight activities despite the difficult financial and political situation in Russia. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the fate of the Russian space program is in doubt. Although most of the republics that make up the successor to the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States, had signed an agreement pledging to continue the space program and to honor all the Soviet Union's international agreements on space projects, many experts questioned the impoverished nascent union's ability to follow through. "There is a high level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown University. "The commonwealth will absolutely not be able to maintain a space program at the same level of activity," declared Roald Sagdeev, former director of the Soviet institute that ran all scientific research programs in space. (C Trib, Jan 29/92; Boston Globe, Jan 30/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Russian cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kalery worked outside the Mir Space Station on an unscheduled two-hour spacewalk to activate a pair of gyroscopes that help stabilize the Space Station. The gyroscopes had worn out naturally during the course of Mir's life and had to be replaced. (AP Jul 8/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
The Russian Space Agency announced plans for three piloted missions and six Progress flights in 1993. The first mission of the series was scheduled for January 24, 1993. (Itar-Tass, Dec 11/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Dr. Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Director of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division, last week received the Korolev Medal, awarded by the Russian Federation of Astronautics and Cosmonautics for achievement in space research. (NASA Relesase 92-151)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
A Russian space capsule containing a cut-glass replica of the Statue of Liberty and greetings from Russian President Boris N. Yelstin splashed down in the Pacific Ocean off Washington state. The Resource 500 satellite was billed as Russia's first private space launch and honored the 500th anniversary of the voyage of Columbus in 1492. (The Sun, Nov 23/92; P Inq, Nov 23/92 and Nov 25/92; W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; USA Today, Nov 23/92; UPI, Nov 23/92; LA Times, Nov 25/92)
European, Canadian, and Finnish ministers, meeting in Granada, Spain, approved spending cuts for the European Space Agency of about 13 percent through the year 2000--down to $26 billion. The biggest cuts will affect the Hermes Space Shuttle. The ministers also launched a three-year study of ways to work with Russia on future space missions. (WSJ, Nov 11/92)
NASA announced the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part in a wide range of investigations on the Mars Observer mission, planned for launch September 16, 1992. These scientists would  be added to the current science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned for the 2-year global mapping mission. Besides representing U.S. universities and research centers, the newly selected group of participating scientists included four individuals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scientists from Austria, the United Kingdom, France and Germany were already involved in the mission, and a group of 10 participating scientists from Russia were to be added later this year. (NASA Release 92-45)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
The Associated Press reported that Japanese space officials recently had travelled to Russia for two weeks of talks and tours of previously off-limits space facilities. During the trip, the officials discussed a space cooperation treaty that would grant Japan access to Russian manned spaceflight data for use in medical research and to remote-sensing technology for use on satellites. (AP, Aug 9/92)
The Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to produce some jetliner parts in the former Soviet Union as soon as possible. The effort would enable Boeing to gain increased access to the Russian aviation market and to meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms. (WSJ, Sept 11/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a French researcher landed safely in Kazakhstan after completing scientific experiments aboard the orbiting Mir Space Station. The 14-day mission brought to a close the third joint Russian-French flight since 1982. The three worked on experiments involving astrophysics, biology, and bioengineering. They also conducted geophysical research based on commercial contracts from several European countries and members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 10/92; The Sun, Aug 11/92)
If Japan follows through on plans to launch a probe toward Mars in 1996, it will become the third nation to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and Russia. Budgeted at $96.8 million, the 550-pound Japanese probe has been dubbed Planet B. It would begin to orbit Mars by October 1997, according to Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Science, which is planning the project. (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92)
The main Russian TV news reported that some members of the former Soviet Union's cosmonaut ground controllers planned a warning strike to protest low wages, which in many cases were equivalent to $6 a month. The television report said that "One of the most prestigious jobs on Earth had become one of the lowest-paid." (W Times, Jan 28/92; P Inq, 28/92)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
An article in the Chicago Tribune discussed the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran; built in the early 1980s, the Buran flew only once in November 1988. Today all three models of the spacecraft sit idle, victims of the economic downsizing in Russia. The Buran program seems destined for oblivion. (C Trib, Nov 8/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts made a spacewalk to position a cable that will power an exterior engine on their Mir Space Station. (AP Sept 9/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
After two failed launch attempts, the Earthwinds around-the-world balloon flight was postponed until November. The captain, airline pilot Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Arizona, and his crew, Don Moses and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov, need near-calm conditions on the ground and the right trajectory to launch the trip, expected to last from 12 to 21 days at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. It would be the first balloon to circle the world. (LA Times, Feb 23/92;)
It was reported that Russian scientists successfully tested an engine for a space plane in 1991. (Time, Feb 24/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA announced that Sergei K. Krikalev and Col.Valadimir G. Titov had been approved as the two Russian candidates to be trained to fly on a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993. (NASA Release 92-166)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
It was reported that the Bush Administration's commitment to keeping Russia's nuclear scientists employed by offering financial assistance and technical cooperation was running into obstacles as U.S. officials held up some deals and sent conflicting signals about others. Among the projects awaiting approval were requests by federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy a Russian-made reactor for the U.S. space program, and join an international consortium with Russia and others to explore use of fusion energy.  (W Post, Mar 25/92)
At the Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would help uncover possible efforts by smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow Southeast Asian countries to use a module that will be built onto the future international space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UPI, Nov 16/92)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs. The new position was established to provide focus for the many programs involving NASA and the former Soviet Union. (NASA Release 92-103)
The U.S. Department of Energy and the Mayak Production Association of the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy signed a contract by which the Energy Department would buy Russian-produced plutonium-238 for use as a power source in U. S. spacecraft. The contract provided for the United States to purchase up to 40 kilograms (88 pounds) over five years. The plutonium is not weapons-grade and is to be used by NASA to power unmanned space missions that are being planned. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; W Post, Dec 29/92)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
Russia faced a new dispute over the famed Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had prevented the liftoff of a satellite at the Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was playing games. It wanted to show that there has to be a Russian-Kazakhstan agreement on Baikonur," Mr. Yeltsin said. Mr. Yeltsin said he would propose to Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev either joint financing of the famed spaceport, Russian purchase of the property, or a form of joint venture with the Kazakhstan republic. (W Times, Apr 30/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
Evgeny Sverdlov, director of the Institute of Molecular Genetics in Moscow, told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), that the demise of the former Soviet Union had created a "brain drain" that challenged the future existence of the Russian scientific research community. Because of the lack of funds, many research centers were on the verge of collapse. He added that it was good for young scientists to hone their skills abroad. But he said it would be a disaster for science in his country if they did not return. (CSM, Feb 13/92)
It was reported that a NASA-led team might travel to Russia to explore areas for joint cooperation on axisymmetric scramjets. At the top of the list was the possibility of the U.S. joining in a second flight later during the year of the Russian scramjet that already had achieved about three seconds of supersonic combustion. (AvWk, Apr 20/92)
Fearing that unemployed scientists in the former Soviet Union might put their talents to use building weapons of mass destruction for unsavory regimes, the United States, Germany and Russia announced the formation of an international center to promote "non-military endeavors." (P Inq, Feb 26/92)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that they had signed a contract to fly two U.S. Mars Oxident Experiment (MOX) instruments on the Russian Mars '94 Mission. The contract had a potential value of $1.5 million. The Mars '94 Mission, scheduled to be launched in November 1994, would deploy small landing stations and penetrators and carry instruments to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars. (NASA Release 93-62)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
NASA announced that starting in January 1994, the NASA Science Internet (NSI) would connect research sites in the United States with Russia's Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow.  Nine additional Russian space-related institutions were to be connected through what is called the Russian Space Science Internet (RSSI). (NASA Release 93-196)
A Russian would-be cosmonaut, now in the United States pursuing a doctorate in space policy at American University in Washington, was in Houston for three months on a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts prepare for flights in U.S. spaceships in 1993 and 1995. (LA Times, June 7/93)
Writing in the Christian Science Monitor, James Oberg, a professional space engineer and a specialist on Russian aerospace, hailed the success of Russia's manned Space Station, Mir. He noted that the Mir, launched in 1986, had been continuously occupied since mid-1989 by successive teams of cosmonauts.
The Russian foreign ministry announced that Russia had fully suspended a $359 million contract to sell India rocket engines and the technology needed to make them. (RTw, Aug 4/93)
NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)
Motorola Inc. announced yesterday that it had contracted with a Russian firm, Khrunichev Enterprises, to launch 21 of the satellites needed for Motorola's proposed $3.37 billion Iridlum communications network. The Iridium project, scheduled to begin operating in 1998, required various government approvals and a definitive financing agreement before it could go forward. (B Sun, Feb 4/93;  WSJ, Feb 4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI, Feb 21/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth on Monday after 189 days in space. The two cosmonauts made four space walks during their stay on the orbiting Space Station Mir and carried out a variety of experiments. (AP, Feb 1/93)
In a Time magazine essay, Dennis Overbye advocated cooperating with the Russians in building the new Space Station. He suggested  that the inclusion of Russia would breathe new life into the tired Space-Station project.  At the very least, he advocated that the Space Station go into a high-inclination orbit so that Russian spacecraft could visit from the Baikonur spaceport and perhaps perform rescue operations. (Time, Jul 19/93)
Russia's Mir Space Station celebrated its seventh anniversary in orbit on February 20. The Mir has given Russian cosmonauts much experience with extended periods in space. About half-dozen cosmonauts have made multiple flights and spent a total of more than a year in orbit. (AP, Feb 19/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
A Deutsche Aerospace AG (DASA) executive called on Europe and the United states to cooperate in setting quotas for launches of Russia's Proton booster rocket until such time as market economy conditions prevailed in Russia. Werner Heinzmann, president of DASA's space systems group, told a news conference that currently the Proton costs only a fraction of a Western launcher because of the value of the rouble. (RTw, June 10/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
NASA announced that it had received a request from Russian physicians treating victims of the recent emergency in Moscow for medical assistance from U.S. clinicians.  The medical consultations were to use a previously established U.S./Russian satellite telemedicine program known as "Spacebridge to Moscow." NASA first became involved in satellite telemedicine programs in the 1970s when a NASA satellite was used for medical consultation and health care delivery to remote sites in Alaska. (NASA Release 93-183)
NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.
A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)
The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the United States and Russia planned a joint mission to Mars in October of 1994. According to the report, the Russian Space Agency and NASA signed an agreement on the Mars-94 project late last year. Scientific equipment on board a Russian space craft would include two small landers with probes for analyzing the Martian surface and atmosphere. The oxidization capability of the Martian soil would also be measured, Tass said. (RTw, Apr 4/93)
Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)
Space-agency officials from the United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan agreed to invite Russia to join them in building an international Space Station that would be the world's largest collaborative science project. (WSJ, Dec 7/93; B Sun, Dec 7/93; TTw, Dec 6/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
India announced that it would develop powerful rocket technology that it said it had been denied as a result of an accord between Washington and Russia. In that accord, Russia agreed to sell some rockets to India but, bowing to  U. S. pressure, agreed not to provide India with the accompanying technology. (NY Times, Jul 18/93)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)
A senior NASA official who asked not to be named said that the agency was seriously considering attaching Space Station Freedom modules to Russia's Mir Space Station and helping refurbish the seven-year-old facility. NASA was also actively looking at combining Freedom with the next-generation Mir Station, which Moscow said it planned to launch around 1996. (Defense Daily, Aug 26/93)
Two Russian cosmonauts orbiting the earth since July  have been forced to extend their stay on the Mir Space Station by 49 days because of a delay in sending a relief craft, a space agency officials announced. (RTW, Oct 16/93)
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said that Russia would start selling foreign countries space technology without the machinery to launch nuclear missiles. Chernomyrdin spoke before leaving Moscow for an official visit to the United States that had been set for June but cancelled after a dispute with Washington over rocket technology sales to India.
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)
Roald Sagdeev, director of the Space Research Institute in Moscow from 1973-1988 and now professor of physics at the University of Maryland, and Michael Nacht, dean of the school of public affairs at the university, argued in a New York Times article that NASA should solicit Russian design help and begin plans to modify the Space Station's orbit so that it could be reached by launch vehicles from both the Kennedy Space Center and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The authors also noted that a University of Maryland study commissioned by NASA found that a wider use of Russian technology could reduce costs by up to a billion dollars a year after the station was operational. (NY Times, June 26/93)
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)
The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)
Two Russia cosmonauts training for a U.S. Shuttle flight said that they were eager to try out America's spaceship. The two cosmonauts had two and one-half years of space experience between them. (AP, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 10/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Three cosmonauts, including one Frenchman, landed in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan after a successful mission aboard the Russian Space Station Mir.  The 22-day Russian-French mission was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan July  1 on board a Soyuz TM-17 craft and two days later docked with Mir. (UPI, Jul 22/93; AP, Jul 22/93)
Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)
The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)
Moscow held its first international aerospace show in Moscow.  As many as 200 foreign aerospace companies and 250 enterprises from all over the former Soviet Union took part in the show, the largest event of its kind ever held in Russia.  Russian military space equipment was on show for the first time. (UPI, Aug 31/93; LA Times, Sept 1/93)
According to news reports, Russia was scheduled to launch an Israeli-made communications satellite in 1995. This was the first such agreement between the two countries. (AP, Apr 21/93)
Russian scientists on the Mir spaceship were scheduled to begin an experiment that involved using a mirror to reflect sunlight down to earth. In the experiment, a 65-foot-diameter disk of aluminum-coated plastic film would be unfurled in space. The experiment would test the possibility of illuminating areas on the Earth with light equivalent to that of several moons. Scientists agree on the need for environmental studies to access the possible effect of such a practice. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; NY Times, Jan 12/97; W Times, Feb 3/93; AP, Feb 3/93; USA Today, Feb 4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA Times, Feb 4/93)
The European Space agency, eager to boost its cooperation with Russia, said that it was studying the joint development of a new generation of space vehicles. Jean-Jacques Dorian, Director of Policy Planning, told journalists on the eve of Moscow's first aerospace show that the agency had contracts worth millions of dollars with a number of Russian firms. (RTw, Aug 30/93)
Science reported that NASA had agreed that NASA and Russian scientists would cooperate in several research projects aboard the Russian Space Station Mir in 1994. The joint effort would be part of a scientific exchange signed by the United States and Russia last July. (Science, May 28/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
The United States and Russia appeared to be nearing a compromise in a dispute over a proposed Russian sale of rocket engines and associated technology to India. Under the expected compromise, Washington would allow Moscow to sell the rocket engines to India but halt the transfer of some associated technology that initially was to be a key part of the deal. The technology was meant to give India the capability to manufacture its own ballistic missile engines, which could be used for either military or commercial space launch vehicles. (AP, Jul 13/93; W Post, Jul 14/93; UPI, Jul 14/93)
U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93)
The Washington Times reported that a group of five investors, headed by retired Navy Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, had signed a joint venture agreement with Russia's Association for the Conversion of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles. The group planed to use Russian missiles to put satellites into low orbits to transmit telephone calls or computer data or carry out scientific experiments. (W Times, May 4/93)
Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))
NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)
The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)
A Soyuz spacecraft with a Russian-French crew docked successfully with the Mir-1 orbiting Space Station on July 3. (RTw, July  3/93)
The military's plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit were criticized by the governing council of the American Astronomical Society and some other scientists. Council members were concerned because experience with previous Russian reactors had shown that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt x-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." Society officials noted that they were not opposing the mission or the use of nuclear reactors in space; rather they were asking that the test be conducted at higher levels, which would presumably be safer.
Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)
The  Washington Times reported that the former Soviet military had welcomed the U.S. decision to scrap most of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev called the decision a "reasonable decision" and said that "it seems there's no reason to raise the possibility again" of putting weapons in space. (W Times, May 18/93)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)
Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)
NASA and the Russian State Committee for the Defense Branches of industry signed a memorandum of understanding in Moscow to cooperate in eight areas of fundamental aeronautical sciences.  The agreement called for cooperative activities in the following areas: transition and turbulence, composite structures and materials, chemically reacting flows, thermal protection system materials, environmental concerns in aviation, hypersonic technologies, experimental test facilities, and advanced aerospace materials. (NASA Release 93-22)
Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)
The United States and Russia reached a last-minute agreement on the sale of rocket engines and related technology  to India.  The deal would allow some of the rocket engines to be transferred to India but would limit the transfer of technology and would not impose any sanctions on Russia, (Reuters, Jul 16/93; APn, Jul 17/93
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency (ESA) have invited Russia to help them build a new Space Station, according to an announcement by the ESA. (RTW, Oct 18/93; NASA Release N93-650)
NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93)
Russia agreed to help build a U.S. atom smasher in Waxahachie, Texas. Russian scientists would be involved in the design, engineering, and production of two of the Collider's booster accelerators in addition to its experimental detectors. According to the terms of the agreement, which could add $100 million to the Russian economy and save the U.S. a similar amount, Russia would provide Russian hardware at half price. (WSJ, Jan 7/93; USA Today, Jan 7/93)
Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)
Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)
A Washington Times editorial questioned the wisdom of the space partnership between Russia and the United States, finding significant problems with the agreement. First, should the Russian fascists come to power, the United States would have provided a hostile government with very detailed insights into the state of our advanced technologies. Second, the writer charged, the United States was being tricked into purchasing obsolete equipment for the joint station; third, Russia's space launch base, called Baikonur, was reported to be badly decayed; and, fourth, there were issues of crew safety--two fires were known to have taken place in similar modules of Russian Space Stations and the Russians had not provided complete details of these events.
Russia inherited the Soviet Union's ambitions in space but lacked its main launch pads. Russian President Boris Yeltsin in a visit to his Kazakh counterpart, Nursultan Nazarbayev, hoped to sign a 30-year lease on the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The outcome was a 20-year lease with an option to renew for 10 more years, and an annual payment of about $115 million. However, should this effort proved unsuccessful, Russia was developing other sites. Russian space scientists considered the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Far North unsuitable for manned flights, but Colonel General Vladimir Ivanov told the Itar-Tass news agency that Russia planned to build a major new space center in the Far East at Svobodny, north of Blagoveshchensk. (LA Times, Mar 28/94; Reuters, Mar 28/94; W Post, Mar 29/94)
NASA was experiencing difficulties finding sufficient amounts of materials to fill the Shuttle's cargo bay in order to justify a planned ten Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir. It might develop that only six or seven flights would be needed according to NASA Shuttle chief Bryan O'Connor. (Phillips Business Information, Aug 1/94)
NASA announced that it, a team of U.S. aircraft and engine manufacturers, and the Russian aircraft firm, Tupolev Design Bureau, planned to use a Russian Tu-144 supersonic transport as a flying testbed for conducting flight research on high-speed enabling technologies. Included in the U.S. team were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell International, General Electric, and Pratt and Whitney. (NASA Release 94-143; Antelope Valley Press, Sep 1/94)
A joint statement was issued following a meeting of the heads of space agencies involved in the International Space Station: the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), the National Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA), the Russian Space Agency (RSA), and NASA. This was the first group meeting since Russia accepted the collective invitation to join the International Space Station partnership in December 1993. The heads of agencies discussed the outcome of the recently completed Space Station System Design Review. CSA, ESA, and NASDA noted the remarkable progress made to accommodate Russia as a new partner and to satisfy the interests of all the partners in the new program structure, and they commended NASA for its efforts to improve program efficiency and to clarify the potential for additional partner contributions.
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
NASA announced the establishment of a Phase One Program Office at the Johnsonn Space Center, Houston, to direct upcoming Shuttle flights to the Russian Mir Station. Tommy Holloway was appointed manager of the office. (NASA Release 94-172)
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
The National Research Council reported that NASA officials had not yet established a solid working relationship with the Russian Space Agency. The Council found tremendous improvement in NASA management but considered that NASA thus far lacked a strong grip on Russian involvement. Since 1985 the Council, the operating arm of the National Academies of Science and Engineering, had reviewed the Space Station regularly under federal funding. The Space Station Committee, headed by Jack Kerrebrock, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor, also expressed concern that NASA needed to invest more in experiment development and preparatory work on Spacelab, the Shuttle's science laboratory. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; NY Times, Jul 29/94; Phillips Business Information, Jul 29/94)
Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)
France planned on its next manned mission to Russian Space Station Mir in January 1996 to use an advanced Aerospatiale system called Alice 2 to improve knowledge of fluid behavior in microgravity conditions for use in materials processing. (AvWk, Dec 12/94)
A Russian Military Space Forces official told Reuters that Russia planned a series of unmanned space launches to its orbiting Space Station Mir in May before a manned launch in June with a cosmonaut from Kazakhstan. The unmanned launches were to consist of a cargo spacecraft, a communications satellite in a joint program with the U.S. company Rimsat, and two military satellites. (Reuters, May 5/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
Russian television on the "Aerospace Salon" program discussed various Russian space flights. The correspondent said that much was known about Salyut flights 1, 6, and 7 but nothing had been publicized about Salyut 2, 3, and 5 missions. It developed that the flight engineers for these missions were military cosmonauts and that they involved Almaz orbital reconnaissance stations. The Almaz hulls were launched as Salyuts, the first unsuccessfully in 1973 and two more in 1974 and 1976. A cosmonaut who flew on one of these, V.V. Gorbatko, was quoted as saying that the initial intention was to arm the Almaz station but the one on which he flew had reconnaissance equipment only. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 30/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
After an unsuccessful attempt to link with the Mir Space Station, an unmanned Progress M-24 Russian cargo craft was scheduled to try again on August 30. A Russian spokesman said the docking mechanism of the Progress appeared too sensitive for the Mir's vibrations. The attempt of Progress to dock August 30 again was unsuccessful. However, on September 1 a Russian cosmonaut successfully docked the unmanned supply ship. (AP, Aug 29/94; Reuters, Aug 29/94; C Trib, Aug 31/94; UP, Sep 2/94; NY Times, Sep 3/94; W Post, Sep 3/94; W Times, Sep 3/94; P Inq, Sep 4/94)
Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
Jon Linderman, a National Research Council fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, said that based on experiments with rats, exercise combined with growth hormone may help prevent muscle atrophy in astronauts, seniors, and patients confined to bed following illness or injury. Russian cosmonauts discovered that extensive exercise alone was insufficient to prevent muscle atrophy. (UP, May 27/94; UP, Jun 3/94)
Russian and U.S. Mars mission planners were meeting the week of June 6 at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to define how the two countries could best cooperate in a proposed multinational space exploration program to be called "Mars Together." France, Germany, and Italy were also considering joining the new 1998 mission to Mars. The new mission resulted from Russia's delay in its originally proposed "Mars 94" and "Mars 96" flights. The idea would be to combine major technological elements on which individual nations were already working. (AvWk, Jun 6/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
From Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, Russia launched one of its Gorizont communications satellites for the U.S. firm Rimsat, putting it into orbit at about 22,300 miles above Earth. This was the second launch of a Russian spacecraft for Rimsat. The Gorizont went into orbit over Malaysia, with AllAsia Sat of Manila as its first customer. (UP, May 20/1994)
Three cosmonauts aboard Russian Space Station Mir celebrated the eighth anniversary of the Soviet Union's launch of Mir in 1986. (AP, Feb 20/94; W Times, Feb 21/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Space Subcommittee the Space Station program was proceeding but cost and schedule savings were decreasing. NASA earlier estimated Russian participation would save two years and $2 billion. After the Systems Design Review, it appeared time would be speeded by 15 months and savings probably would be $1.5 billion. Also, Russia now wanted $650 million instead of $400 million for lease of the functional cargo block vehicle. Furthermore, agreement needed to be reached with Russia on the cost of a major component required to provide navigation and reboost capability for the Station. NASA assured the Committee that the agency would never cede control of the Station to Russian ground commanders. Goldin also said it was essential for NASA to have stable funding. (Reuters, Apr 13/94; Defense Daily, Apr 14/94; O Sen Star, Apr 14/94; H Post, Apr 14/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronauts Norman E. Thagard and Bonnie J. Dunbar as prime and backup crew members for a three-month flight on Russian Space Station Mir in March 1995. Both astronauts flew on previous U.S. Shuttle flights and conducted various scientific experiments. (NASA Release 94-16)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
An editorial in a major space journal urged that the European Space Agency (ESA) not abandon its Columbus space station module program, despite a redesign of the Freedom station in favor of a U.S./Russian station core. This threat, due to funding crises in Germany and Italy, would jeopardize one of ESA's own justifications for existence. While ESA's near-term strategy is to maintain Columbus and increase ESA's participation in the station, its long-term strategy is for an advanced crew transfer spacecraft for station operations--a major European technological development. The U.S., Russia, Japan and Europe all need this new vehicle. Launched by Ariane-5, it should be ready around 2005-2007, after Columbus in 2001. Further, European managers rightly stressed that the station program should make better use of Ariane 5 for resupply as well as launches, but costs now 30 percent over budget must be reduced. (AvWk, Jan 3/94)
The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Partner met in Paris with officials of the Russian Federation for the first time to discuss steps to implement the decision to bring Russia into the Space Station partnership. The resulting joint statement referred to Russia's planned contribution, enhancing Station capabilities, needed changes to the legal framework of the 1988 agreements to include Russia, and a schedule to complete negotiations, beginning with an April meeting. (NASA Editor's Note N94-23)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar arrived in Russia to begin their yearlong training. The training was to stress physical conditioning, essential for long-duration space flights in order to counter bone and muscle deterioration. The astronauts were to wear Russian space suits bearing both Russian and U.S. flags. (AP, Feb 24/94; AP, Feb 28/94; UP, Feb 28/94)
Rene Pellat, head of the French space organization CNES, said that both the Mars 94 and Mars 96 proposed Russian missions with large international participation were to be postponed by at least two years because of Russia's economic difficulties. (W Times, May 15/94)
A feature article described the training program in Russia of U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar. Thagard was scheduled to blast off to Russian Space Station Mir with two cosmonauts in March 1995; Dunbar was his backup. They were studying Russian intensively, both the spoken language and technical terminology. In addition, they practiced on a Soyuz simulator, conducted serious physical workouts, and engaged in Russian psychological training for long-haul space crews. (LA Times, Jul 12/94)
NASA announced names of members of the crew of Atlantis for its mission in mid-1995 to perform the first docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. Robert L. Gibson was to command the 10-day mission, which was to include a Spacelab module. (NASA Release 94-90; H Chron, Jun 4/94; H Post, Jun 4/94)
NASA's Office of Space Communications announced the installation of a Video Teleconference System facility at Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, to expand video teleconferencing coverage to Russia. The installation supplemented the university's existing video teleconferencing capabilities with the Russian Institute of Space Research in Moscow. The new facility allowed NASA scientists and engineers to work directly with Soviet researchers. (NASA Release 94-28)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station, Wilbur C. Trafton, said he expected Russia to participate in the Space Station partnership in accordance with the agreement reached in 1993. Such participation was scheduled to allow the project to be completed in June 2002 instead of 2003 and save $2 billion. If Russia should withdraw from participation, backup plans existed. (AP, Feb 18/94; Reuters, Feb 18/94)
NASA was preparing three rendezvous with Russian Space Station Mir to launch the new cooperative effort between Washington and Moscow. In the first, scheduled for February 1995, Shuttle Discovery would simulate docking with Mir but not in fact touch it. In June 1995, Shuttle Atlantis would actually dock with Mir and remain together for four days, ultimately taking aboard U.S. astronaut Norm Thagard who would have joined Mir in March. In October 1995 Atlantis would be outfitted with an Orbiter Docking System that would be installed on the Space Station to facilitate future rendezvous. (AFP, Dec 16/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that two Russian cosmonauts had returned to Earth near Arkalyk, Kazakhstan, after nearly six months on board Space Station Mir. They left behind a colleague who intended to break the current record of 366 consecutive days spent in space by remaining on Mir 429 days. (B Sun, Jul 9/94; AP, Jul 9/94)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA announced that its prime contractor for Space Shuttle orbiters, Rockwell Aerospace, on September 11 received the Russian-built docking mechanism, the Androgynous Peripheral Docking Assembly (APDA). This mechanism would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to join the orbiting Russian Mir Space Station in June 1995. Work was scheduled to begin immediately at Rockwell's Space Systems Division to assemble the APDA with the Rockwell-built docking system hardware. (NASA Release 94-151)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
The United States and Ukraine signed a five-year civil space agreement the week of November 21, which established direct cooperation between NASA and the Ukrainian National Space Agency and created the legal basis for bilateral scientific cooperation. The agreement, which provided for cooperation in such fields as remote sensing, telecommunications, biomedical sciences and biotechnology, and space research and technology, was described as "almost exactly the same" as the 1992 agreement with Russia. (AvWk, Nov 28/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
NASA announced the appointment of astronaut Ronald M. Sega as Director of Operations, Russia in charge of NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, near Moscow. His assignment was to support training and preparations of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City. (NASA Release 94-182)
The official newspaper, China Daily, quoted a spokesman for the China Aerospace Corporation as expressing confidence it would fulfill all launch services for overseas clients in 1994. China launched the Apstar-1 satellite made by U.S. Hughes Aircraft, from the Xichang Space Center in southwest China on July 21. An Australian satellite was scheduled to be launched in August. China sought a larger share of the commercial space market dominated by NASA, Europe's Arianespace, and Russian launchers. (UPI, Jul 30/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
A Russian television program, "Science Today," commented on the roles of the Russian Energiya-Buran and the U.S. Space Shuttle systems in reducing the costs of placing payloads in space. In this connection the program promoted the potential of the Russian-Ukrainian project "Maks" based on an existing aircraft, the Mriya. The Russian Maks program was commended by G. Le. Lozino-Lozinskiy, general designer of the "Molniya" and British Aerospace agreed it was necessary to begin building winged transport systems with the Maks and presented the Maks system to the European Space Agency. (FBIS-Sov, Nov 29/94)
Russia marked its Space Day in a subdued mood, with the Baikonur Cosmodrome having become part of Kazakhstan and Russia's cosmonaut team decreased from 100 to 40 people. The Buran Space Shuttle was ended after its only unmanned test flight in 1988. But workers remaining at the Molniya complex in northwestern Moscow, established to construct Buran, hoped to work on the MAKS project involving small shuttles launched from the giant An-225 Mriya transport plane to carry cargo into space. (AP, Apr 12/94)
Russia again postponed the launch of the Spektr research module, scheduled to rendezvous with Space Station Mir in December. Itar-Tass news agency reported that the launch had been postponed until May 1995. (Itar-Tass, Nov 17/94)
Two Russian cosmonauts stepped outside Space Station Mir in order to reposition solar panels outside the Station. They were expected to spend five hours outside, and the repositioning of the panels should facilitate the visit of U.S. Shuttle Atlantis in 1995. (AP, Sep 13/94)
Russian Military Space Forces official Sergei Gorbunov said that Russia had decided to develop a new giant booster rocket that was to have a reusable first stage and burn a special, safer low-pollution fuel mixture. The rocket, Angara-24, would be appropriate for a new Far Eastern launch site if Russia decided to build it as an alternative to the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The booster was to be tested in 1998 and the first launch was planned for 2000. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
Victor Blagov, deputy head of Russian space missions, said that the six cosmonauts on the aging Mir Space Station would have to ration electricity for several months after the craft's solar batteries were unexpectedly drained. Problems first appeared on October 11 after a powerful piece of electrical equipment suddenly sprang to life, shutting down part of the Station and running down four of the six batteries. Four other solar batteries could not be put aboard Mir until the middle of 1995. (Reuters, Oct 25/94)
The International Space Station was entering a decisive six-month period in which governments in the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada were poised to sign the final industrial contracts and intergovernmental accords needed to build the facility. Barring unforeseen developments, the European Space Agency would be unable to commit itself to the Space Station before November 1995, when its member governments' ministers were scheduled to convene. Other remaining hurdles were the signing of the prime contract for Station hardware between NASA and the Boeing Company; the conclusion of a smaller contract between the Canadian Space Agency and Spar Aerospace; a final round of negotiations bringing Russia into full Station partnership; and an agreement among the partners on who would contribute what to the Station's upkeep and the apportioning of access to the Station's limited electricity and other resources. (SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
NASA's Cleveland Lewis Research Center was scheduled to work with the Russians on a project to use the sun's rays to power the Russian Mir Space Station. In addition, the Lewis Center was to direct the building of two wind tunnels desired by the commercial aircraft industry to help design airliners that fly at 2.4 times the speed of sound. The two projects would help compensate for jobs lost at Lewis by funding cuts. (Plain Dealer, Feb 11/94)
Disagreements continued to exist between the United States and Russia over the Salyut FGB "space tug" with regard both to the tug's price and the cost of launching it, which Russia wanted the United States to pay. Khrunichev Machine Building Enterprise was in the early stage of working on the tug. An agreement was worked out on November 10 about the medical certification process for joint flights, under which each country would accept the medical certification of the other's space flight personnel until prelaunch examinations were performed 30-45 days in advance of Russian Soyuz flights and 10 days in advance of U.S. Shuttle flights. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California, chairman of the House Science Committee, sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin asking that NASA develop cost estimates for upgrading the infrastructure surrounding Russia's Baikonur Cosmodrome. He also requested that NASA explore options for establishing direct relations with Kazakhstan in the areas of science and technology. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
An article about U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar and their training in Russia stressed their intensive Russian language lessons and their sense of Russia's space program accomplishments in the face of the country's serious economic problems. They believe both countries would benefit from space cooperation: the United States would gain from the experience and data Russia had collected from long stays in space and Russia would profit from U.S. technology and the use of the U.S. Shuttle to ferry large cargos to Mir. (C Trib, Jul 3/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronaut Kenneth D. Cameron to manage NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, and at the Russian control center at Kaliningrad. (NASA Release 94-27)
A NASA delegation led by Mike O'Brien from NASA's External Affairs Division in Washington was in Moscow to present to Russian officials the draft of the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the International Space Station. The MOU detailed services to be provided by Station partners and the percentage of Station resources--power, water, storage space--each would receive. Bill Shepherd, deputy program manager for NASA's Station program, was optimistic about Russian response to the MOU and also optimistic about NASA's purchase of the 20-ton FGB navigation and propulsion tug (the first Station component to be sent up) from Lockheed-Khrunichev. (Phillips Business Information, Dec 19/94)
The media reported that Pratt & Whitney and Rockwell International were negotiating a potential $1 billion deal with Russian aircraft manufacturer Ilyushin to produce jetliners. The project could involve the initial purchase of 20 aircraft by Aeroflot Russian International Airlines and create $1 billion in U.S. exports. Pratt & Whitney would provide the engines and Rockwell would provide the avionics The Il-96M is a four-engine wide-body craft that carries 300 passengers. (P Inq, Jan 22/94)
Jean-Marie Luton, director general of the European Space Agency (ESA), announced at a news conference in Berlin that veteran German astronaut Ulf Merbold would join two Russian cosmonauts for the first joint European and Russian EUROMIR 94 space flight scheduled for October 3. During the 30-day flight, 30 experiments prepared by scientists from ESA states were to be performed on board Russian Space Station Mir. (Reuters, May 30/94)
The General Accounting Office issued a report to the Congress stating that Russian participation in the U.S. Space Station project would add nearly $400 million to the Station's cost as well as $1.4 billion for other NASA programs that supported the Station, instead of saving that amount, as had been predicted. (Reuters, Aug 2/94; P Inq, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 3/94)
Russian cosmonauts Vasily Tsibliyev and Alexander Serebrov on the Soyuz TM-17 landed safely and without incident after six months in the Mir station, although the module had collided with Mir before descent. They were replaced by two cosmonauts, including Valery Polyakov, due to stay a record-breaking 14 months in space, to break the record 366 days set by Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov in 1988--1989. (Reuters, Jan 14/94)
As part of the Administration's efforts to gain congressional support for NASA's International Space Station project, NASA was considering removal of the Russian Salyut Functional Cargo Block (FGB) vehicle from the redesigned configuration. If the FGB were removed, which some key members of Congress wanted in order to reduce dependence upon Russia, NASA might replace it with Lockheed's Bus-1. Following the March International Space Station System Design Review, international partners and White House advisers, including members of the presidential panel reviewed the Station redesign and, in general, seemed favorably disposed to the Station. The panel was headed by Charles Vest, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (AvWk, Apr 11/94)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts on Mir had completed the first in a series of U.S. experiments using NASA's Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS). SAMS was activated October 4 to collect vibration data in preparation for future chemistry and physics experiments. (NASA Release 94-168)
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1994 activities and provided a chronology of major space events. Of particular note were the flight of a Russian cosmonaut aboard a U.S. spacecraft for the first time and a spectacular cosmic collision that occurred on Jupiter. However, it was the work of the refurbished Hubble Space Telescope that dominated NASA news in 1994. Among Hubble results were the following: evidence of a massive black hole in the center of a galaxy 50 million light-years away, supporting Einstein's theory of relativity; observations of huge pancake-shaped disks of dust, raw material for planet formation, swirling around half the stars in the Orion Nebula; confirmation of a critical prediction of the Big Bang theory that helium should be widespread in the early universe; and significant progress in determining the age of the universe--between 8 and 12 billion years--and its size. (NASA Release 94-216; UPI, Dec 22/94)
The Russian President made an edict in mid-November establishing the state's first experimental space center at Plesetsk. The edict divided the Plesetsk facility, with one part being retained by the strategic missile forces and the other transferred to Russia's military space forces without, however, increasing logistical support, staffing, or pay. In contrast to Baikonur, for which Russia annually paid Kazakhstan $116 million, the Plesetsk Space Center would give Russia its own launching site. From the Soviet era Plesetsk had nine launchpads and was the top secret site for launching more than half of all satellites. However, a critical state of electricity supply to industrial enterprises in Arkhangelsk Oblast had occurred, resulting from the payments crisis, which threatened a cut-off of electricity to Plesetsk and to Severodvinsk, where atomic submarines were built. (Izvestiya, Nov 17/94)
During a visit to Cape Canaveral with his crewmates, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Titov familiarized himself with the Spacehab module that was scheduled to be carried on his Shuttle flight in February 1995. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA announced the updated schedule of Space Shuttle/Space Station missions through calendar year 1997 and expendable launch vehicle missions through calendar year 2001. Included were 10 Space Shuttle flights to Russian Space Station Mir between 1995 and 1997. (NASA Release 94-61)
NASA announced the names of the crew for the Space Shuttle mission to rendezvous and dock with the Russian Space Station Mir in October 1995. The mission commander was designated as Kenneth D. Cameron. (NASA Release 94-145)
The $20 million docking ring, known as the Androgynous Peripheral Docking System, which would enable Space Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir in 1995, arrived from Russia after it had been tested in Russia, in California, and in orbit. NASA managers expressed confidence in the ring although they could not read the Russian plaque on it. (O Sen Star, Dec 7/94; Fla Today, Dec 7/94)
Interfax news agency reported that following unsuccessful talks with Kazakhstan about extending the use of its traditional base at Baikonur, Russia planned to launch a post-Soviet space ship in 1996 from its own territory, using the rocket complex at the city Svobodny-18 in the northeastern Amur region. (Reuters, May 5/94)
NASA announced the completion of the second of two shipments of solar panel modules, marking delivery of the first U.S. Space Station flight hardware for NASA's cooperative space endeavors with Russia. The shipments each consisted of 45 solar panel modules developed for the Mir cooperative solar array project, an effort that brought together NASA's advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's proven structures and mechanisms. Eighty-four of the modules were scheduled to be integrated with Russian-made frames in 42 hinged parts. The completed array would be returned to the United States to be taken to Mir on the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release 94-217; Phillips Business Information, Dec 22/94)
Astronaut Jannice Voss Ford, training for a mission aboard Russian Space Station Mir, appeared in a two-hour electronic conference concerning the Mir flight, NASA, the Space Station, and her qualifications for being an astronaut. (Fla Today, Jun 12/94)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
Space News reported on the financial and other difficulties confronting the Russian space program. Few of the staff of the Russian Space Agency (RSA) were receiving pay checks; many space workers were on unpaid leave and other scientists and engineers had left RSA; unlike NASA, RSA had oversight responsibility but did not manage space projects, leading to power struggles with companies engaged in space work and with the military with whom RSA must negotiate such matters as rental fees for using military facilities for launches. (SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that Russia had launched the Kosmos-2290 military satellite from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. (W Times, Aug 30/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
One of the six ball-screw housings, the $95 million Russian docking system shock absorber, failed its test and the Russian builder wished to replace all six. This might delay the June 8, 1995 launch of Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Russian Space Station Mir. (O Sen Star, Dec 15/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
A feature article, accompanied by photographs of Mount Rainier and of the newly exploding Russian volcano taken from the radar images brought back by Space Shuttle Endeavour, commended the extraordinary quality of NASA's Spaceborne Imaging Radar. It discussed the process by which more than 500 sites were reviewed and gave particular attention to efforts to further define ancient Ubar, buried beneath desert sand. (Newsday, Nov 15/94)
The requirements for Rockwell International's Space Systems Division in integrating a Russian-built mechanism into airlock hardware it had manufactured so Space Shuttle Atlantis could dock with Space Station Mir were described. The docking assembly would be the first in what could be a long line of hybrid U.S.-Russian space hardware. Rockwell executives were confident they could meet the May 1995 launch date for Atlantis. Rockwell's Russian partner was NPO Energia, with whom it had worked some 20 years previously on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Some of the complications of the collaboration were discussed. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
In discussing the training of two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William Saxe, NASA's representative in Moscow, was quoted as saying that when the astronauts arrived in February, they were refused maps or phone books of Star City, their training center, because these were considered top secret. However, the astronauts were not denied entrance to any of the buildings. The astronauts were not to begin training with Russian cosmonauts until the fall. (NY Times, Aug 21/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
At Russia's request, the Federal Aviation Administration was about to launch a sweeping inspection of Russia's airlines and air safety controls. The review resulted from three serious air crashes in Russia during the year and dire warnings of the dangers of Russian air travel. (W Post, Aug 27/94)
In order to carry out a complex docking experiment that involved detaching the Soyuz spacecraft from Mir and then redocking using automatic systems, the three cosmonauts aboard the Russian Space Station would remain in space an additional day. The operation was carried out successfully on November 2. On November 4, the German scientist and two cosmonauts returned to Earth. (Reuters, Nov 2/94; Phoenix Gazette, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; UP, Nov 4/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
A congressional report, based on a House Subcommittee on Space tour of the European and Russian space communities, said Europeans were tired of U.S. changes in the International Space Station project and uncertain about U.S. plans to take Russia in as a full partner. The report also expressed concern about how well Russia could support its part of the Space Station agreement. (AP, Mar 23/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported from Moscow that nine Russian women went into training for long-haul space flights by starting a four-month stint of lying with their heads below their feet. The Institute of Medicobiological Problem was in charge of the experiment, which simulated lengthy space flights aboard the Mir Space Station. One woman was to be selected to fly on Mir in November. (Reuters, Feb 18/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced that the first set of solar array modules for the International Space Station program were to be shipped from the United States to Russia at the end of May. The modules were prototypes of flight units to be delivered in September to be incorporated into advanced solar arrays for use on Russia's Space Station Mir. (NASA Release 94-79; UP, May 23/94)
The Russian embassy in Washington announced that during Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin's visit to the United States the week of June 20, an agreement on joint space exploration was scheduled to be signed. (Reuters, Jun 20/94; USA Today, Jun 21/94; AP, Jun 21/94
Russian cosmonaut Krikalev aboard Discovery exchanged greetings with Russian cosmonauts aboard Space Station Mir. The Soviet cosmonaut also got through by ham radio to students in Mars, Pennsylvania. (AP, Feb 8/94; UP, Feb 8/94; Reuters, Feb 8/94; W Times, Feb 9/94; B Sun, Feb 9/94; USA Today, Feb 9/94)
Astronaut Bill Shepherd, deputy manager of the Space Station program office in Houston, said that NASA had contingency plans for building the International Space Station without Russian assistance, if necessary. However, NASA fully expected Russian participation. (Fla Today, May 17/94; H Chron, May 17/94)
European Space Agency (ESA) scientific director Roger Bonnet told a news conference that scientists and officials from the world's main space agencies were to meet in Switzerland on May 31 to discuss an ESA proposal for a joint international moon program. The program, to cover a period up to 40 years, would begin with modest lunar orbit satellite missions and conclude by setting up human outposts on the moon. Participants in the four-day conference were to include NASA, and the Russian and Japanese space agencies. (Reuters, May 30/94)
U.S. astronauts and Russian cosmonauts met at the 10th congress of the Association of Space Explorers that opened in Moscow. Participants stressed the importance of space cooperation now that the space race was over. The conference theme was devoted to protecting Earth's ecology. (AP, Aug 9/94)
Russia's Interfax news agency reported that the previous week a fire had destroyed a control facility at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Experts stated, however, that launches would not be affected. (AP, Mar 15/94)
Itar-Tass news agency reported that a Russian spaceship manned by a Russian and a Kazakh cosmonaut had docked with Mir. (H Post, Jul 4/94)
Franklin Chang-Diaz, a Costa Rican immigrant to the United States, addressed the National Hispanic University mathematics and science convocation in San Jose to tell Hispanic students how he became the first Hispanic in space. He flew with the NASA five-person crew with Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev on Shuttle Discovery in February. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 22/94)
James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, and ranking member of the House Space Subcommittee, wrote NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin requesting information about U.S. dependence on Russia, payments to the Russian government, cost constraints on the Space Station in view of NASA's tight budget, and financial agreements with Station international partners. He expressed reservations over the decision to move the Station to a higher orbital inclination at the Russian request and expressed the fear that the agreement with Russia was negotiated from a position of U.S. vulnerability because of budgetary limits. (Defense Daily, Apr 1/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
NASA began a 110-hour countdown to the first of an unprecedented series of US missions to the Russian Space Station Mir. Launch of Discovery and its crew of six--including the first woman shuttle pilot and a famed cosmonaut--was set for February 2. The eight-day flight was to include a spacewalk by two astronauts, deployment and retrieval of an astronomy satellite, and science experiments in a commercial space laboratory. The primary goal of the mission was to be the rendezvous with Mir. (Reuters, Jan 29/95; APn, Jan 29/95; H Chron, Jan 31/95; H Post, Jan 31/95; H Chron, Jan 29/95)
Dr. Daniel S. Goldin, head of the nation�s space agency, has won support in the White House for his philosophy of smaller, better, and less expensive spacecraft. A case in point is the early planning for a Pluto mission. Four years ago, engineers came up with a concept costing as much as $4 billion. After many redesigns they developed a mission, called Pluto Express, at an estimated cost of $400 million. Instead of packing many instruments into a single craft weighing several tons, engineers designed two lightweight craft weighing as little as 300 pounds each. In the proposed mission, the craft would be launched separately, perhaps by Russian Proton rockets, on �fast� trajectories. They should be able to reach Pluto in 6 to 8 years, compared to Voyager 2�s travel time of 12 years to distant Neptune.
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (STS-74). On its second visit to Space Shuttle Mir, Atlantis added a permanent Russian-built docking port. The 15-foot, 9,000 pound docking tunnel came with two new solar arrays, one built in Russia and one provided by NASA, that would be assembled later. The link up, which occurred on November 15, required the pilot, Kenneth Cameron, to aim for a target about three inches in diameter and connect at a speed of less than one-tenth of a mile per hour. The quarter-million-pound spacecraft docked with Mir, of about the same weight, as they sped through space at 17,500 mph. They remained docked for three days. Mission STS-74 ended on November 20, paving the way toward assembly of the International Space Station beginning in November 1997.
Remotely controlled tests by Ames Research Center of a modified Russian planetary rover, Marsokhod, are planned for February 13-18 in a volcanic area that resembles the surfaces of the Moon and Mars. The test site is in Kilauea Volcano�s summit caldera and southwest rift zone on the island of Hawaii. Marsokhod, which combines the Russian rover chassis with western avionics, is a sophisticated prototype of a long-distance rover. (NASA Release 95-14)
Radioactive debris leaking from a large group of orbiting Russian nuclear reactors make up the puzzling clouds of junk orbiting Earth. This is the conclusion of a team of scientific sleuths who have been sifting clues for five years. The clouds, which seem destined to grow, are threatening to wreak havoc in the most crowded orbit in the heavens, roughly 600 miles up. In all, 33 nuclear-powered radar satellites that spied on the movements of Western warships were launched into orbits about 150 miles above the Earth. Afterward, as a safety precaution, Moscow boosted the old reactors into parking orbits roughly 600 miles up. Published designs of the Russian space reactors show they were filled with sodium-potassium coolant. Liquid droplets moving at kilometers a second are just as dangerous to a spacecraft as a solid object. While the drops pose no radioactive health danger to humans, they will force engineers to add more shielding to help protect new spacecraft. (NY Times, Feb 26/95)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
A contract for the design and development of the International Space Station was signed today by NASA and the Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division. This 400-ton Space Station will be a catalyst for global cooperation, bringing together resources from the United States, Russia, Japan, member nations of the European Space Agency, Canada, and Italy. The new contract was for $5.63 billion. Assembly will begin in November 1997 with the launch of the U.S.-purchased Russian FGB �space tug� a power and propulsion module. It will be followed in December 1997 with Node 1, that would connect laboratory and crew modules and allow the Space Shuttle to dock. (NASA Releases 95-2 & 13; Space News, May 1/95; AvWk, Apr 10/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis (mission STS-71). This first docking mission with Russian Space Station Mir occurred almost 20 years after the Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975. The joined spacecraft had a record mass of about 200 tons and held a record 10 people�6 Americans and 4 Russians (8 men and 2 women). After five days of joint operations 245 miles above Earth, during which Mir�s current crew underwent extensive medical testing in a shuttle cargo bay laboratory, the Mir-18 crew returned with Atlantis, having been replaced by two Russian cosmonauts.
Russian rocket engines will be offered by United Technologies for sale in the United States. United Technologies Corp.�s Pratt & Whitney unit agreed to market two of Energomash�s rocket engines. The hope is that the engine will power the X-34 reusable rocket. (Space News, Jun 26/95; WSJ, Jul 19/95)
The first element of the International Space Station Alpha will be the Functional Energy Block (FGB). It is actually a 21-ton �space tug� being built in Russia and set for launch in November 1977. The U.S. Boeing Defense and Space Group has teamed with Russia�s Khrunichev Space Center on this project. Boeing will procure one block for launching. (Fla Today, Aug 18/95; Reuters, Aug 15/95; Space News, Dec 18/95; AvWk, May 8/95 & Sep 4/95)
Launch of Space Shuttle Discovery (mission STS-63). On February 6 Discovery approached to within 37 feet of the Kristall module of the Russian Space Station Mir, where the two 100-ton spaceships flew in formation for a time. This rendezvous was a dress rehearsal for the first in a series of seven shuttle docking flights to Mir that would begin in June. This series, which will involve the Space Shuttle Atlantis, is intended to give the United States and Russia an unprecedented opportunity to combine flight operations, ground control, training activities, and research.
Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station carried ont geological studies of the Earth's surface and its mineral and petroleum resources. The three cosmonauts underwent physical examinations and were reported healthy. (ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station carried ont geological studies of the Earth's surface and its mineral and petroleum resources. The three cosmonauts underwent physical examinations and were reported healthy. (ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
Boris Ostroumov, Deputy General Director of the Russian space agency, said that the Baikonur Cosmodrome is a scientific and technical complex and that it will not become a Russian miliary base. The facilities will be used for scientific and national economic needs and will be administered by the Russian space agency, Ostroumov said. (FBIS-Sov, Jan 10/95)
The United States and Russia began taking practical steps toward merging their manned space programs.  NASA expected to begin shuttle flights to the Mir Space Station as a step in a joint venture to build a space station. The agreement called for seven flights through 1997 in which U. S. space shuttles would dock with Mir and allow the exchange of crews. One shuttle mission in 1995 would supply solar arrays that would combine U.S. advanced photovoltaic technology with Russia's expertise in space structures and mechanisms in order to boost Mir's electrical output by six kilowatts. (AvWk, Jan 2/95; San Diego Union-Tribune, Jan 4/95)
NASA and Russian space station officials were scheduled to begin a series of technical exchange meetings at the Johnson Space Center intended to give clear direction to joint cooperation in constructing the international space station. Twenty-five teams of Russian technicians and engineers were expected to arrive to discuss a number of issues, including docking procedures, power supply distribution; structural mechanics, depressurization; and place and use of antennae. Crew size was also to be discussed. The meetings were expected to last until February 10. NASA officials hoped to agree on as much common ground as possible so that Russia could be made an official partner in the station project before the year is out. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 19/95)
A protocol was signed for the Russian Functional Energy Block (FGB) to be launched in November 1997 as the first element of the International Space Station. After initial use as a propulsion module, the FGB will serve as a fuel storage module and a service area, which will provide living and experimentation space as well as backup guidance, navigation and control. The FGB will also serve as an integral part of the Space Station�s overall power and information subsystems. (NASA Release 95-13)
A space endurance record was set by Russian Cosmonaut Valeri Polyakov, who completed his 367th day aboard the Russian Space Station Mir. Polykov was launched into orbit January 8, 1994, and was expected to remain on Mir until March 22. (Phillips Business Information, Jan 9/95; USA Today, Jan 10/95; AP, Jan 10/95)
After several attempts in 1994, Russian cosmonauts successfully tested the Mir space station's automatic docking equipment, clearing the way for the seven to ten scheduled dockings with American space shuttles through 1997. (AP, Jan 11/95; H Chron, Jan 12/95; Dayton Daily News, Jan 12/95; C Trib, Jan 12/95)
A Russian space enthusiast, Sergei Leskov, lamented the declining state of the Russian space program in the January 19 issue of "Izvestia." Production of rockets and other hardware has declined in the last few years, Leskov said, and even the hardware in orbit was on its last legs. The Mir space station, too, had grown old and increasingly gave mission controllers nasty surprises. He noted that during the past five years, funding of the space sector had been cut five-to-ten-fold in certain areas. The contract with the United States for construction of the Alpha space station had been the salvation of the Russian space sector, but only a small range of enterprises were involved in it, and the project did not promote development of new technologies. Without an infusion of more money, Leskov wrote, the Russian space sector could find itself as much a part of history as the Pyramid of Cheops. (BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, Jan 23/95).
A Soyuz TM-21 has launched the first U.S. astronaut to the Mir station. Astronaut Norman E. Thagard, M.D., lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on March 14, and the Soyuz docked with Mir on March 16. Thagard and the other Soyuz cosmonauts will spend three months on Mir, then return aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis. (NASA Release 95-25; NY Times, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95 & Mar 17/95; W Post, Mar 14/95, Mar 15/95, Mar 17/95 & Apr 23/95; USA Today, Mar 14/95 & Jun 7/95; Fla Today, Apr 2/95 & Jun 7/95; Space News, May 1/95; Reuters, Mar 13/95; AP, Mar 13/95, Mar 3/14 & Apr 9/95; UPI, Mar 11/95; AvWk, Mar 20/95 & Apr 17/95)
NASA announced that it planned a February 2 liftoff for the Shuttle Discovery, whose astronauts were to attempt the first rendezvous of a space shuttle with the Russian Space Station Mir. The planned eight-day flight was considered a rehearsal for a series of Shuttle-Mir docking missions set to begin in late May or early June. The STS-63 Mission was to be commanded by James D. Wetherbee, with Eileen M. Collins as pilot. (NASA Release, 95-5; H Chron, Jan 19/95; AFP, Jan 19/95; APn, Jan 18//95; NASA Note to Editors, N95-4)
Anatoly Kiselyov, General Director of the Khrunichev State Space Research and Industrial Center, said that NASA's terms for financing the work to develop and build the cargo module for the Alpha Station were unrealistic and that Russian air and space firms could not agree to them. Kiselyov said the real costs of building the functional cargo module would be 40 to 50 percent higher than American estimates, or at least $220 million. The cargo module is to be the first component of a future space station and is scheduled for launch in November 1997. It will serve as the basis on which to build a future space complex. (FBIS-Sov, Jan 13/95)
Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
A delegation from the U. S. Congress traveled to Russia to meet with Russian Space Agency officials. Representatives Jerry Lewis (R-CA) and F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), members of the subcommittee in charge of NASA’s funding⎯the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies⎯led the contingent. Their goal was to keep intact the coalition of countries dedicated to making the International Space Station (ISS) a reality. Faced with Russian insistence that the planned space station connect with the Russian space station Mir, the U.S. lawmakers warned Russian officials not to pursue radical changes in the plans for the space station. Sensenbrenner noted that obstinacy on the part of the Russians might result in the coalition’s building the ISS without Russian involvement.(Ben Lannotta, “Congress to Russia: Drop Mir–Station Link Idea,” Space News, 15–21 January 1996, 3, 20.)
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russia’s work on the orbiting laboratory’s nerve center. Without Russia’s contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, “Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station,” Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
The Russian-built Tu-144LL supersonic passenger jet, which U.S. and Russian aerospace industries and NASA had modified for commercial purposes, performed well in its first test flight after refurbishment. The aircraft took off from the Zhukovsky Airfield south of Moscow. During the Tu-144LL flight, researchers studied the impact of excessive speeds on the aircraft’s internal and exterior surfaces, engine temperature, and handling. The aircraft’s body, constructed primarily from light aluminum alloy, held up well during the initial test. The Tu-144LL project supported NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, which had begun in 1990, to encourage the development of technologies supporting supersonic commercial travel. The Boeing Company had led the U.S. industry involvement in the project, with support from McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Rockwell International Corporation, Pratt & Whitney, and General Electric Company. The project’s aim was to prepare flight-research facilities to adapt to market demands of the future. Aviation experts predicted that a commercial market for advanced supersonic transport would evolve early in the 21st century.(NASA, “First Flight of U.S.-Russian Supersonic Testbed Scheduled for Nov. 29,” news release N96-78, 26 November 1996; “Russian Tu-144LL SST Joint NASA Flying Laboratory—Flight November 29, 1996,” http://nix.larc.nasa.gov/info;jsessionid=1f4kro1asktqm?id=EC96-43859-2&orgid=7 (accessed 1 August 2007).)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
Russia launched a satellite carrying two monkeys and a collection of insects, snails, and plants. The satellite Bion-11 launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Moscow. The Russian Space Agency planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the animal “crew.”(Reuters, “Russia Launches Satellite with Monkeys, Insects,” 24 December 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
Two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, returned to Earth after spending more than six months aboard the Mir space station. The New York Times echoed the feelings of many in the space community, calling the six months the Russians had spent in space, “six of the least glorious months in the history of manned space flight.” During their departure from Mir, Tsibliyev and Lazutkin continued to experience the same type of problem that had characterized their tenure on board the space station. The two cosmonauts, scheduled to disengage from Mir in the Soyuz spacecraft and then to circle the space station, cancelled the exercise because of concern that the two spacecraft would collide. After the cosmonauts landed in the desert of Kazakhstan, Tsibliyev recounted to an international press corps the difficult mission that he and Lazutkin had endured aboard Mir, remarking that the two cosmonauts should not become the scapegoats for Russia’s problems in space. The collision
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, “Spacewalk,” USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, “Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task,” Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
As the two cosmonauts worked to repair the failing Mir space station, President Boris N. Yeltsin allowed the Russian government to borrow US$100 million from foreign banks, giving the Russian Space Agency an infusion of capital. Yeltsin announced the decision after touring the construction facilities where Russia planned to build its contributions to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency’s cash-flow problems had resulted in construction delays and failure to meet deadlines, postponing the completion of the entire ISS.(Associated Press, “Government Will Borrow $100 Million for Space Agency,” 9 August 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agency’s support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled “Space Flight Has a Price.” Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Kara’s crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, “Mir⎯the Movie,” 5 November 1997.)
Professional and amateur astronomers in northern China and in the eastern reaches of Russia witnessed the near-simultaneous occurrence of a total solar eclipse and an unimpeded view of Comet Hale-Bopp. According to news reports, tens of thousands of people crowded city streets and braved freezing temperatures to observe the spectacle, many using pieces of smoked glass to protect their eyes. Mohe County in China’s northern tip had banned the use of smoke-producing stoves and other heating devices, to keep the air as clear as possible for the view. Chinese television stations broadcast the event, only the third time in recorded history when a full eclipse and the passing of a nearby comet had occurred simultaneously.(Associated Press, “Comet, Eclipse Dazzle Chinese, Russians,” 10 March 1997.)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
NASA reported that one of the two monkeys sent into space aboard the Russian Bion-11 flight in December 1996 had died upon completing postmission tests in Moscow. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that they would investigate the death. According to observers, both monkeys aboard the mission returned to Earth alert and active. The purpose of the flight was to investigate further the effects of spaceflight on the musculoskeletal system.(Associated Press, “Russian Space Monkey Multik Dies,” 12 January 1997; NASA, “Monkey Dies After Completing 14-Day Bion Mission,” news release 97-8, 9 January 1997.)
EarthWatch Inc. of Longmont, Colorado, launched into orbit Early Bird 1, the first private spy satellite. The launch, which took place in Russia, ended government domination of space spying. According to EarthWatch, Early Bird 1 had the capability to track objects on Earth as small as 10-feet (3-meters) long. The company also reported that “customers were lining up to buy images.” Customers for Early Bird 1 services included public interest groups, planning to track military movement and arms control measures, and foreign governments, without the resources to launch their own satellites. Because Early Bird 1 was an American-produced satellite, the U.S. federal government retained the right to switch it off during wartime, as well as the right to filter images sold to foreign customers. Experts predicted that the security and privacy questions surrounding the first private spy satellite would take years to sort out. However, they also surmised that Early Bird 1 was only the first in the wave of satellites that private industry would launch during the coming decade.(William J. Broad, “First Civilian Spy Satellite Soars into Space, Launched in Russia by a U.S. Company,” New York Times, 25 December 1997; Reuters, “1st Civilian Spy Satellite Launched in Russia,” 26 December 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, who had spent more than six months aboard Mir in 1996, received the Order of Friendship Medal from Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin in a ceremony at the Kremlin. The medal was the highest honor available to a non-Russian citizen.(NASA, “Astronaut Shannon Lucid Receives Russian Order of Friendship Medal,” news release 97-103, 19 May 1997.)
Mir’s crew had to abandon a German-built robotic camera called the Inspector, which Russian space officials had hoped would capture precise images of the holes in the Spektr module, made when the a cargo craft crashed into Mir in June 1997. The camera had failed immediately after its launch, diverting from its planned course. After attempting for several hours to redirect the Inspector, the crew made plans to change Mir’s orbit, to avoid a collision with the unruly robot. The malfunctioning Inspector was the latest in the long string of accidents and malfunctions that had forced the three Russian-American crew members aboard Mir to spend nearly as much time on maintenance as on scientific research.(Reuters, “Mir To Abandon Robot Space Camera After Failure,” 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Robot Fails, Floats Free Near Mir,” 18 December 1997.)
NASA announced the promotion of Gretchen W. McClain to the position of Acting Director of Space Station Requirements. As Director, McClain took over responsibility for establishing policy and standards for the ISS, as NASA continued to plan for the space station, with ongoing support from the Russian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, Japan, and Canada.(NASA, “NASA Names Acting Space Station Director,” news release, 97-15, 23 January 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
Vladimir Lobachyov, head of Russian Mission Control, explained to reporters that the collision of the robotic cargo craft Progress with the Mir space station had probably punctured one of the space station’s solar batteries, damaging Mir’s power supply. The crew of the damaged Mir turned the space station to face directly toward the Sun, so that Mir would get the jolt of energy necessary to boost its solar-power supply.(Reuters, “Mir Crew Turns to Sun To Help Damaged Space Station,” 26 June 1997.)
A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov conducted an “internal” spacewalk, entering the damaged Spektr module of Mir. Once inside the darkened module damaged by the June 1997 cargo craft collision, the men found floating space debris. Seven bags and a refrigerator door were among the items banging around inside the Spektr module. After securing the debris, the cosmonauts went to work installing new solar-panel cables to restore full power to Mir. The cosmonauts, who were wearing bulky spacesuits, performed the 6-hour spacewalk inside a cramped module. Although the men became exhausted before they could finish the repair work, the arduous exercise had boosted the station’s power supply by 30 percent. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the cosmonauts to conduct another repair operation during the following days.(David Hoffman, “A Partial Repair Gives Mir a Power Boost,” Washington Post, 21 October 1997; Associated Press, “A Spacewalk of Surprises Aboard Mir,” 21 October 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research center’s energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the country’s piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradov’s success.(Associated Press, “2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission,” 6 August 1997.)
The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the craft’s docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progress’s docking tempered Russia’s celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, “Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn,” 5 March 1997; Reuters, “Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking,” 4 March 1996; Reuters, “Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag” 6 March 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
Mir cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov engaged in a 6-hour spacewalk, successfully dismantling a damaged solar panel so that Mir’s crew could install a replacement panel. The Russian Space Agency nearly called off the spacewalk when Solovyev discovered a problem with the radio-monitoring system on his spacesuit, just as the men prepared to leave the station. Although the crew’s attempts to repair the monitoring system were unsuccessful, Russian Mission Control eventually decided to proceed with the spacewalk. The cosmonauts worked effectively, communicating with Russian space officials only periodically. This was Solovyev’s fourth spacewalk during his tenure on Mir, confirming his status as the world’s most experienced spacewalker, with more than a dozen spacewalks to his credit. While the cosmonauts worked outside Mir, U.S. astronaut David A. Wolf monitored their progress from inside.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 November 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
Mir’s main computer failed during a cargo craft docking, setting the Russian space station adrift. The malfunction postponed a planned spacewalk to begin repairs to Mir, forcing the crew to turn its attention to reorienting the space station toward the Sun. The crew shut down most of Mir’s operating systems to conserve power.(Shannon Tangonan, “Computer Shutdown Sends Mir Adrift,” USA Today, 19 August 1997; Michael Specter, “Computer Failure on the Mir Sends It Out of Control,” New York Times, 19 August 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
A Russian cargo spacecraft docked without incident at the Mir space station, using the craft’s automatic pilot to complete the maneuver. It was the first successful docking after two previous failed attempts, one of which had resulted in the crash that seriously damaged Mir. To address the earlier problem, the Russian Space Agency had reconfigured the mathematical formula guiding the procedure. The Progress M-36 cargo craft carried a backup computer for the space station. Mir’s crew planned to unload the more than 6,000 pounds (2,700 kilograms) of cargo in the days following the delightfully uneventful docking.(Washington Post, “Cargo Ship Docks with Space Station,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Successful Docking Gives Mir a Life in Morale,” 8 October 1997; Reuters, “Mir Crew To Unload Cargo After Text-Book Docking,” 8 October 1997.)
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russia’s many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, “Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails,” Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, “Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch,” 20 May 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheed’s capital resources with Intersputnik’s rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europe⎯burgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, “Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture,” Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, “Lockheed Planning Russia Venture,” 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, “Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
A relief crew of two Russian cosmonauts, Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov, arrived at Mir to begin repair work on the damaged space station. On 25 June 1997, Mir had suffered its worst accident, when a robotic supply craft attempting to dock pierced the exterior of one of its research modules. The arriving crew, carrying tools and equipment, also had difficulty docking. As Soyuz approached Mir, its autonomic docking system failed, forcing Solovyev to override the system and pull Soyuz back. Solovyev then successfully docked the relief vehicle using manual controls. The crew planned to repair Mir’s failing oxygen-generating system, before reconnecting the damaged research module to the rest of the station. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency stressed that Mir had sufficient oxygen reserves in the event that the oxygen generator failed altogether. After repairing the oxygen system and the research module, the new crew planned to make as many as six spacewalks to repair the external damage caused by the June collision. Cosmonaut Solovyev brought significant experience to the mission; he had resided on Mir during four earlier missions, spending a total of 456 days in space. NASA planned for British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to remain on Mir, although the Russian Space Agency was replacing its crew aboard the space station.(Baltimore Sun (MD), “Relief Team Reaches Crippled Mir Space Station,” 8 August 1997; Reuters, “Two Cosmonauts Blast Off on Mission To Repair Mir,” 6 August 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Rocket To Repair Station,” 6 August 1997; Reuters, “New Crew Faces Hydra of Woes on Mir Space Station,” 5 August 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
A Russian Space Agency official insisted that there had been no problem with Andrew S. W. Thomas’s spacesuit, describing the U.S. astronaut as bad tempered and expressing concern about the implications of Thomas’s attitude for the remainder of the mission. Deputy Flight Commander Viktor Blagov indicated that, since major work would take place on Mir, “any fuss about the space suit is out of place.” Blagov explained that Thomas would keep both David Wolf’s spacesuit and his own.(Reuters, “Balky Suit.”)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.9−6.8 tonnes (6.5−7.5 tons, 13,000−15,000 pounds, or 5,900−6,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESA’s contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, “Third Try’s the Charm for European Rocket,” Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success,” 21 October 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
Following a meeting of the Defence Council, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree giving overall control of Russia’s space industry to the civilian Russian Space Agency. Yeltsin’s intention was “to extract maximum economic benefit from one of the few manufacturing industries in which Russia is a world leader.” With this decree, Yeltsin required the government to create a plan for a restructured space industry, giving priority to national security, to economic and scientific missions, and to strengthening Russia’s position in the world marketplace.(Reuters, “Russia Puts Civilian Agency in Charge of Space,” 20 January 1998.)
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
A Soyuz TM-28 spacecraft blasted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying the penultimate crew of the Russian space station Mir. The three-member crew was composed of former presidential defense adviser Yuri M. Baturin, Flight Commander Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Engineer Gennady I. Padalka.564 Baturin was the first Russian bureaucrat to travel into space, and his inclusion in the mission attracted “unusually heavy Russian media coverage.” The former Kremlin adviser had trained alongside professional cosmonauts, passing all examinations. Earlier in the year, President Boris N. Yeltsin had fired space physicist Baturin without an explanation, and Baturin had focused since then on training for the mission to Mir.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia Blasts First Bureaucrat into Space,” 13 August 1998; Associated Press, “Mir Mission Under Way Despite Russian Economic Troubles,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 August 1998.)
Cosmonauts working aboard Mir conducted the first of two tests, using green fluorescent gas made from combining nitrogen, acetone, and biacetyl gases, to search for leaks in the Spektr laboratory module damaged in a collision in June 1997. However, they were unable to pinpoint the sources of any seepage. Because Mir was nearing its decommission stage, Russia planned no repairs, in the event that the cosmonauts were able to locate the leaks precisely. Instead, the tests were intended as practice for finding leaks on the future ISS.
NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
NASA and Russian Space Agency officials announced that Russia had agreed to sell research time aboard the International Space Station (ISS) for US$60 million, with payment dependent on the Russian agency’s completion of critical milestones. The ISS collaborators, including representatives of the 16 countries participating in the ISS program, had reached the agreement during a week of meetings in Moscow. Russia had missed three target dates because of insufficient funds. The deal, part of NASA’s efforts to bail out its partner and to “prevent costly new delays” in the construction and launch of the ISS, did not release Russia from its obligations to build the service module. As the Moscow meeting concluded, NASA officials also announced that the launches of the first ISS components, the Zarya and Unity modules, remained on schedule, and that the international partners had agreed to reconvene to refine the ISS assembly sequence, at the launch of the Unity module from Kennedy Space Center (KSC).(NASA, “Statement Following Conclusion of Moscow Meetings,” news release 98-176, 2 October 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Agency Makes Sale,” 5 October 1998; William J. Broad, “To Buy Some Time, Russia To Sell U.S. Some Time in Space,” New York Times, 5 October 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Russian cosmonauts aboard Mir located a lost wrench among 12 years’ worth of accumulated spare parts. They used the wrench to loosen the bolt that had broken three wrenches earlier in the week, preventing the two cosmonauts from undertaking a planned spacewalk.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Solve Mystery of Missing Wrench,” 5 March 1998.)
The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
NASA announced that two of its research pilots had been the first Americans to fly a modified Russian Tu-144 supersonic jetliner, participating in three evaluation flights over a two-week period during mid-to-late September, at Zhukovsky Air Development Center near Moscow. Pilots Robert Rivers of Langley Research Center and C. Gordon Fullerton of Dryden Flight Research Center had flown the jetliner as part of a jointly funded activity under the auspices of NASA’s High-Speed Research Program and the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group. The purpose of the test flights was to gain operational experience and experimental flight data to develop an “environmentally friendly, second-generation, supersonic transport” in the United States.(NASA, “NASA Pilots Fly Russian Tu-144LL Flying Laboratory,” news release 98-186, 13 October 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
An international group of computer hackers, calling itself Masters of Downloading or MOD, announced that it had stolen key software programs from NASA. The same group had previously broken into the Pentagon’s Defense Information Systems Network, claiming to have stolen enough information to “‘take control’ of military satellites and other systems.” Although U.S. Department of Defense officials said that MOD had downloaded an application for management and record keeping, not for “anything that could perform a control function,” the group claimed that its cyber attack on NASA had “stripped the U.S. space agency of its chief defense against computer intrusion.” MOD had sent the stolen samples of NASA software to a computer expert who maintained a Web site devoted to information-security issues. The group, which included at least two Russian members, asserted that it had broken into NASA’s system through JPL to obtain the software samples and threatened to sell the information to international terrorist groups or foreign governments.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA Becomes Latest Victim of Masters of Downloading,” 23 April 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
Russian space officials cancelled a spacewalk after cosmonauts broke three wrenches on the last of 10 locks, while trying to open a hatch. The cosmonauts had intended to repair a damaged solar panel. NASA rescheduled the spacewalk for April. The incident further increased concerns about the safety of Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 March 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
Mir Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev celebrated his 50th birthday⎯in space, enjoying a “semi- officially” sanctioned one-gulp-per-person dose of cognac and a birthday dinner chosen from the space station’s supplies. Solovyev had logged an impressive 80 hours of spacewalking during 17 walks. As of this Mir mission, Solovyev’s fifth, the Russian cosmonaut had spent a cumulative total of approximately 20 months on the space station.(Associated Press, “Mir-50-Year-Old Cosmonaut,” 16 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
A Zenit rocket, launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, failed when a computer error caused a premature engine shutdown during the second-stage burn. The rocket fell, crashing in Siberia. The rocket’s failure destroyed 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row,” 13 July 1999; Globalstar Chronology, 13 July 1999, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/glolstar.htm (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
Just hours before Endeavour touched down in Florida, a new crew from Russia docked at Mir to begin a three-week transition from Mir 24 to Mir 25. Mir 25 Commander Talgat A. Musabayev replaced Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Flight Engineer Nikolai M. Budarin replaced Pavel V. Vinogradov, and Researcher Léopold Eyharts, a 40-year old French air force pilot on his first spaceflight, joined the crew.(NASA, “STS-89”; Washington Post, “2 Russians, Frenchman Blast Off for Mir,” 30 January 1998.)
Endeavour separated from Mir to head home at 11:57 a.m. (EST), returning David A. Wolf to Earth and leaving Andrew S. W. Thomas at the Mir station for a four-and-one-half-month stay. Wolf was returning to Earth aboard Endeavour after completing a 119-day stay on Mir. The new crew of Mir, two cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and a French astronaut Léopold Eyharts, lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on Soyuz TM-27, 23 minutes before Endeavour undocked from Mir.(New York Times, “Shuttle Departs, Leaving Last American on Mir,” 30 January 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Endeavour Separates from Mir,” USA Today, 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.”)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency nominated veteran cosmonaut Valery V. Ryumin to fly as a mission specialist aboard Discovery during Mission STS-91 in May. In his last spaceflight in 1980, Ryumin was a member of the Soyuz 35 Mission. During that mission, he had spent 185 days in space from April through October. Ryumin had spent a total of 362 days in space in the course of his three missions.(NASA, “Veteran Cosmonaut Nominated To Fly on Final Shuttle/Mir Mission,” news release, 21 January 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
Russian Mission Control monitored Mir’s airlock pressure following the repair work of 9 January. On Friday, 8 January, when the crew entered the airlock without spacesuits to retrieve some equipment, the repair was holding, but the pressure had fallen slightly. Russian ground control near Moscow, which was analyzing the data, planned to decide on Monday whether Mir’s Kvant-2 module was safe.(Reuters, “Mir’s Airlock Pressure Down a Bit—Russian Control,” 11 January 1998.)
The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
In a spacewalk lasting nearly 7 hours, Mir cosmonauts failed to stabilize the solar panel damaged in a collision in 1997. Russian space officials had postponed this spacewalk from 3 March, when the crew had been unable to unlock the hatch, breaking three wrenches in their attempts. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, spent most of the spacewalk setting up a handrail, left outside the space station by the previous crew. After struggling to unfold and assemble the handrail, the pair only had enough time to install one of two footrests. The cosmonauts returned to Mir after the elapse of 6 hours and 40 minutes; their oxygen tanks only held approximately 7 hours of air. Russian Mission Control had intentionally turned off the audio system during most of the spacewalk. Officials said that Mission Control would no longer allow journalists to listen to radio traffic between Mission Control and spacewalkers, because reporters had become overly critical. Russian officials accused reporters of exaggerating problems on the space station, despite the fact that Mir had been operating relatively trouble free for several months before this spacewalk.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Undertakes Six-Hour Spacewalk To Repair Solar Panel,” 1 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 2 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Runs Out of Time, Fails To Stabilize Solar Panel,”1 April 1998.)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
The two Russian crew members of the Mir space station completed a record-breaking spacewalk. Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov dismantled and retrieved in record time the Kristall module’s optical-monitoring equipment made by the United States. The scheduled 6-hour spacewalk took only 3 hours and 8 minutes. However, it was unclear whether the cosmonauts had been able to repair a leaky hatch. The problem was not with the rubber sealing, as Russian ground control had suspected, but rather with a malfunctioning lock that was preventing the hatch from sealing hermetically. The cosmonauts activated 10 reserve locks and pumped air into the airlock, planning to monitor the hatch for leaks over the next 24 hours. The spacewalk was Commander Solovyev’s 16th in five flights over 10 years. He had spent more than 70 hours in free space, more than any other person had accrued.(Washington Post, “Mir Commander Walks into Spaceflight History,” 10 January 1998; Washington Times, “Cosmonauts Possibly Fix Leaky Hatch, Do Spacewalk in Record-Short Time,” 10 January 1998.)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, “Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan,” 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches,” 6 July 1999.)
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, “Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan,” 18 July 1999. 210)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
Celebrating the anniversary of the flight of Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin presented state medals to several dozen cosmonauts and space officials during a Cosmonaut’s Day ceremony. Yeltsin briefly praised Mir’s achievements in his remarks at the Kremlin, but when Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev presented him with a model of the new ISS, Yeltsin asked Koptev whether Mir would stay aloft. Koptev responded in the affirmative, but explained during a press conference afterward that private investors had not yet produced funds for Mir’s continued operation. Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, a lawmaker and former cosmonaut, called on Russians to contribute money to a charity formed to keep Mir in orbit.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 12 April 1999.)
NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, “Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes,” 4 October 1999.)
Kazakhstan partially lifted its ban on launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, permitting a Russian Progress cargo spacecraft to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Kazakhstan had agreed to permit the Progress launch after receiving Russia’s promise to pay a US$115 million fee for the use of the launch facility. Russia had agreed to pay US$50 million in cash by November 1999 and US$65 million in goods by 2000. Kazakhstan’s launch ban on Proton-K rockets remained in effect.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan Lifts Space Ban, Russian Launch Cleared,” 14 July 1999; Associated Press, “Russia- Kazakhstan-Space,” 14 July 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency signed a cooperative agreement with Russian arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, “intended to raise Russia’s earnings on the world market and help it develop space hardware.” Russia had earned only US$800 million, compared to the United States’ US$50 billion, in commercial satellite launches during 1998. Rosvooruzheniye hoped the deal would help Russia break into the international space markets.(CNN.com, “Russia’s Space Agency, Arms Exporter Sign Cooperation Deal,” 25 February 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz booster launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome 450 miles (724 kilometers) north of Moscow, carrying German, French, and Swedish research devices. In selecting the launch location, Russia was attempting to increase its use of the Plesetsk launch facility because of its problems continuing to launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia had rented the Baikonur launch facility from Kazakhstan.(Reuters, “Russian Rocket Blasts Off from Plesetsk Cosmodrome,” 9 September 1999. 220)
GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
After having agreed in June 1998 to abandon the space station within a year, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov issued a decree to keep Mir in space for three more years, using private funds, so that Russia could dedicate its insufficient space budget to its ISS commitments. The decree reportedly mentioned that Russian and foreign contractors and investors would develop a plan allowing Mir to remain in orbit without using ISS-allocated funds.(Peter N. Spotts, “Saving Mir: At What Cost to New Space Station? Russians Decree That They Will Keep Aging Orbital Outpost Raises Questions in U.S. About Their Ability To Fund International Project,” Christian Science Monitor, 25 January 1999.)
The Russian Space Agency’s “space mirror” failed to unfurl properly at the Mir space station, and Russia officially terminated the experiment. Crew attached the mirror to a cargo spacecraft filled with trash, sending it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. Engineers had intended the 83-foot (25-meter) mirror to “work like an artificial [M]oon,” acting as a prototype for larger mirrors that “could illuminate [S]un-starved northern cities through the long Arctic nights and spotlight disaster areas.” The experiment’s failure was a “big disappointment” for the Russian Space Agency, which had hoped to display “its ability to conduct pioneering, ambitious projects despite a lack of funds.”(Vladimir Isachenkov for the Associated Press, “Russia-Space Mirror,” 5 February 1999.)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, “Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean,” 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, “Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESA’s Working Methods,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russia’s commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstan’s foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and French cosmonaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré replaced scientific equipment on Mir’s exterior during a planned 5-hour spacewalk that went overtime. The pair overcame “numerous technical blips,” to complete the French portion of the tasks and most of the Russian portion. Malfunctions in their spacesuits’ ventilation systems delayed both men in leaving the station. Other problems included equipment failure during a simulated repair to an imaginary hole on Mir’s superstructure; an unsuccessful attempt to retrieve data from a pollution study in process around the station; and the failure to install a new Russian-sponsored experiment to measure cosmic rays. Cosmonauts succeeded in other tasks during the spacewalk, including the recuperation of a French-sponsored test and the installation on the station’s hull of comet technology designed to gather space dust for analysis. Haigneré was on his second mission to Mir, but this was his first spacewalk.(Agence France-Presse, “Cosmonauts Struggle Through Grueling Space Walk Program,” 19 April 1999.)
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haigneré of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, “U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961⎯September 30, 2000,” in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, “Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban,” 1 September 1999.)
Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russia’s Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASA’s Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS “years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia.” Colladay said that Trafton’s background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him “particularly well suited to lead ILS.”(Lockheed Martin, “Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services,” news release, 26 March 1999,” http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
Interfax news agency reported that Russia had agreed to pay Kazakhstan US$400,000 in damages following the 27 October crash of a Proton rocket during its launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. After reaching an agreement on compensation, Kazakhstan had lifted its launch ban for all Russian launches except the Proton rocket.(Associated Press, “Russia-Kazakstan-Rockets,” 19 November 1999.)
The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
Two Russian cosmonauts carried out a successful 51⁄2-hour spacewalk outside Mir, installing equipment and opening the antenna that they had failed to unfold properly in a previous spacewalk. Russian space officials said that the spacewalk was most likely the last to occur at Mir. This was the seventh spacewalk for Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and the eighth spacewalk for Flight Engineer Sergei V. Avdeyev, who had spent a record-making, cumulative total of 717 days in space.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Make Final Spacewalk,” 28 July 1999.)
The Boeing Company named former cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov as the company’s director for Space and Communications, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, located in Boeing’s Moscow office. With the appointment, Titov became responsible for initiating new business opportunities, working closely with Boeing’s ISS program members and with Russian and Ukrainian partners on the Sea Launch program. A cosmonaut since 1976, Titov had commanded several Soyuz missions, served as a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle missions, and lived aboard Russia’s Mir space station, logging 387 days in space, including nearly 19 hours of extravehicular activity.(The Boeing Company, “Director Space & Communications for Russia and CIS Named,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990615r.html (accessed 8 February 2008).)
Kazakhstan’s Finance Minister, Uraz Dzhandosov, announced that Russia had paid US$12.5 million as a first installment of its debt to Kazakhstan, fulfilling a condition of the agreement between the two countries. Kazakhstan had demanded the payment as part of the terms of lifting the launch ban it had imposed on Russia when a Russian Proton rocket exploded after liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.(Russia Today, “Russia Pays First Part of Baikonur Debt, 12 August 1999. 214)
Kazakhstan imposed a new ban on Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome following the previous day’s crash of a Proton booster rocket, which had malfunctioned shortly after launch. Without naming a figure, Kazakhstan announced that it would require Russia to pay compensation in an amount significantly higher than the fee that Kazakhstan had charged Russia after the 5 July Proton crash. In addition, the Kazakhstan government formed a special commission headed by Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Pavlov to investigate the accident.
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASA’s predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitation⎯partial vacuums in flowing liquids⎯on cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeri’s work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(“Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
Responding to a 25 January 2000 article in the New York Times, alleging that grants in the mid- 1990s had benefited the Russian civilian agency Biopreparat, NASA’s Office of Inspector General published a report stating that NASA had not followed the U.S. Department of State’s guidelines for administering biotechnology grants to Russia, thereby inadvertently funding germ- warfare laboratories. The Russian government owned 51 percent of Biopreparat, the organization that had conducted most of the Soviet Union’s biological warfare research since the 1970s. At the time of the article’s publication, Biopreparat was continuing to research pathogens that had been included in the Soviet biological warfare program. The Inspector General found that “almost three-fourths of US$1.68 million in NASA grants intended for space biotechnology work found its way to ‘institutions that had been affiliated with Russia’s biological warfare program’.” Therefore, the Inspector General asserted that NASA had not followed the Department of State’s guidelines requiring NASA to “regularly visit and participate in the research it was funding at Russian institutes that had been part of the Soviet biological warfare program.” NASA agreed with the Inspector General’s sole recommendation: to practice “invasive collaboration” in the future, when funding biotechnology research in countries with known or suspected biological weapons programs.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “NASA Oversight of Russian Biotechnology Research 1994–1997” (NASA report no. G-00-07, Washington, DC, 13 October 2000), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-00- 007.pdf (accessed 8 April 2008); Frank Morring Jr., “NASA Seen Funding Russian Germ-Warfare Labs Through Lax Oversight,” Aerospace Daily, 18 October 2000.)
The Netherlands-based MirCorp, the company originally established to keep the Mir space station in orbit for commercial purposes, announced that, following a board meeting during the previous week, the company had decided to “retool the company to work with other Russian space equipment.” The company planned to develop a new orbiter capable of docking with the ISS, to market existing space technologies, such as cargo spacecraft, and to explore commercial projects involving access to a future Russian module on the ISS.
Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
The first International Space Station (ISS) crew, Expedition I, arrived at the new station where they planned to live for the next four and one-half months. The crew’s Soyuz craft automatically docked at a port on the Zvezda habitation module. The Russian-built, NASA-financed Zarya propulsion-and-storage module, attached to the other end of Zvezda, was loaded with supplies and equipment delivered by recent Shuttle missions. Unless an emergency or breakdown occurred, the multi-hatch Unity module would remain off limits. A Shuttle crew had installed a structural truss on the Unity module in October, and during a mission scheduled for early December, another crew would attach a set of solar arrays to the truss. Without the solar arrays, the station did not have enough power to heat the module properly or to control the dew point, to prevent dangerous condensation. The ISS crew and their U.S. and Russian managers temporarily named the station Alpha, at least for the duration of the Expedition I mission.(William Harwood, “Crew of ‘Alpha’ Males Moves into Space Station: Docking Complete, NASA Chief Allows Name’s Use for Now,” Washington Post, 3 November 2000.)
Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earth’s rotation and the faster movement of Earth’s surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million,” 13 March 2000.)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, “Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission,” news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
The Russian government earmarked funds to send two Progress cargo spacecraft to the Mir space station, announcing that it would wait until February 2001 to make a final decision about the station’s fate. Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov had explained that the decision the Russian government had been wavering about for more than a year rested on the availability of private funds to keep the station in orbit. Executives from MirCorp had promised the Russian government that the company would raise between US$100 million and US$170 million by next year, but Russian space officials were skeptical of MirCorp’s ability to meet this commitment. MirCorp had yet to pay the US$10 million it owed Russia for the 17 October launch of a Progress cargo spacecraft delivering fuel to Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Earmarks Funds for Mir,” 26 October 2000.)
The Russian government decided that it could no longer afford to maintain the Mir space station and would destroy it in February 2001 during a controlled descent. The Russian government had previously decided to abandon Mir, but had extended the space station’s time in orbit after the private MirCorp, based in the Netherlands, had leased time on the station, financing its operation. According to the Russian government, a primary factor in its decision to end Mir’s orbit had been increasing skepticism over MirCorp’s continued ability to finance Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia To Dump Mir Space Station,” 16 November 2000.)
A Russian Progress cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying fuel to the uninhabited ISS for use in adjusting the station’s orbit. The craft also carried scientific instruments, linens, and personal-hygiene supplies in preparation for the October arrival of the station’s first permanent crew.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Ship with Supplies for Space Station Launches,” 7 August 2000.)
Russian space officials announced a decision to alter plans for the Enterprise module of the ISS, which the company RSC Energia was building in conjunction with the U.S. company SPACEHAB. In the original plans, the module had been noncommercial, providing docking and cargo space, but in an effort to increase revenue, RSC Energia had revised the plans to allow the module to hold multimedia equipment for various business projects.(Associated Press, “Russia Seeks Space Station Revenue,” 23 August 2000.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United States–built GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, “Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit,” Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
The first of two Cluster spacecraft launches took place from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. NASA and the European Space Agency had formed a partnership to develop and build the exploration craft, designed to travel around the Earth in a tetrahedral formation, collecting data on solar wind. Space officials planned to launch two additional Cluster craft one month after the first two had entered their orbiting pattern. With four satellites launched and flying in formation, scientists expected to harvest data about the “turbulent battle” raging between Earth’s magnetic field and the solar winds blowing at an estimated rate of 1–2 million miles (1.6–3.2 million kilometers) per hour. Researchers also hoped the new information would help scientists understand other interactions between the Earth and the Sun. Each of the four Cluster spacecraft carried instruments to measure the patterns of electrons and the presence of protons and helium, as well as instruments to monitor the characteristics of electronic fields, solar wind, and plasma waves.(NASA, “New Cluster Mission To Provide Unprecedented Detail about Space Weather,” news release 00-105, 13 July 2000.)
Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
Russia successfully launched a Soyuz test rocket equipped with a Fregat accelerator unit able to carry payloads into high orbit, but lost the Fregat unit upon its reentry to Earth. The rocket took off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying only a dummy payload into space, in a test that was part of Russia’s ongoing research into developing vehicles and technologies that would eventually serve the orbiting ISS.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russia Tests, Then Loses Rocket with Union for Higher Orbit,” 9 February 2000. 878 Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Thousands Walk Out on Boeing in Seattle,” 10 February 2000.)
Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
Ground controllers in Russia restored communication with Mir, after they had been unable to contact the uninhabited space station for 24 hours. Spokesperson for Russian Mission Control Valery Lyndin allayed fears that Mir would crash to Earth shortly, announcing that Russia had received no indication that the space station was losing pressure. Mission Control Chief Vladimir A. Solovyov explained that the station’s batteries had lost power and no longer had sufficient energy to communicate with ground controllers. Once ground controllers had identified the problem, they had switched off specific systems to direct more energy to ground communications. Although Mir’s solar panels were recharging the batteries, the cause of the power shortage remained unclear.(Washington Times, “Contact with Mir Restored After Loss of Battery Power: Mission Control Allays Fears of Crash,” 27 December 2000.)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russia’s commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rocket’s second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agency’s commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezda’s launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: “The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do.” Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: “This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not.” The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, “Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station,” 13 July 2000; USA Today, “Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit,” 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), “Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set,” 11 July 2000; Reuters, “Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln,” 12 July 2000; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS,” 12 July 2000.)
The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
The government of the People’s Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about China’s top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as “an integral part of the state’s comprehensive development strategy” and stated, “exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind.” The paper provided details of China’s satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined China’s efforts toward international cooperation, notably China’s signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, “China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program,” Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report stating that the Russian components for the International Space Station (ISS) did not meet NASA’s standard safety requirements. GAO’s findings were the latest in a long series of controversies, particularly between the United States and Russia, in the international effort to build the space station. Most significant of its safety deficits, the Russian crew module did not have adequate shielding to protect the ISS crew from orbiting space debris. At the time of the report, the Russians were already more than two years behind in delivering the crew module.(Patty Reinhert, “Space Station Safety at Center of Debate,” Houston Chronicle, 17 March 2000; Associated Press, “General Accounting Office Slams Russian Modules,” 17 March 2000.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the craft’s orbit as “decayed,” and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as “effectively lost.” EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, “Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure,” Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
Russian space experts agreed that the Mir space station was in fine condition to continue orbiting Earth, and the Russian government extended the station’s time in space indefinitely, after the Netherlands-based MirCorp agreed to fund a new mission. Russia’s council of space engineers, known as the Council of Chief Designers, authorized plans to launch a Progress cargo spacecraft, in the middle of October, to deliver fuel and equipment to Mir.(MirCorp, “MirCorp Statement on the Mir Space Station’s Future,” news release, 3 October 2000; Associated Press, “Russian Space Experts Determine Mir Fit To Continue Orbital Flight,” 3 October 2000.)
A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan,” 5 September 2000.)
Emergency rescue personnel from Canada, Russia, and the United States participated in training exercises near St. Petersburg in Russia, where they practiced maneuvers for rescuing astronauts returning to Earth from the ISS. The rescuers practiced searching in water and on land for a module carrying three astronauts, as well as practicing first-aid techniques.(Associated Press, “Russian, U.S. Rescuers Practice Space Rescue,” 16 August 2000.)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere, the mission’s main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as “an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity,” thereby improving scientists’ forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.’s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, “Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft,” news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, “Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months,” 16 August 2000.)
NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Russia launched a Progress supply spacecraft to deliver fuel to the uninhabited Mir space station, which was slipping from orbit. Increased solar flare activity had expanded the atmosphere, creating friction between Mir and the thin gases above Earth and causing the station to descend steadily, ever since its last crew had returned to Earth in June after a 73-day mission. The fuel would enable the station to achieve a higher orbit, preventing it from falling into thicker layers of the atmosphere and burning up. Some Russian politicians had called for disposal of the station, and U.S. space officials had urged the Russian government to dedicate its “scarce space funds” to the ISS. However, MirCorp, a private company based in the Netherlands, had leased time on Mir and agreed to fund the Progress launch, thereby saving the station.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches Progress Cargo Space Ship,” 17 October 2000.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russia’s largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russia’s space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, “New Chief for Russia Space Company,” 7 February 2001.)
Crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour and the ISS held a brief ceremony to mark the three-month anniversary of the 11 September terrorist attacks. The tribute included playing both the Russian and U.S. national anthems in the Space Shuttle and at ISS Mission Control Centers at NASA’s JSC in Houston. Moreover, Endeavour carried U.S. flags and Marine Corps flags that had flown at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon, and the Pennsylvania State Capitol; shields and patches worn by New York City police officers; a New York Fire Department flag; and a poster with pictures of the firefighters who had died in the attacks. Also aboard the Shuttle were 6,000 American flags, which Endeavour would return to Earth, and NASA would distribute to the victims of the 11 September terrorist attacks and their families.(NASA, “Shuttle, Station Crewmembers To Honor September 11 Victims,” news release N01-74, 10 December 2001.)
Spain’s Prince of Asturias Foundation granted the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation to the ISS partnership, in recognition of the cooperation among the partnering space agencies that had created the orbiting space station. The Prince of Asturias Felipe de Borbón was the heir to the throne of Spain. The foundation granted the Award for International Cooperation to recognize the cultural, humanitarian, scientific, social, and technical efforts of individuals, groups, and institutions. The prince presented the award to officials representing the space agencies participating in the ISS, namely the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. Earlier in the day, the prince had called the astronauts at the ISS to congratulate them on their efforts.(NASA, “International Space Station Receives 2001 Prince of Asturias Award,” news release 01-206, 26 October 2001; Fundación Príncipe de Asturias, “The Aims of the Foundation,” http://www.fundacionprincipedeasturias.org/ing/00/objetivos.html (accessed 28 November 2008).)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed to allow the transport of space tourists to the ISS. Although the two agencies did not sign a formal agreement on the matter, media reported that they had agreed to the procedures and standards that spaceflight participantsindividuals who are not professional astronauts or cosmonautsmust satisfy when they visit the space station. NASA and the Russian Space Agency agreed that such visitors must demonstrate foreign language ability, undergo specified physical training, and pass a personal suitability test. The issue of spaceflight participants had become a source of contention between NASA and the Russian Space Agency after American businessman Dennis A. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency to transport him to the ISS in April 2001.(Peter Baker, “U.S., Russia Agree To Allow ‘Space Tourists’,” Washington Post, 10 August 2001; ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers” (statement of criteria, Paris, November 2001), http://esamultimedia.esa.int/docs/isscrewcriteria.pdf (accessed 5 November 2008).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-98 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California after three days of bad weather had prevented its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew received a congratulatory call from President George W. Bush, praising their successful 13- day mission. By the time that Atlantis and its crew departed the ISS, the Shuttle had significantly boosted the space station’s orbit, leaving the ISS orbiting at about 237 miles (381 kilometers) above Earth. While attached to the space station, Atlantis had used a series of engine bursts to push the ISS approximately 16 miles (26 kilometers) higher than its previous position. Shuttle crew had also unloaded food and supplies, including an enormous Russian carbon-dioxide removal unit, for the use of the three-person ISS crew during their visit.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back on Earth After Dismal Three Days,” 21 February 2001; Associated Press, “Atlantis Leaves Space Station in a Higher Orbit,” 16 February 2001.)
In preparation for the final descent of the Mir space station, the Russian Space Agency negotiated a US$200 million insurance policy covering any damage that might occur if pieces of the craft landed in populated areas. Russian officials planned to fire the engines of the cargo ship attached to the space station, thereby pulling Mir from orbit and sending the space station hurtling into Earth’s atmosphere. Scientists predicted that intense heat would destroy most of the station during reentry, but that some fragments would hit Earth. Although space agencies had successfully deorbited many rockets and satellites to final resting places in the ocean, Russia faced increasing international consternation regarding the damage Mir’s reentry might cause. Japan was at higher risk from fragments of Mir than other countries, because the space station would pass over Japan in its final, low orbit.
The People’s Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the country’s long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about China’s future goals. People’s Daily, however, called the launch “an important step in realizing manned spaceflight.” President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, “I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory.” Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100 landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, when wind and rain caused the diversion of the Shuttle and its seven-person crew from its planned landing at NASA’s KSC in Florida. The completed mission had been unique, with NASA deliberately paring down its research goals because of the anticipated arrival during Endeavour’s stay at the ISS of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft carrying space tourist Dennis A. Tito. Shuttle Commander Kent V. Rominger greeted the press upon landing, commenting on the crew’s installation of the ISS’s robotic arm and the computer problems that had plagued the space station during the visit. Rominger explained that he and the other astronauts had worked with 500 computer experts on the ground to achieve partial restoration of the ISS’s hard drives and software applications.(Warren E. Leary, “As Shuttle Returns to Earth, Tourist Adjusts to Space Station,” New York Times, 2 May 2001; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Diverted to California Due to Bad Weather,” 1 May 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lands in Clear California/Cloud Hangs Over Russia Relations,” Houston Chronicle, 2 May 2001.)
Researchers published findings from an unprecedented analysis of NASA-produced satellite data of carbon absorption by northern hemisphere forests. The researchers had used the satellite data to study the extent to which forests had absorbed carbon released into Earth’s atmosphere in the form of carbon dioxide from fossil-fuel combustion. Many scientists consider atmospheric accumulation of carbon dioxide to be a primary cause of global climate change, because forests act as “sinks,” absorbing carbon dioxide, thereby reducing its atmospheric accumulation. The researchers had found that forests in Europe, Russia, and the United States annually absorbed almost 700 million tonnes (771 million tons or 1.5 trillion pounds) of carbon from 1981 to 1999. They had also found geographic variations in carbon absorption, with Russian forests accounting for nearly 40 percent of the carbon sink and Canadian forests losing carbon. The findings were significant, because they indicated which forests had lost carbon and which had stored it. The findings also validated relationships between satellite measurements and ground-based measurements of carbon absorption, demonstrating the crucial importance of satellites in monitoring forests. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, dedicated to understanding human- induced and natural changes in Earth’s environment, had funded the research.
Russian cosmonauts training at NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, staged a one-day walkout to protest NASA’s rejection of millionaire Dennis A. Tito as a member of the Russian crew that would travel aboard the Soyuz to the ISS on 30 April. Space enthusiast Dennis Tito had paid the cash-strapped Russian Space Agency a reported US$20 million to make the trip. Russia’s agreement with the untrained Tito had sparked debate over the proper use of the ISS and over so-called space tourism. Talgat A. Musabayev, the Kazakh cosmonaut who was to command Tito’s crew, removed his men from the training program in Houston after learning that NASA would not allow Tito to participate in the exercises. NASA argued that allowing a person who had not trained as an astronaut to travel to space would pose safety risks, especially since the ISS remained a work-in-progress. Russian officials contended that they had the right to transport aboard their spacecraft any person they deemed fit for the mission. Both sides pledged to find a resolution to the disagreement.(Kathy Sawyer, “Space Tourism Sparks U.S.-Russian Standoff,” Washington Post, 20 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Opposing Russian Plan for Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 March 2001; Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts to NASA: Millionaire Comrade Trains with Us or Nobody Trains,” 20 March 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched an automatic cargo carrier to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:24 p.m. (UT). A Soyuz-FG booster lifted the Progress M1-7 cargo carrier. Progress M1-7 was to deliver 2.5 tonnes (2.8 tons or 5,511 pounds) of equipment, food, and fuel to the space station, as well as a microsatellite called Klibri, which the crew would release after the carrier had docked with the ISS.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 577, 1 December 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx577.html (accessed 12 December 2001).)
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts’ work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present,” Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a cargo ship headed for the aging Mir space station. The mission’s aim was simple: to remove the 15-year-old space station from orbit safely, by propelling it into Earth’s atmosphere. To accomplish the task, Russia selected an unpiloted Progress M1-5 cargo ship, carrying enough fuel for its own journey and to fire Mir’s thrusters. A series of mechanical problems, including a fire and a collision with another cargo craft in 1997, combined with Russia’s shortage of funds for space endeavors, had led to the Russian government’s decision to end Mir’s successful run. With the launch of the Progress craft, some cosmonauts and Russian space officials protested the destruction of the last remaining symbol of the space heyday of the Soviet Union. Amateur astronomers aimed their telescopes toward the skies to glimpse Mir one last time as it orbited Earth.(Associated Press, “Cargo Ship Intended To Dump Mir Blasts Off Successfully,” 24 January 2001; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia To Launch Ship To Bring Mir Era to End,” 17 January 2001; Agence France-Presse, “Russia Sets January 18 as Date for Mir’s Final Appointment in Space,” 4 January 2001; Michael Alicea, “See Mir in FlightBefore It’s Gone,” Palm Beach Post (FL), 21 January 2001.)
The Russian cargo craft Progress M1-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, carrying 2.5 tons (2.3 tonnes or 2,300 kilograms) of supplies for the ISS crew. Along with food, research materials, and a new computer system to replace the damaged control machines, the cargo carrier also hauled 1 ton (0.9 tonnes or 907 kilograms) of extra fuel to the space station, so that Progress M1-6 could push the ISS into a higher orbit. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the spacecraft to dock with the ISS two days after launch. The launch was the first using the newly improved Soyuz-FG rocket, a booster designed to use 5 percent less fuel than previous models.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571; Mark Wade, “Progress M1,” Encyclopaedia Astronautica, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/proessm1.htm (accessed 29 July 2008).)
The Soyuz spacecraft, carrying space enthusiast Dennis A. Tito, arrived safely at the ISS, having completed a two-day journey from Kazakhstan. The successful docking took place only 14 hours after Shuttle Endeavour left the ISS, with the crew having completed its mission of installing a Canadian-built robotic arm. Tito arrived at the ISS in good health. Appearing through grainy footage provided by the Russian Space Agency, Tito floated into the space station with arms outstretched and proclaimed, “I love space.” The Soyuz mission mandated that the Russian- American crew remain aboard the ISS for six days.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Leaves Space Station After 8 Days,” Houston Chronicle, 30 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Tito’s ‘Taxi’ Drops Fare at Station, ‘I Love Space’, Says the American Cosmonaut, Who Faces Strict NASA Limits,” 30 April 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space station’s size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
Cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS to clear an obstruction that had prevented the pilotless Progress Russian supply ship from docking securely to the space station. The crew believed that the obstruction was a rubber seal from a supply ship that had left the ISS on 22 November. NASA had delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour for five days because of concern that Endeavour’s arrival at the space station could cause the insecurely docked supply ship to wobble, possibly damaging the ISS. However, Dezhurov and Tyurin were able to remove the obstruction during their 3-hour spacewalk, thereby clearing the way for Endeavour to launch on 5 December.(Warren E. Leary, “Endeavour Is Set for Launching After Docking Problem Is Solved,” New York Times, 4 December 2001; Los Angeles Times, “With Space Debris Cleared, Shuttle Launch Set,” 4 December 2001.)
The ISS Partnership agreed to allow space tourist Dennis A. Tito to travel to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TM-32, scheduled to launch at the end of April. The agreement among the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States followed months of disagreement regarding the safety and propriety of allowing the wealthy American businessman to purchase passage into space for US$20 million. Without conferring with NASA or with other members of the ISS Partnership, the Russian Space Agency had made an agreement with Tito permitting him to take a place on Russia’s Soyuz spacecraft. NASA had protested against including an individual who was not a trained astronaut on the spaceflight at such an early point in the ISS’s development. After Russia had reached the agreement with Tito, he had undergone months of training. The ISS Partnership required Tito to sign a waiver absolving NASA of any liability for his safety and required him to promise that he would pay for anything he damaged. The ISS Partnership also announced plans to formalize the criteria for future visits to the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Deal Reported in Long-Running Dispute on Putting Tourist on Space Station,” New York Times, 21 April 2000; NASA, “International Space Station Partnership Grants Flight Exemption for Dennis Tito,” news release 01-83, 24 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Continues To Resist Visit by First Tourist,” 15 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Financier’s Spaceflight Gets Final Clearance,” Washington Post, 25 April 2001.)
Astronauts Thomas D. Jones and Robert L. Curbeam Jr. made their third and final spacewalk from Space Shuttle Atlantis, finishing the installation of the ISS’s science laboratory Destiny. The spacewalk was the 100th in the history of U.S. space exploration. Two days earlier, Jones and Curbeam had conducted a spacewalk to install a window shutter for Destiny, allowing the astronauts residing inside the ISS an unparalleled view of Earth. Overall, the mission to install the vital and expensive Destiny module went smoothly. Atlantis’s crew worked quickly to connect the necessary cables, hatches, and wires to equip the new research center. The successful installation also allowed NASA to accept a transfer of leadership from the Russian Space Agency. Using the newly installed computers in the Destiny module, U.S. flight controllers took control of the ISS on 13 February 2001.
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review,” http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
After months of debate over whether Russia should bring Mir out of orbit and what damage the space station might cause when it fell to Earth, the 15-year-old Mir space station plunged into Earth’s atmosphere, spraying some of its remnants into the Pacific Ocean. The splashdown marked the end of a 2.2 billion-mile journey for Mir. Witnesses in Fiji reported seeing streaks of gold and silver lights across the sky when Mir fell, but nobody reported any damage from pieces of the falling space station. U.S. officials at the Pentagon tracked the descent, while Japan’s public safety chief urged people to stay indoors to avoid falling debris. Anatoly Y. Solovyev, a Russian cosmonaut who had spent 651 days aboard Mir, remarked that he was sad to see the end of the pathbreaking space station: “An entire era of our Soviet space program is ending, into which we invested not only our money, but what is more important, our intellectual potential.” Once Mir had descended safely, officials of the Russian Space Agency praised the precise sequence of maneuvers that had brought the space station safely from orbit.(Patrick E. Tyler, “Mir Space Station Sizzles To Ending Over Pacific,” New York Times, 23 March 2001; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Officials Exultant After Flawlessly Bringing Down Mir,” 23 March 2001; Peter Baker, “Mir’s Fall to Earth Marks a Fiery End to Bumpy Mission,” Washington Post, 23 March 2001; Associated Press, “Japan’s Public Safety Chief Urges People To Stay Inside To Avoid Mir Debris,” 16 March 2001; World Reporter, “Pentagon To Track Mir Station’s Descent from Orbit,” 10 March 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the “newest power couple” in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, “Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XM’s ‘Roll’ Satellite,” 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Sends ‘Roll’ Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio,” Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
Diplomats from 178 nations reached a compromise agreement to enact the Kyoto Protocol, a pact designed to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases, which scientists believed were contributing to global warming. The United States, represented by Undersecretary of State Paula J. Dobriansky, had rejected the final agreement. Calling the agreement “fatally flawed,” President George W. Bush expressed concern over the effect of the treaty on the U.S. economy. Although Russia and Japan had also expressed major reservations, the two countries had eventually signed the Kyoto Protocol when negotiators included language in the final draft delaying the date of compliance. The treaty called for industrialized nations to limit the emissions released by automobiles, plants, and factories, but the mechanisms for enforcement defied easy solutions. However, according to final rules, each nation must reduce its carbon- dioxide emissions or pay fines for violations. Nations throughout the world criticized the United States’ rejection of the treaty. For example, the chief negotiator for the European Union expressed disappointment at the United States’ decision, saying, “Almost every single country stayed in the protocol. There was one that said the Kyoto Protocol was flawed.” Although an international consensus had emerged, the treaty still required the ratification of the 55 nations responsible for 55 percent of the world’s carbon-dioxide emissions in 1990.(Traci Watson, “Compromise Rescues Kyoto Protocol; Nations Hope Global Warming Treaty Will Take Effect in 2002; U.S. Says Pact ‘Is Not Sound Policy’,” USA Today, 24 July 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Global Climate Treaty Moves Ahead, Without US,” Christian Science Monitor, 24 July 2001.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan propelled by a Soyuz-U rocket. The spacecraft carried one of the most controversial space travelers in historyAmerican businessman Dennis A. Tito. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency for the opportunity to accompany cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Yuri M. Baturin on the mission to the ISS. Many space officials, regarding the endeavor as unsafe and capricious, had opposed Tito’s presence on the flight. Only days before the launch, Tito had gained the final approval of the consortium of nations building the ISS, becoming the highest profile space tourist to fly into orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren E. Leary, “Russia Wins Fight To Be First Space Travel Agent,” New York Times, 25 April 2001.)
Two members of the ISS crew performed a spacewalk to complete installation of the Russian Pirs docking compartment. During the 5-hour spacewalk, American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir N. Dezhurov connected communications cables between the Pirs module and the adjoining crew-habitation and command module. The pair also tested an external construction crane and photographed an askew solar array attached to the crew-habitation module, so that ground-based experts in Russia could determine whether the array would require repair in the future.
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russia’s second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: “The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community.” Russia had planned to initiate Mir’s final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, “Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week,” 15 February 2001; Associated Press, “Russia Marks Mir’s 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise,” 19 February 2001; Associated Press, “Scientists Protest on Mir’s 15th Anniversary,” 20 February 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TM-33 to the ISS on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4 a.m. (CDT). The mission’s crew members consisted of Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyez and Konstantin M. Kozeev and French astronaut Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré; Afanasyez was also Mission Commander. The spacecraft carried supplies and equipment for the ISS. The crew members planned to conduct joint operations and scientific research with the crew of Expedition 3. In addition, one of the main purposes of the mission, designated Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight, was to deliver the Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS, so that the ISS crew could use it as an emergency escape vehicle. The new Soyuz would remain at the ISS, and the spacecraft’s crew would return to Earth in the older Soyuz TM-32, which was already docked at the station.(NASA, “Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
The United States, Russia, and other partners and sponsoring agencies of the ISS released a nine- page document, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers,” defining the partners’ agreed-upon procedures for staffing the ISS. Among the acceptable categories of ISS crew members, the international partners included nonprofessional spaceflight participants, such as American space tourist Dennis A. Tito, who had reportedly paid the Russian Space Agency US$12 to US$20 million to visit the ISS. Tito’s visit had created tension among ISS partners, who hoped that the new agreement would clarify the selection criteria for individuals traveling to the ISS, while continuing to enable space programs to raise funds from nonprofessional space travelers.(ESA, Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, “Principles Regarding Processes and Criteria for Selection, Assignment, Training and Certification of ISS (Expedition and Visiting) Crewmembers”; William Harwood, “NASA Approves Space Visitor Rules,” Washington Post, 1 February 2002; Mark Carreau, “New NASA Policy Opens the Way for More People To Go into Space,” Houston Chronicle, 1 February 2002.)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rocket’s engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, “Foton,” http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
NASA announced that Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri would replace Sergei I. Moschenko as a member of the ISS Expedition 7 crew. Russian officials had proposed the change to the Multilateral Crew Operations Panel, which formally certified and assigned ISS crew, and the panel had formally approved the proposal on 10 October 2002. Kaleri had served three separate missions on the Russian space station Mir between 1992 and 2000. In addition to Kaleri, the Expedition 7 crew would include U.S. astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko.(NASA, “Expedition Five Backup Crewmember Named to Expedition Seven,” news release 02-235, 3 December 2002; NASA, “Memorandum of Understanding Between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States of America and the Russian Space Agency Concerning the Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station” (MOU, Washington, DC, 29 January 1998), Article 11.3, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/reports/1998/nasa_russian.html (accessed 5 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency notified NASA that it had abandoned its plan to transport singer Lance Bass of the popular music group ’N Sync to the ISS. Television producers had intended to sponsor Bass, featuring him in a television documentary about his trip to the ISS. However, the sponsors had failed to raise the estimated US$20 million needed to cover the singer’s fare. Therefore, Russian officials had decided to withdraw Bass as a member of the Soyuz crew scheduled to leave for the ISS on 28 October 2002. If the 23-year-old Bass had gone on the Soyuz mission, he would have become the youngest person ever to travel in space, as well as the third space tourist.(Marcia Dunn, “It’s Official: Russia Faxes NASA To Confirm Bass off Space Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2002.)
The leaders of the space agencies participating in the ISS met at ESA’s headquarters in Paris to discuss the program’s status. The attendees included representatives of NASA, the Canadian Space Agency, ESA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency. All of the agencies reaffirmed their commitment to work on developing, assembling, and using the ISS for both applied and scientific research. In addition, the agencies agreed on a timeline for the next measures they would undertake to ensure that the construction and operation of the ISS met system engineering and safety requirements, so that participants could use it for various research objectives.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 02-105, 3 June 2002.)
A Russian Kosmos-3M rocket launched the first Algerian spacecraft, AlSAT-1, from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The Algerian Space Agency (Agence Spatiale Algérienne) had designed the 92-kilogram (202-pound), imaging microsatellite to provide multispectral, medium- resolution images for remote-sensing purposes, particularly the monitoring of natural disasters. The Algerian Space Agency intended AlSAT-1 as the first of five microsatellites for a program called the Disaster Monitoring Constellation.(Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Lancement AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/ lancement.php (accessed 29 October 2008); Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Mission AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/mission.php (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TMA-1 from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 8:11 a.m., local time10:11 p.m. (EST). The launch was officially designated ISS Mission 5S. Soyuz TMA-1 was the first of a newly modified version of the Soyuz spacecraft, offering improved safety features and accommodation for crew members of a larger range of sizes. In addition, Soyuz TMA-1 was an automatic passenger craft intended to replace Soyuz TM- 34 as the ISS’s escape craft. The Russian Space Agency had been sending Soyuz vehicles to the ISS every six months as CRVs for scientists residing on the ISS. Soyuz TMA-1’s crew consisted of Commander Sergei V. Zalyotin and two crew members, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov and Belgian ESA astronaut Frank De Winne. The mission’s primary purpose was to provide a CRV for the ISS; however, Soyuz TMA-1’s crew also planned to conduct scientific experiments with the ISS Expedition 5 members. ISS crew would conduct most of these experiments under a commercial contract between Russia and ESA.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002”; NASA Mission Control Center, “Report #48,” http://quest.nasa.gov/ news/space/2002/10-29a.txt (accessed 17 October 2008).)
The Russian Soyuz TM-34 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:27 a.m. Greenwich Mean Time (GMT)1:27 a.m. (EST). The mission, designated Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight, carried three crew membersCommander Yuri P. Gidzenko of Russia, Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, and South African businessman Mark Shuttleworth. The mission’s main purpose was to deliver a new Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS for use as an emergency lifeboat for the ISS’s permanent three-member crew. In addition, major media noted that Shuttleworth had paid the Russian Space Agency a fee of approximately US$20 million to fly on Soyuz to the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz 4 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp4/taxi4/index.html (accessed 12 August 2002); Houston Chronicle, “Space Tourist No. 2,” 25 April 2002.)
NASA announced the backup crew members for ISS Expedition 10, including Jeffrey N. Williams, acting as backup for the ISS station commander, Russian cosmonaut Konstantin M. Kozeev, and U.S. astronaut Sunita L. Williams. The primary crew members for Expedition 10 were ISS Commander Leroy Chiao, U.S. astronaut John L. Phillips, and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov.(NASA, “Space Station Expedition Backup Crew Named,” news release 02-258, 23 December 2002.)
The five partner space agencies of the ISSthe Canadian Space Agency, ESA, NASA, Japan’s NASDA, and the Russian Space Agency approved the 2002 Program Action Plan for the ISS at a meeting held in Tokyo, Japan. The partner agencies agreed to expand the station’s capabilities, to increase the number of permanent ISS crew members, and to provide additional crew rescue vehicles. They also agreed to a process for selecting an ISS configuration, once the ISS had accommodated the remaining components. In this process, each of the station’s partner agencies would make additional programmatic and technical assessments, cost estimations, and internal budget reviews. In addition, the agencies announced that they would approve a station configuration option by March 2003, select a revised configuration by June or July 2003, and agree upon a final configuration by December 2003.(NASA, “Space Station Action Plan Approved,” news release 02-241, 6 December 2002.)
ESA launched the International Gamma Ray Astrophysics Laboratory (INTEGRAL) observatory from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, at 10:41 a.m., local time12:41 a.m. (EST). ESA had designed the satellite, and Italy’s Alenia Spazio had developed it, with support from more than 30 European firms. INTEGRAL would study dense objects that are sources of high-energy radiation, such as neutron stars and black holes. Project scientists hoped that INTEGRAL would produce images that would help confirm the presence of black holes at the center of galaxies, beginning with the Milky Way. INTEGRAL had two main instruments for analyzing gamma-ray sources: the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, or SPI spectrometer, and the Imager on Board the INTEGRAL Satellite, or IBIS imager. The spectrometer and imager had an extremely sharp angular resolution, enabling them to conduct spectral analyses with an energy resolution 40 times better than that provided by any previous satellite. INTEGRAL also carried an x-ray imager and a charged-coupled device (CCD) imager that operated within the visible spectrum waveband. Using the combined data from the four instruments, project scientists would be able to make simultaneous observations of high-energy phenomena, from visible light to gamma rays.(ESA, “Europe Opens a Window onto a Violent Universe,” ESA news release 66-2002, 17 October 2002, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESAKXQTHN6D_index.0.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, “Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces,” Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the world’s cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, “Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes,” 8 December 2003.)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESA’s Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europe’s official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission,” 3 June 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
On the 35th anniversary of the accident that killed Yuri Gagarin, the Russian daily Komsomolskaya Pravda published extracts of a secret investigation of Russia’s KGB (the Soviet-era Office of State Security) into the cause of the Soviet cosmonaut’s death. Gagarin and his instructor had died on 27 March 1968, during a routine training exercise at the Chkalovsky Air Base outside Moscow. The government had ordered three official investigations, one by the civilian government and two military, but all three had ruled out sabotage. An inspection of Gagarin’s MiG-15 had identified no mechanical failures and investigators had concluded that the fighter “went into a spin after either hitting birds or suddenly swerving to avoid a weather balloon or another aircraft.” The circumstances of his death had since “been cloaked in mystery and rumours that the Communist Party had Gagarin killed because of his love of drink and women.” The KGB’s counterintelligence unit had conducted its own secret investigation, finding that ground staff’s actions had “amounted to a ‘dangerous violation’ of standing instructions,” leading to the death of Gagarin and his instructor.(Ben Aris, “KGB Held Ground Staff To Blame for Gagarin’s Death,” Daily Telegraph (UK), 28 March 2003. 400 Kathy Sawyer, “Columbia’s Last Seconds Recorded,” Washington Post, 28 March 2003)
The ISS marked its 1,000th consecutive day of human residency aboard the station. The first crew had arrived 2 November 2000, and since then, seven crews had lived and worked on the ISS. During that time, the living and working area had increased by 6,000 cubic feet (170 cubic meters) to the current area of 15,000 cubic feet (424.8 cubic meters), and ISS partners expected the station would eventually more than double its size. The seven ISS crews, consisting of 10 American and 10 Russian crew members, had conducted 12 spacewalks and had welcomed 11 visiting Space Shuttles, 4 Soyuz taxi crews, and 10 Progress cargo vehicles. Crews had added to the ISS the largest solar arrays ever produced for use in space, the first track-mounted railcar in space, and a science facility described as the most sophisticated space laboratory to date.(NASA, “Milestone Marked in Space1,000 Days of Human Presence on Station,” news release 03-251, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03251_iss1000_days.html (accessed 23 December 2008). 491 William Glanz, “NASA Outlines Cost of Columbia Probe,” Washington Times, 1 August 2003.)
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
Russia’s Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots,” 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, “Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport,” Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
NASA’s Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles―the United States’ only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend “to make foreign policy,” acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, “NASA Official: Agency Won’t Seek Waiver to Iran Act,” Space News, 20 February 2003.)
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martin–built Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, “ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V―65 Successes in a Row for Atlas,” news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russia’s participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew members―Russian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Lu―to save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station,” 11 June 2003; Reuters, “Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station,” 9 June 2003.)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMC’s purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russia’s GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Korea’s KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, “Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched,” Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, “Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit,” Space News, 29 September 2003.)
Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Boris Alyoshin and French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin signed an agreement allowing Russian access to the ESA launch complex in French Guiana, beginning in 2006. The agreement provided for the construction of a new launchpad at Kourou for the launching of Russian Soyuz rockets. France agreed to contribute half of the cost of EUR 314 million (US$361 million), with other ESA member states providing the remainder. The agreement also allowed Arianespace to collaborate with the Russian company Starsem to use Soviet-era Soyuz rockets for launching medium-sized payloads, thereby closing a gap in Arianespace’s marketing range.
The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services’ Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earth’s upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as “the world’s smallest space telescope,” with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileo’s telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellites―CubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1―to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tube―the Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSAT―would image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, “Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads,” Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia,” Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka successfully completed repairs to the ISS during a much-delayed spacewalk lasting 6 hours. Among the numerous repairs that Fincke and Padalka completed were the replacement of a faulty circuit breaker and the restoration of power to a gyroscope that helped stabilize the ISS. The ISS partners had rescheduled the spacewalk from 24 June 2004 because of problems with the crew members’ spacesuits.(Mark Carreau, “Finally, Spacewalk a Success,” Houston Chronicle, 1 July 2004; NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-018, 1 July 2004.)
After more than six months in space, the crew members of ISS Expedition 8 returned to Earth, safely landing in Kazakhstan at 8:12 p.m. (EDT). The crew of Expedition 8 consisted of NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri. During their tenure at the ISS, Foale and Kaleri had conducted scientific research. Expedition 8 had been the second- longest expedition to the ISS, with the two men spending a total of 194 days, 18 hours, and 35 minutes in space. Returning with them to Earth was ESA astronaut André Kuipers, who had spent nine days on the space station conducting research as part of ISS Expedition 9. The other two members of Expedition 9, Gennady I. Padalka and E. Michael Fincke, remained at the ISS for a mission scheduled to last nearly six months.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” news release SS04-007, 29 April 2004. 195)
The Russian Space Agency successfully launched the Progress M1-11 resupply vehicle to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:58 a.m. (EST). The Progress vehicle, the 13th resupply flight to the ISS, carried 2.5 tons (2,300 kilograms or 2.3 tonnes) of food, fuel, and equipment. The vehicle’s mission designation was ISS 13P.
NASA and the ISS partners announced crew assignments for the next two expeditions to the space station. NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka would serve on Expedition 9, and NASA astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov would provide the crew for Expedition 10. In addition, Chiao and Sharipov would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 9, while NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev would serve as the backup crew for Expedition 10. Although NASA and its partners had previously scheduled Tokarev to pair with Chaio on Expedition 10, the ISS partners had decided to replace Tokarev with Sharipov, because Sharipov had previously trained with Chiao.(NASA, “New Crews Named for 2004 Space Station Missions,” news release 04-056, 6 February 2004.)
Representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States―the nations participating in the ISS project―met to discuss their cooperative activities for the station. At the meeting at ESA’s Technical Centre in the Netherlands, ESA officials reviewed ISS operations and plans, unanimously endorsing a new technical configuration for the space station that would incorporate components from each of the ISS partner space agencies. Upon completion, the ISS would have improved research capabilities and would accommodate more crew members than the current maximum of three.(NASA, “Joint Statement: International Space Station Heads of Agency Meeting,” news release 04-237, 23 July 2004; Warren E. Leary, “More Astronauts Approved for Space Station,” New York Times, 24 July 2004.)
NASA officials announced that the crew members of the ISS were experiencing a food shortage and would have to eat less until a Russian supply capsule could bring additional food supplies. Russia had scheduled the resupply capsule to arrive at the ISS on 25 December 2004, but if it missed the delivery, crew members Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov would have to return to Earth aboard the Russian Soyuz capsule docked at the ISS. NASA also noted that, if the crew members had to evacuate the space station, Russia and the United States could continue to operate the ISS from Earth. Officials cited a number of reasons for the supply shortage on the ISS, including the postponement of regular supply missions after the Columbia accident and the necessary removal of some food supplies from an August 2004 resupply flight, to make room for equipment to monitor air quality in the ISS.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Endures Food Shortage,” Houston Chronicle, 10 December 2004.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Progress-M 51/ISS-16P, an automatic cargo vehicle, on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 10:19 p.m. (GMT). Progress-M 51, bound for the ISS, carried 2.75 tons (2,500 kilograms or 2.5 tonnes) of equipment, fuel, food, and water.
ISS crew members Alexander Y. Kaleri and C. Michael Foale conducted a spacewalk, leaving the station vacant. The spacewalk marked the first time that the ISS crew had left the station without another crew member remaining on board to assist in case of emergency. The purpose of the spacewalk was to service experiments located on the station’s exterior and to prepare the orbiting structure for future assembly work. The astronauts were unable to complete all of the planned tasks, however, because a problem with Kaleri’s spacesuit prompted Russian flight controllers to end the spacewalk early.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Is Cut Short; Malfunction in Cosmonaut’s Suit Cited,” Washington Post, 27 February 2004.)
The Expedition 9 crew of the ISS launched at 11:19 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on the Russian Soyuz TMA-4/ISS-8S. The crew members consisted of Russian cosmonaut, Expedition 9 Commander Gennady I. Padalka; NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke; and ESA astronaut André Kuipers of the Netherlands. Padalka and Fincke would remain at the ISS for nearly six months, while Kuipers would spend nine days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew members of Expedition 8―NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Alexander Y. Kaleri.(NASA, “Expedition 9 on the Way to Space Station,” news release 04-133, 18 April 2004; National Space Science Data Center, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 605, 1 May 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx605.html. 629 Thomas H. Maugh II, “Einstein’s Theory Rockets into Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 21 April 2004; NASA, “The Gravity Probe B: The Relativity Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ gpb/index.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
Russian President Vladimir V. Putin appointed Anatoly N. Perminov as Director of the Russian Space Agency. Perminov, a professor at the Moscow Aviation Institute, had previously served as Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Space Force. He replaced previous Russian Space Agency Director Yuri N. Koptev, who Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had appointed in 1992.
The crew of Expedition 10 left for the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz TMA-5/ISS-9S, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 11:06 p.m. (EDT). The crew members were American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonauts Yuri G. Shargin and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Chiao and Sharipov would stay at the ISS until April 2005, and Shargin would spend eight days on the ISS, returning to Earth with the crew of Expedition 9.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS04-035,” news release SS04-035, 13 October 2004. 212)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 11, a six-month mission set to launch in April 2005. Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would serve as Station Commander, and American astronaut John L. Phillips would serve as Flight Engineer and ISS Science Officer. In 2000 Krikalev, who had experienced the most spaceflights of any Russian cosmonaut, had served as a member of the first ISS crew for Expedition 1. Phillips also had ISS experience as a member of Mission STS-100 in 2001. The backup crew members for Expedition 11 were American astronaut Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin.(NASA JSC, “Next International Space Station Crew Named,” news release H04-383, 23 November 2004.)
The crew of Expedition 9 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, landing in Kazakhstan at 6:36 a.m., local time. American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka had spent 188 days at the ISS, where they had performed four spacewalks. Returning with them was Russian cosmonaut Yuri G. Shargin, who had traveled to the ISS on 13 October 2004 with the crew members of Expedition 10.(Mark Carreau, “Station Crew Returns to Earth,” Houston Chronicle, 24 October 2004; Stefano S. Coleman, “Two Safely Back After 6 Months on Space Station,” New York Times, 24 October 2004.)
NASA announced that astronaut Leroy Chiao would replace William S. McArthur Jr. as Commander of Expedition 9, the next mission to the ISS. NASA had disqualified McArthur from Expedition 9 because of an unspecified medical issue. Chiao, who had trained as McArthur’s substitute, would join Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev for the mission, scheduled to launch in April 2004.(NASA, “Chiao Replaces McArthur as Next Space Station Commander,” news release 04-019, 12 January 2004. 581 Mark Carreau, “Leak on Space Station Stopped,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 2004.)
The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, “Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth,” 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, “Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station,” 26 April 2005.)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecraft’s sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the public’s knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann Druyan―Sagan’s widow―had founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particles―photons―on the spacecraft’s large, triangular, mirror-like “solar sails” were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine,” 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, “Projects: Solar Sailing,” http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earth’s surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for “Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo,” which means “Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress”). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite,” news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
The ISS Expedition 10 crew, comprising Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov, successfully reactivated the station’s Elektron oxygen generator, which had shut down on 1 January because of air bubbles in the system’s lines. Flight Engineer Sharipov made three unsuccessful attempts to repair the Russian-built unit. While the ISS crew continued to work on the problem, flight controllers in Russia used oxygen stores aboard the Progress 16 supply ship to repressurize the station. Russian engineers then instructed the crew to hook up a backup liquid unit to infuse fresh electrolytes into the oxygen generator’s system. The crew reactivated the Elektron generator without incident. Engineers planned to monitor the system’s performance to ensure that it continued to function properly.(Tariq Malik, “Repaired Oxygen Generator Fails Again Aboard ISS,” Space.com, 5 January 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_elektron_050104.html (accessed 18 August 2009); William Harwood, “Space Station’s Oxygen Generator Back in Action,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2005.)
James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESA’s plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, “With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete,” Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, “First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies,” ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
ISS Expedition 12 crew members William S. McArthur Jr. and Valery I. Tokarev left the ISS temporarily unoccupied so that they could relocate the orbiting station’s Soyuz spacecraft from the Pirs module’s docking compartment to the Zarya module’s docking port. The Soyuz spacecraft had remained docked at the ISS to serve as a return vehicle to Earth and an emergency escape vehicle. McArthur and Tokarev were relocating the Soyuz so that Pirs could serve as an airlock for future spacewalks.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-054,” status report SS05-054, 18 November 2005. 858 H.R. Rep. 109-272, at 169 (2005) (Conf. Rep.); NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement of Passage of FY 2006 Budget,” news release 05-407, 16 November 2005.)
The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China’s Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kong–based APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESA’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespace’s two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocket―launches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, “Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base,” New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, “Apstar 6 Launched from China,” Space News, 13 April 2005.)
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venus’s atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venus’s surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESA’s second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, “Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planet’s Hidden Mysteries,” ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, “European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe,” 9 November 2005.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
Khrunichev Center announced that it had signed a contract with Russia’s defense ministry, valid through 2010, to research, develop, and flight-test the Angara launch vehicle. The Angara project included a series of liquid oxygen/kerosene expendable launch vehicles. The Khrunichev Center intended for Angara 5 to have greater capabilities than the company’s existing Proton rocket and to be far more environmentally friendly. In addition, the Angara 5 would launch exclusively from Plesetsk, rather than from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to the contract, near the end of 2006, the Khrunichev Center would launch the first vehicle carrying a Russian government payload.(Dmitry Pieson, “Khrunichev, Defense Ministry To Build Angara Jointly,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 27 May 2005.)
Russian Space Agency Chief Anatoly N. Perminov and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed an agreement allowing Russia to use ESA sites for space launches and enabling Russia and Europe freely to exchange research and development information. Specifically, ESA would permit Russia to conduct Soyuz launches from Kourou, French Guiana. In addition, the two would share information on the design of new launchers and fuelsinformation once closely guarded by both sideswith the intention of developing new launchers jointly. For example, Russia and Europe had studied the option of developing new reusable launchers and new propulsion systems.
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italy’s Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
During a hearing of the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics―Live from Space: The International Space Station―NASA astronaut John L. Phillips became the first person to provide congressional testimony while in space. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics had convened the hearing to gather information on numerous topics concerning the ISS, such as current activities on the ISS, scientific and research accomplishments resulting from ISS operations, and long-term human spaceflight. At the time of the hearing, Phillips was aboard the ISS serving as a member of Expedition 11, along with Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev. Former ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Peggy A. Whitson also provided testimony at the hearing.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Gives First Congressional Testimony from Space,” news release 05-152, 14 June 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Live from Space: The International Space Station, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 14 June 2005, 3.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
The Russian Space Agency announced that the launch of Cosmos 1 had failed. According to the agency, the rocket that had launched the spacecraft had experienced failure 83 seconds after ignition. Consequently, the experimental solar-powered spacecraft had crashed soon after its launch.(David Holley and Alex Raksin, “Solar Craft Falls Short of Cosmos,” Los Angeles Times, 23 June 2005. 808 ESA, “German Chair for ESA Council,” ESA news release 35-2005, 22 June 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_35_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 11 August 2009); ESA, “What is ESA?” http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/About_ESA/ SEMW16ARR1F_0.html (accessed 11 August 2009).)
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
The French-Russian company Starsem launched COROT on a Soyuz-2 rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 14:23 (UT). CNES had designed the satellite to conduct seismological analyses of stars, gathering data that would enable scientists to determine their age, composition, and internal structure. In addition, CNES had designed COROT to detect
NASA’s Discovery returned to Earth, landing at NASA’s KSC at 9:14 a.m. (EDT) to complete the 13-day Mission STS-121. During STS-121, the crew had tested the use of Discovery’s robotic arm boom extension as a work platform, performed repairs to the exterior of the ISS, delivered 14 tons (12.7 tonnes or 12,700 kilograms) of equipment and supplies to the orbiting space station, and transported ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS. Reiter joined Russian Pavel V. Vinogradov and American Jeffrey N. Williams as an ISS crew member, marking the first time since May 2003 that the ISS had three crew members. Discovery crew had also tested improved safety procedures and equipment for the Shuttle. Furthermore, the flight had verified the safety of a significant aerodynamic modification to the Shuttle’s external fuel tank. More specifically, NASA had removed protuberance air load ramps from the external fuel tank, because a piece of foam had jettisoned from that area of the tank during Discovery’s launch for the Return to Flight Mission (STS-114) in 2005.(NASA, “NASA Welcomes Space Shuttle Crew Back to Earth,” news release 06-280, 17 July 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_06321_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 15 March 2010).)
structures would double the ISS’s electrical power to an estimated total power of 75 to 110 kilowatts. The ISS’s international partners intended for the additional power to support European, Japanese, Russian, and U.S. laboratory modules and to enable the ISS’s life-support system to support up to six astronauts.(Mark Carreau, “NASA Unfurls Set of Solar Panels To Power Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 15 September 2006; NASA, “STS-115.”)
NASA announced the crew for International Space Station (ISS) Expedition 13, scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in March 2006. Russian cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov would command the mission, and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams would serve as Flight Engineer and NASA Science Officer. Expedition 13 would also include the first Brazilian astronaut to fly in space, Marcos Cesar Pontes, who would engage in scientific experiments aboard the ISS for approximately one week. Williams had flown aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-101 as Mission Specialist in May 2000, performing a spacewalk that lasted almost 7 hours. As Flight Engineer for the 1997 mission to the Russian Mir space station, Vinogradov had completed five spacewalks. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 13: American astronaut E. Michael Fincke and Russian cosmonaut Fyodor N. Yurchikhin.(NASA, “NASA Announces Next International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-002, 5 January 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06002_Expedition_13_crew.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 5 January 2006, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/060105_exp13_crew_announcement.html (accessed 28 June 2010).)
Eileen M. Collins, who had joined the astronaut corps in 1990, announced her retirement from NASA. In February 1995, Collins had served as NASA’s first female Shuttle pilot on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-63, the first Shuttle mission to rendezvous with the Russian Mir space station. In May 1997, she had served as pilot on Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-84 flight to Mir, and in July 1999, she had become NASA’s first female Shuttle commander on Space Shuttle Columbia STS-93, which had launched the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. In July–August 2005, she had served as commander of Space Shuttle Discovery STS-114, the first Shuttle flight since the 2003 loss of Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin described Collins as a “brave, superb pilot,” and NASA Flight Crew Operations Director Kenneth D. Bowersox called her a “gifted leader.”(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Eileen Collins Completes Career of Space Firsts,” news release 06-208, 1 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06208_Collins_retires.html (accessed 1 October 2009); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s First Female Shuttle Commander Retires from Spaceflight,” Space.com, 1 May 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060501_collins_retirement.html (accessed 18 June 2010).)
Russian space scientist Vladimir Sergevich Syromyatnikov died of leukemia in Moscow, Russia, at the age of 73. Syromyatnikov had begun working for Russia’s S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia) in 1956. He had later developed several important space technologies, including the first piloted spacecraft, Vostok, which Yuri Gagarin had flown in 1961. Syromyatnikov had also worked on the Voskhod spacecraft, the Venera probe to Venus, and the docking system that had linked the Soviet Soyuz and the U.S. Apollo space vehicles in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project of July 1975. Syromyatnikov had later developed the Androgynous Peripheral Assembly System—the docking system that connected NASA’s Space Shuttles with Russia’s orbital facility Mir and with the ISS.(Patricia Sullivan, “Vladimir Syromyatnikov; Designing Docking System for Space Capsules,” Washington Post, 1 October 2006.)
During a spacewalk of 6 hours and 31 minutes, which lasted longer than scheduled, ISS crew members Pavel V. Vinogradov and Jeffrey N. Williams performed several tasks to repair, retrieve, and replace hardware on the U.S. and Russian segments of the space complex. Vinogradov replaced the clogged nozzle of a valve that helped vent hydrogen into space from the Elektron oxygen-generator in the Zvezda service module. Vinogradov and Williams replaced a faulty video camera on the ISS’s Mobile Base System, which rests upon a rail car that moves up and down the station’s truss, to position the robotic arm for assembly work. The two crew members also photographed navigation antennas on the aft side of the service module that the European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) would use in the future for unpiloted docking.(Tariq Malik, “Extended EVA: Astronauts Make ISS Repairs in Long Spacewalk,” Space.com, 2 June 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060602_exp13_eval.html (accessed 13 August 2010); NASA, “International Space Station Status Report no. SS06-026,” 2 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/jun/HQ_ SSO6026_station_stauts.html (accessed 15 April 2010).)
The crew of ISS Expedition 13 returned to Earth. Commander Pavel V. Vinogradov and Science Officer Jeffrey N. Williams landed in their Soyuz TMA-8 spacecraft near the Russian city of Arkalyk. Accompanying Vinogradov and Williams was spaceflight participant Anousheh Ansari, who had flown to the ISS with the crew of Expedition 14 on 18 September 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report,” status report SS06-042, 28 September 2006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/sep/HQ_SS06042_station_status.html (accessed 18 March 2010).)
A Soyuz-U rocket launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia at 17:38 (UT), carrying Kosmos 2420, a Russian military satellite. The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos stated that “the launch took place in the interests of the Defense Ministry.” Observers in the United States speculated that Kosmos 2420 might be a spy satellite intended to bolster Russia’s declining military-intelligence presence in space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631, 1 June 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx631.html (accessed 17 March 2010); Stephen Clark, “Russian Soyuz Rocket Launches New Spy Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 3 May 2006; RIA Novosti, “Russia Launches Kosmos Military Satellite from Plesetsk Base,” 3 May 2006.)
Heads of the national space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at NASA’s KSC in Florida to review plans for completing assembly of the ISS by the end of 2010. Since the grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet in 2003, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, the ISS had operated with two-member crews. However, the ISS partners planned to increase the crew to three members with the next Space Shuttle Discovery flight, scheduled for May 2006, and to increase the crew of the station to six members in 2009. Furthermore, NASA announced its plan to launch 16 Shuttle flights to allow completion of the ISS before the planned retirement of the Shuttles in 2010. To advance the assembly schedule, the Shuttles would transport ESA’s Columbus laboratory module and JAXA’s experiment module Kibo to the ISS during four missions in 2007 and 2008. The ISS partners issued a joint statement that “affirmed their plans to use a combination of transportation systems provided by Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States in order to complete ISS assembly in a timeframe that meets the needs of the partners and ensures full utilization of the unique capabilities of the ISS throughout its lifetime.”(NASA, “Joint Statement by International Space Station Heads of Agency,” news release 06-084, 2 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06084_HOA_statement.html (accessed 21 June 2010); Warren E. Leary, “Schedule To Complete Space Station Is Advanced,” New York Times, 3 March 2006; Irene Klotz for Reuters, “NASA Has New Plan To Complete Space Station,” 2 March 2006.)
NASA announced the crew for ISS Expedition 14, a six-month mission scheduled to launch aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft in September 2006. American astronaut Michael E. Lopez- Alegria would command the mission and serve as NASA’s station science officer, and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin would serve as Flight Engineer. American astronaut Sunita L. Williams, making her first spaceflight, would join Expedition 14 in progress, after traveling to the ISS on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-116, scheduled for December 2006. ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter would travel to the ISS aboard Space Shuttle Discovery STS-121, scheduled for summer 2006, serving as the third astronaut on Expedition 13 and later joining the Expedition 14 crew until Williams’s arrival. Lopez-Alegria had served on board Space Shuttle Columbia STS-73 in 1995, on Space Shuttle Discovery STS-92 in 2000, and on Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-113 in 2002, conducting five spacewalks during the assembly of the station complex. Tyurin had served as Flight Engineer of ISS Expedition 3 in 2001. NASA also announced the backup crew members for Expedition 14, American astronauts Peggy A. Whitson and Clayton C. Anderson.(NASA, “NASA Announces 14th International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-209, 2 May 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/may/HQ_06209_14th_ISS_crew.html (accessed 16 March 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA Announces Next Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 3 May 2006.)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched a Soyuz TMA-9 passenger craft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 04:08 (UT). The spacecraft carried two ISS crew members, American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Russian cosmonaut Mikhail V. Tyurin. Accompanying the two astronauts was the first female space tourist to the ISS, Anousheh Ansari, an Iranian-American entrepreneur who had paid US$20 million for the voyage. Ansari would perform blood and muscular experiments for ESA aboard the ISS.(Marc Kaufman, “As Shuttle Heads Home, NASA Lauds Mission,” Washington Post, 18 September 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 635, 1 October 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx635.html (accessed 17 March 2010).)
To raise money for the Russian space program, ISS crew member Mikhail V. Tyurin drove a golf ball off the ISS during a spacewalk, an event that comprised a small, but highly publicized, part of the 5.5-hour spacewalk. Tyurin and American astronaut Michael E. Lopez-Alegria spent most of the spacewalk conducting serious tasks, such as installing a proton detector to monitor solar eruptions. NASA beamed imagery of the event to Mission Control, showing Tyurin using a 6- iron to drive a lightweight replica of a golf ball off a special spring-loaded tee. Element 21 Golf Company of Toronto, Canada, had paid the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos an undisclosed fee for the golf outing, and NASA had approved it after determining that the ball posed no threat to the ISS. NASA expected the ball to enter Earth’s orbit and to incinerate in the upper atmosphere within a few days.(Mark Carreau, “After Sending Golf Ball into Space, It’s Down To Business,” Houston Chronicle, 23 November 2006; Stefano S. Coledan, “From Outer Space, a Cry of Fore!” New York Times, 23 November 2006.)
NASA announced the appointment of two new Flight Directors, Ron Spencer and Heather Rarick, who would direct human spaceflights from Mission Control at NASA’s JSC. The appointments increased to 28 the number of active Space Shuttle and ISS flight directors, including those in training. From 1990 to 1994, Spencer had worked as a contractor at JSC, during which time he had developed the space station assembly sequence for the Space Station Program Office. In 1994 he had become a NASA civil servant, and, beginning in 1997, he had worked in Mission Control as a Shuttle flight dynamics officer. Rarick had also worked as a contractor for NASA in various capacities until 2001, including working as the operations lead and Russian interface officer in the International Liaison Office of Mission Control. She had become a NASA employee in 2001, continuing her previous assignment, as well as assuming the technical lead for the Russian interface officers. In 2003 NASA had named Rarick chairperson of the Russian Joint Operations Panel, which would address long-term resolution of U.S.-Russian operational issues. NASA Flight Director Office Chief Phil Engelauf praised Spencer and Rarick as “possessing the leadership skills necessary to ensure NASA accomplishes the near-term exploration goals of completing the space station, safely flying the shuttle through retirement and returning to the moon.”(NASA, Johnson Space Center, “Two New Flight Directors Chosen To Lead NASA’s Mission Control,” news release J06-069, 14 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2006/J06-069.html (accessed 11 August 2010).)
Russia launched the Resurs DK1 satellite aboard a Soyuz-U rocket at 4:00 a.m. (EDT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The civilian Earth-observation satellite would operate for three years, the first in an upgraded series of spacecraft with improved capabilities in imaging resolution and communications. Navigating with a system based on Russia’s global navigation system Glonass, Resurs would be capable of surveying up to 700,000 square kilometers daily. Unlike previous Russian civilian remote-sensing craft, Resurs DK1 would carry an advanced communications system enabling it to quickly download recent images of natural resources, natural disasters, sea-ice conditions, and polar weather to Russian ground stations. Russian government agencies would use the images, making them available to national and international organizations, as well as private commercial customers. The satellites would have two attached instruments—Italy’s Payload for Anti-Matter Exploration and Light-Nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA), which would monitor cosmic rays, and a Russian particle detector, which would identify probable electromagnetic precursors of earthquakes.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin no. 632, July 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx632.html (accessed 6 August 2010); Stephen Clark, “Civil Remote Sensing Craft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2006; RIA Novosti, “Survey Satellite Launched from Baikonur,” 16 June 2006.)
The American company Space Adventures Limited announced that, in conjunction with the Russian space agency Roskosmos, it would offer spacewalks outside of the ISS for US$35 million. The fee included US$20 million for a space tourist to take a 10-day round-trip to the ISS on a Soyuz spacecraft and US$15 million for the traveler to make a spacewalk wearing a Russian spacesuit. Space Adventures Limited had previously sent three customers to the ISS, including Dennis A. Tito, who had become the first space tourist in 2001. The announcement was controversial because the approval of all 15 international partners in the ISS is required for plans of this type. A NASA spokesperson stated that Roskosmos had not yet informed NASA of its intent to sell spacewalks at the ISS.(John Schwartz, “Walk in Space for $15 Million (Plus Airfare),” New York Times, 21 July 2006.)
NASA and the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos announced the crew members for Expedition 15, the next expedition to the ISS: American astronauts Clayton C. Anderson and Daniel M. Tani and Russian cosmonauts Oleg V. Kotov and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The ISS partners had scheduled Kotov and Yurchikhin to fly to the ISS in March 2007; Anderson would travel to the ISS in June 2007, and Tani would go in August 2007. Yurchikhin would command Expedition 15, and the remaining three crew members would serve as flight engineers.(NASA, “NASA Announced New International Space Station Crew,” news release 06-337, 18 October 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/oct/HQ_06337_new_station_crew.html (accessed 20 April 2010).)
ESA and the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) launched the Meteorological Operational Satellite A (MetOP-A), Europe’s first polar-orbiting weather satellite. MetOP-A, which represented a major advance in meteorological capabilities, launched on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 16:28 (UT). Engineers had designed MetOP-A to quickly provide data of unprecedented accuracy and resolution, covering weather and climate variables ranging from temperature to concentrations of ozone gas. The satellite was the first of three scheduled for launch over the next 14 years. Collectively, the three satellites would ultimately form the space-based portion of EUMETSAT’s Polar System (EPS). Polar-orbiting satellites were capable of highly detailed Earth observation, because they orbited at relatively low altitudes—often at altitudes of 800 kilometers (nearly 500 miles), as opposed to the 36,000-kilometer-altitude (approximately 22,400-mile-altitude) orbits of many geostationary satellites. The EPS was Europe’s contribution to a cooperative venture with NOAA, which had provided users worldwide with meteorological data from polar orbit for nearly four decades. In addition, NOAA and France’s CNES had provided five of MetOP-A’s 10 instruments.(ESA, “MetOP at a Glance: Overview,” 16 November 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaLP/ SEMN1FAATME_ LPmetop_0.html (accessed 2 April 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636, 1 November 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa. gov/spacewarn/spx636.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos launched the crew of ISS Expedition 13 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 9:30 p.m. (EST) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 13 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Pavel V. Vinogradov and American astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 12, which comprised American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to stay at the station for six months. In NASA’s second return-to-flight mission, STS-121, scheduled for July 2006, Discovery would bring ESA astronaut Thomas A. Reiter to the ISS to join the crew of Expedition 13. The Russian spacecraft also transported astronaut Marcos C. Pontes of the Brazilian space agency, Agência Espacial Brasileira (AEB), who had joined NASA as an international astronaut in 1998. Pontes, the first Brazilian to fly in space, would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with Roskosmos, returning to Earth with the Expedition 12 crew on 8 April 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report SS06-013,” 29 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06013_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 24 September 2009); NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06-014,” 1 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_SS06014_ ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Tariq Malik, “Orbital Rendezvous: Fresh Crew, Brazilian Astronaut Arrive at ISS,” Space.com, 1 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060401_exp13_ docking.html (accessed 7 July 2010).)
The United States and the Russian Federation signed an Agreement on Technology Safeguards Associated with the Activities under the Sea Launch Project. The Sea Launch Project, a Boeing- led consortium, comprising companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway, was using Russian Zenit carrier rockets to provide commercial launch services for U.S. and foreign satellite payloads from a launch platform in the international waters of the Pacific Ocean. The program, which had begun in 1999, had completed 19 launches. The U.S. Department of State, acting as signatory, stated, “Conclusion of this agreement highlights our ongoing bilateral partnership in this successful commercial endeavor and will facilitate Russian participation. It also increases the potential for enhanced Russian participation and cooperation more generally in the sphere of commercial use of outer space for peaceful purposes.”(RIA Novosti, “Russia, U.S. Sign Technology Agreement Under Satellite Project,” 22 March 2006; U.S. Department of State, “Launch TSA Signed on March 21, 2006,” media note 289-2006, 21 March 2006, http://2001- 2009.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2006/63459.htm (accessed 20 April 2010).)
The crew of ISS Expedition 12, American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 7:48 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The two men had spent nearly 190 days in space, conducting two spacewalks and using every Russian docking port on the complex. They were the first ISS crew to dock at all the Russian ports. Accompanying McArthur and Tokarev on their return was Brazil’s first astronaut Marcos C. Pontes, who had spent eight days on the ISS conducting scientific experiments, under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roskosmos.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS06-016,” 8 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/ 2006/apr/HQ_SS06016_ISS_Status_Report.html (accessed 25 September 2009).)
The Russian space agency Roskosmos announced its plans to launch dozens of spacecraft between 2006 and 2015, including probes to conduct atmospheric and surface studies of Mars and Venus. Roskosmos also intended to launch 30 fixed communications-and-broadcasting satellites and 10 satellites to provide mobile communications services. In addition, Roskosmos planned to create a pair of geostationary satellites that would provide meteorological services, part of a satellite network under the auspices of the World Meteorological Organization.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Russia Plans Space Probes To Explore Mars, Venus,” 30 August 2006.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center in Moscow, announced that a rocket carrying an Arabsat 4A telecommunications satellite had failed to reach its proper orbit. The Russian Proton Breeze M rocket, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:10 p.m. (EST), failed to burn its upper-stage engine for as long as its designers had planned, leaving the satellite stranded in low orbit. EADS Astrium engineers had designed Arabsat to expand and optimize capacity for direct-to-home TV broadcasting, telephony, and data transmission over a coverage zone encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and part of Western Europe. If the launch had been successful, it would have placed Arabsat in a geostationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,000 kilometers (22,369 miles). ILS announced that it would form a failure-review oversight board “to review reasons for the anomaly and define a corrective action plan.” An investigatory Russian state commission would conduct a similar review.(Sergi Manstov, “Proton Failure—Arian Re-sets,” NASASpaceFlight.com, 1 March 2006; Jefferson Morris, “Proton Launch Failure Leaves Arabsat 4A Stranded,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 2 March 2006.)
Russia and India signed an agreement in Moscow for India to participate in Russia’s 2011 Moon- Globe Program to design a spacecraft for lunar exploration. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia and India would jointly build a robotic laboratory, with India supplying the rocket and flight module and Russia developing and producing the landing module of a Moon rover and a scientific complex. The agreement allowed for joint lunar exploration through 2017.
Over the course of 10 hours, NASA’s Mission Control remotely unfurled the S3/S4 solar arrays located on the new truss segment. Tip to tip the solar arrays spanned a distance of 240 feet (73 meters). With the solar arrays added to the left and right sides of the new power module, the ISS achieved an unprecedented symmetry in its appearance. In the midst of the solar-array- deployment operation, a fire alarm sounded in the Russian sector of the ISS, but crew and mission managers quickly determined that a computer malfunction was the cause. Russian computers, working in conjunction with American computers, had failed, and attempts to reboot the Russian computers had triggered the false fire alarm. However, because of the computer failure, the small maneuvering jets on Atlantis had assumed control of the ISS’s attitude, placing the station’s solar panels in a poor position for gathering sunlight and causing power levels to drop. Mission Control ordered the crew to turn off some nonessential equipment until the ISS regained attitude control. Thereafter, engineers successfully reestablished gyroscope control, and the left-side array began tracking the Sun properly.(Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array,” 13 June 2007; John Schwartz, “Glitch Blamed for Fire Alarm on Orbiter,” New York Times, 13 June 2007; William Harwood, “Computer Glitches Impact Station Attitude Control,” Spaceflight Now, 12 June 2007.)
NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
it with wire ties, leaving 6 inches (15 centimeters) of clearance, a distance adequate for undocking. Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin also photographed a Russian satellite navigation antenna, changed out a Russian materials experiment, photographed a German robotics experiment, and inspected and photographed an antenna and the docking targets for the European cargo craft, the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV). The ATV, designed with greater capacity than the Russian Progress craft, had not yet made its first trip to the ISS.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-10,” 22 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0710_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009).)
ESA’s YES2 craft attempted to deliver Fotino, a 12-pound (5.4-kilogram) reentry capsule, to a landing site in Kazakhstan, via an experimental tether system. YES2 deployed Fotino from the Foton-M3 spacecraft. A metal brace and straps held Fotino in place while the tether unwound, gradually lowering the capsule. The mission plan called for the tether to lower the capsule 30 kilometers (18.6 miles) below Foton-M3. However, a malfunction prevented the tether from unreeling to its full length. Telemetry data indicated that the tether had deployed approximately 8.5 kilometers (5.3 miles). Automated timers aboard the craft commanded Fotino to separate approximately a half hour before the scheduled touchdown time, even though the tether had not extended fully. However, because the tether had not completely deployed before Fotino’s release, early estimates predicted that the reentry vehicle would orbit for 4–11 days before reentering the atmosphere. Lead Engineer for the YES2 mission Â. Michiel Kruijiff remarked that, apart from the problem with the tether, the mission had been largely successful, achieving many of the mission objectives.(Stephen Clark, “Space Tether Experiment Hits Major Snag,” Spaceflight Now, 26 September 2007; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Attempt To Deliver Parcel from Space Fails,” 26 September 2007.)
TMA-10 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 17:31 (UT), carrying Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, as well as Charles Simonyi, who had paid US$25 million to travel to the ISS as a tourist. After joining Microsoft Corporation in 1981, Simonyi had led the development of the computer software programs Word and Excel, but he had since left Microsoft to start International Software Corporation of Bellevue, Washington. Simonyi planned to participate in several medical and engineering experiments during his 11-day visit to the ISS and to update the blog for his student- oriented Web site, www.charlesinspace.com, among other educational activities. Simonyi remarked that his one goal was to educate students about the science of space travel. The Russian space agency Roskosmos had scheduled Simonyi to return to Earth on 20 April, with Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin. Lopez- Alegria and Tyurin had been aboard the ISS since September 2006. Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams, who had served with Expedition 14 since December 2006, would remain aboard the ISS as a member of Expedition 15 until later in 2007.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report SS07-18,” 7 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/homehqnews/ 2007/apr/HQ_SS0718_station_status.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642, 1 May 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx642.html (accessed March 1, 2010); Marc Carreau, “5th Space Tourist Goes into Orbit on $25 Million Ticket,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2007; Scott Gutierrez, “Developer of Word on Way to Space Station,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 9 April 2007.)
South Korean Vice Minister of Science and Technology Chung Yoon announced the selection of Ko San, a 30-year-old expert on artificial intelligence, to visit the ISS as South Korea’s first astronaut. Ko San had been one of two finalists. The other finalist, Yi So-yeon, was a 29-year- old female doctoral student in biotechnology. More than 36,000 South Koreans had applied to become the first person in South Korea to travel in space. Ko and Yi had been training in Russia when South Korean authorities selected Ko as the winner. They appointed Yi as his backup, in the event Ko was unable to participate in the mission. They selected Ko over Yi because he had performed better in certain experiments and had demonstrated a stronger capability of communicating with Russian cosmonauts. As backup, Yi would continue to train with Ko and would serve as a consultant in planning Ko’s mission.(Kurt Achin, “S. Korea Names Astronaut for the Country’s First Voyage into Space,” Voice of America, 6 September 2007; “Space Mission To Help Boost Aerospace Research,” Korea Times, 6 September 2007.)
NASA announced the successful activation and operation of its new oxygen-generation system, which it had tested aboard the ISS between 11 and 14 July. Space Shuttle Discovery had delivered the 1,800-pound (816.5-kilogram) component during Mission STS-121 in July 2006, and the crew had installed it in the ISS’s Destiny laboratory. Since the new system’s installation, the crew had added several pieces of hardware and software to the ISS to support its operation. The crew had installed the last required part, a hydrogen-vent valve, during a spacewalk on Space Shuttle Atlantis’s Mission STS-117 in June 2007. Software updates to U.S. computers earlier in July had completed preparations for the system’s activation and operation. The new system, which would augment the Russian Elektron oxygen generator, would allow the increase of the ISS crew in 2009. NASA had designed the system to generate approximately 12 pounds (5.4 kilograms) of oxygen per day, enough for six people, but it was capable of providing as much as 20 pounds (9 kilograms), enough for 11 people. During the test, the system had generated approximately 10 pounds (4.5 kilograms) of oxygen.(NASA, “New NASA System Will Help Space Station Crews Breathe Easier,” news release 07-159, 17 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07157_station_oxygen.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The craft’s mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, “German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
ISS Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and ISS Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov undertook a 5.5- hour spacewalk to install protective panels designed to shield the space station from dangerous space debris. The IISTF had issued a report in February 2007 finding that the impact from space debris was the top threat to the future of the ISS and to the safety of its inhabitants. Yurchikhin and Kotov installed 5of 17 panels on a Russian section of the ISS, a section that had been among the first components launched and was not as heavily protected as the later U.S. modules. Each panel measured approximately 2 feet by 3 feet (0.6 meters by 0.9 meters) and 5 inches thick (12.7 centimeters thick) and weighed approximately 20 pounds (9 kilograms). The cosmonauts also successfully rerouted a cable for a navigation antenna that the crew would use later in the year at the scheduled arrival of the first new European cargo vehicle.(Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Protective Shielding,” 31 May 2007; Mark Carreau, “Cosmonauts Install Protective Panels on Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 31 May 2007; International Space Station Independent Safety Task Force, “Final Report” (NASA, Washington, DC, February 2007), 17, http://www. nasa.gov/pdf/170368main_IIST_%20Final%20Report.pdf (accessed 29 January 2010).)
The Soyuz craft carrying Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Oleg V. Kotov, and Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor landed at 6:36 a.m. (EDT), more than 200 miles (322 kilometers) west of the designated landing site in Kazakhstan. The craft, returning from the ISS, had veered off course, causing the crew to experience higher than normal gravity load during the descent. The steep off-course landing was similar to the Soyuz incident in May 2003. However, this time, Russian crews were able to locate the Soyuz crew quickly. Medical tests showed that none of the three space travelers had experienced injuries and that all were in good condition. The two Russian cosmonauts were returning from a six-month assignment at the ISS, and Muszaphar, Malaysia’s first astronaut, was returning from 10 days aboard the station conducting scientific research.
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
of the ISS in preparation for the expansion of the space station.(Patrick Peterson, “Docking Port Relocated, Attached to Harmony,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010). 167 Xinhua News Agency, “Russia, India To Develop Advanced Military Aircraft, 13 November 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Russia, India To Join in Moon Mission,” 12 November 2007.)
On the 50th anniversary of the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik, publisher Harry N. Abrams released America in Space, a photographic record of the history of space exploration, documenting NASA’s achievements in aeronautics, science and technology, and human spaceflight. Published in cooperation with NASA, the book contained 500 color and black-and- white photographs, including many previously unpublished photographs, selected from NASA’s archives. Heralding the space age, the launch of Sputnik led to the creation of NASA one year later.(NASA, “New Book Chronicles NASA’s First 50 Years,” news release 07-210, 1 October 2007, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07210_NASA_book.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Jeremy Hsu, “NASA Book Commemorates 50 Years of Spaceflight,” Space.com, 5 October 2007, http://www.space.com/entertainment/ 071004-nasabook-anniversary.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
U.S. astronauts Patrick G. Forrester and Steven R. Swanson conducted a fourth unscheduled spacewalk outside the ISS, to wrap up incomplete tasks. During the spacewalk, which lasted 6 hours and 29 minutes, Forrester and Swanson completed their primary task of activating the SARJ, a rotating joint on the ISS’s new power module; installed a new camera stanchion on the S3 Truss; and linked a computer-network cable between the U.S. and Russian sides of the stations. The two astronauts were unable to bolt down the debris shields that Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov had installed on the Zvezda module during the spacewalk on 6 June. Instead, they opted to tether the two panels in place.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Mike Schneider for Associated Press, “Astronauts Complete 4th Spacewalk,” 18 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Finish Power Upgrades to Station,” Houston Chronicle, 18 June 2007.)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to “space mail,” a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), “Young Engineers’ Satellite 2; Mission Facts,” 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, “Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments,” 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
for a new module scheduled to arrive later in the year. ISS Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineers Oleg V. Kotov and Clayton C. Anderson worked from inside the space station to move the Pressurized Mating Adapter-3 (PMA-3) from its port-side perch on NASA’s Unity module to a berth facing Earth. The crew had delayed the relocation process by approximately 1 hour, because three of the sixteen bolts securing the PMA had returned intermittent fault messages. However, Mission Control determined that the error messages would not affect the relocation or the installation of the Harmony node later in the year. Kotov assisted Anderson in operating the ISS’s robotic arm, while Yurchkhin oversaw the bolt-latching systems, alternately freeing and securing the module during its relocation. PMA-3 detached from Unity at 8:23 a.m. (EDT) and, at 9:07 a.m. (EDT), the crew successfully reattached the port to its new berth. NASA’s lead Expedition 15 Flight Director Robert C. Dempsey acknowledged the cooperation between the Russian and American crew members. Dempsey remarked that Expedition 15’s crew was one of the first truly integrated crews that he had seen, noting that the mission marked the first time that Russian cosmonauts had operated NASA-controlled components, such as the Canadian-built robotic arm.(Tariq Malik, “Space Station Crew Clears Port for New Module,” Space.com, 30 August 2007, http://www.space. com/missionlaunches/070830_exp15_pma3move.html (accessed 30 June 2010).)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
The heads of space agencies from Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States met at the ESA headquarters in Paris to review International Space Station (ISS) cooperation. The ISS partners discussed the significant accomplishments and milestones in implementing the ISS’s configuration and assembly sequence, as endorsed at the previous meeting of the partners in March 2006. Milestones for the ISS included reestablishing a three-person crew, reinitiating station-assembly activities, and completing three extremely challenging Space Shuttle missions, which included the extravehicular accomplishments of American, Canadian, European, and Russian astronauts.(NASA, “Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement,” news release 07-013, 23 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_07013_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 14 October 2009). 11 Edward Cody, “China Confirms Firing Missile To Destroy Satellite,” Washington Post, 24 January 2007; Jason Dean, “China Verifies Antisatellite-Missile Test,” Wall Street Journal, 24 January 2007.)
NASA announced modifications to the ISS contract with Roskosmos. The US$719 million modified contract covered crew rotations for 15 crew members—six in 2009, six in 2010, and three in 2011—as well as the delivery and removal of 5.6 tonnes (6.2 tons) of cargo. The modification also included NASA’s purchase of a Russian Docking Cargo Module flight in 2010, which would carry 1.4 tonnes (1.5 tons) of NASA cargo to the ISS, and the purchase of a flight opportunity in 2009, which would allow an astronaut from one of the ISS partner nations to
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Progress M-62, a Russian cargo spacecraft, docked with the ISS to bring the Expedition 16 crew supplies—1.26 tonnes (1,260 kilograms or 1.4 tons) of food and water, fuel, and other cargo, such as research equipment and Christmas and birthday presents. The crew had detached Progress M-61 from the ISS on 22 December to make room for M-62’s arrival. Instead of sending M-61 directly back to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere, Russian space program officials had decided to use it first as a platform for technical experiments. Roskosmos had also used Progress M-60 for research after undocking the craft from the ISS.(RIA Novosti, “Russian Cargo Spacecraft Docks with ISS,” 26 December 2007.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rocket’s engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, “Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket,” 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, “Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure,” 14 March 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS lasting 6 hours and 18 minutes. In undertaking his 10th spacewalk, Lopez-Alegria set another U.S. record, surpassing Jerry L. Ross’s nine spacewalks. Although Tyurin initially encountered problems with his spacesuit’s cooling system, causing his visor to fog up, he and Lopez-Alegria accomplished several tasks, including repairing an antenna. The antenna had failed to retract on 26 October 2006, when a Russian Progress vehicle docked at the ISS’s Zvezda service module. To ensure the antenna would not interfere with the undocking of the craft in April, Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin partially retracted the stuck antenna and secured
The ISS Expedition 15 crew completed their second spacewalk in eight days. During the 5-hour- and-37-minute spacewalk, Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov performed a number of tasks. They installed on the Pirs module sample containers for a Russian experiment on the effect of space on microorganisms and placed a section of Ethernet cable on the exterior of the Zarya module. The installation of the cable completed a remote computer network, enabling the crew to command the Russian segment of the ISS from the U.S. segment. Furthermore, Yurchikhin and Kotov successfully completed their primary task, installing 12 debris-shield panels on the conical section of the Zvezda module. During the previous week, the crew had installed five panels, and in 2002 the ISS crew had installed six others, to provide the module with better protection from micrometeoroid-debris strikes. During the spacewalk, Yurchikhin and Kotov found a dent or hole from a meteorite, measuring approximately 5−6 millimeters (approximately 0.2 inches), in an outer pumping component on the Zarya module. This damage was the first of its type ever found on a module of the ISS. In addition, with the completion of the spacewalk, both cosmonauts had logged 11 hours and 2 minutes of experience in Russia’s new Orlan spacesuits.(Agence France-Presse, “International Space Station Holed by Meteorite,” 7 June 2007; Spaceflight Now, “Cosmonauts Begin Another Station Spacewalk,” 7 June 2007.)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 110-329, the Consolidated Security, Disaster Assistance and Continuing Appropriations Act for 2009, which included language renewing through July 2016 NASA’s waiver from the Iran-North Korea-Syria Nonproliferation Act (INKSNA). The terms of INKSNA, as enacted in 2000, barred U.S. government agencies from making “extraordinary payments” to Russia, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. Under these terms, NASA would be unable to purchase transport on Soyuz spacecraft. In 2005 Congress had enacted legislation granting NASA a waiver from INKSNA through January 2012, allowing NASA to negotiate a US$700 million contract for occasional flights to the ISS aboard the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. However, that contract would expire in 2011, and Congress needed to renew the waiver before NASA could begin negotiating a new contract. NASA would need to purchase Soyuz vehicles to transport American, Canadian, European and Japanese astronauts to the ISS during the period between the retirement of the Space Shuttle Program (SSP), scheduled for 2010, and the first flights of the Constellation Program, scheduled for 2015.
ESA launched its Galileo In-Orbit Validation Element (GIOVE-B), the second of its Galileo global navigation system satellites, at 22:16 (UT). The 500-kilogram (1,102.31-pound) satellite lifted off aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. GIOVE-B, like its predecessor GIOVE-A, was a test craft for a fleet which would eventually total 30 satellites. Once completed, ESA officials intended for the Galileo program to be interoperable with the American GPS and the Russian Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS). Because navigation systems rely on precise timing, GIOVE-B carried two redundant rubidium atomic clocks, which would serve as back up to the Passive Hydrogen Maser (PHM). The PHM was the most accurate clock that had ever been placed in orbit, with a stability of better than 1 nanosecond per day. GIOVE-B also carried a radiation-monitoring payload and a laser retroreflector for high-accuracy laser ranging. Astrium GmbH had built the satellite, with the assistance of Thales Alenia Space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); ESA, “ESA’s Most Advanced Navigation Satellite Launched Tonight,” press release no. 25-2008, 27 April 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM9GD2QGFF_index_0.html (accessed 17 February 2011); BBC News, “Europe Launches Sat-Nav Tester,” 26 April 2008.)
ISS crew member Yuri V. Lonchakov manually docked the Russian Progress-M-01M (Progress- 31) cargo vehicle after the vehicle’s automatic docking system experienced some last-minute problems, such as a loss of frequency information and an unusual toggling of the tracking displays. The vehicle had launched at 7:38 a.m. (EST) aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Shortly after reaching orbit, it had failed to deploy an antenna for the Kurs automatic docking system. Eventually, engineers had been able to extend the antenna;
The Russian automatic cargo carrier Progress-M 65 (Progress 30) successfully docked with the ISS at 2:43 a.m. (EDT), after a delay caused by the weather-related evacuation of NASA’s JSC. The ISS partners had rescheduled the docking, originally planned for 12 September 2008, because of Hurricane Ike. When NASA evacuated the center’s ISS control room in response to the hurricane’s approach, flight controllers had not yet made the adjustments necessary to prevent the ISS’s solar arrays sustaining damage during the cargo carrier’s docking. Russia had launched Progress aboard a Soyuz rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 September 2008 at 19:50 (UT). The carrier was transporting a total of 2.5 tons (2,267.96 kilograms) of supplies for the crew on the ISS, including 110 pounds (49.90 kilograms) of oxygen, 1,918 pounds (869.99 kilograms) of propellant, 463 pounds (210.01 kilograms) of water, and 2,866 pounds (1,300.00 kilograms) of food, clothing, equipment, and other dry cargo. News agencies also reported that Progress was carrying a new Russian Orlan spacesuit. In advance of Progress-M 65’s arrival, the crew had filled the previous cargo carrier Progress 29 with trash and had undocked from the ISS on 1 September 2008.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Tarik Malik, “New Cargo Ship Arrives at Space Station,” Space.com, 17 September 2008, http://www. space.com/5852-cargo-ship-arrives-space-station.html (accessed 28 July 2011); Todd Halvorson, “Russian Freighter Rockets Toward Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2008.)
George David Low, a former NASA astronaut who had flown on three Space Shuttle missions, died at the age of 52 from colon cancer. Low, who was the son of former NASA Director George M. Low, had worked at NASA’s JPL from 1980 to 1984 before NASA selected him to train as an astronaut. During his 12 years as an astronaut, Low had spent more than 714 hours in space and had circled Earth more than 540 times. After retiring as an astronaut, Low had continued to serve NASA on the Russian Integration Team and in the Legislative Affairs Office. In 1996 he had joined Orbital Sciences Corporation, and in 2006 he had become the Senior Vice President and Program Manager for Orbital’s Commercial Orbital Transportation Service program.(Joe Holley, “G. David Low, 52; Cerebral Astronaut Flew on 3 Shuttles,” Washington Post, 20 March 2008.)
NASA marked the 10-year anniversary of the ISS, which the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States had established with the 20 November 1998 launch of the Russian-built Zarya module. The Unity connector module had joined the ISS in December 1998.
A Russian Proton-M rocket launched an American AMC-14 communications satellite at 02:18 (MST), from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, but failed to bring it into correct orbit. The Breeze-M booster on the rocket failed 10 minutes after launch, leaving the satellite 8,000 kilometers (4,971 miles) below geostationary orbit. SES Americom owned the satellite, and Lockheed Martin had built it. The failed satellite had featured a new telecommunications technology that allowed changes in coverage while the satellite was in orbit. The satellite’s design would have enabled it to achieve a higher altitude using its own engine, although this would use up the satellite’s fuel supply and significantly shorten its lifespan.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Russian Rocket Fails To Take US Satellite into Planned Orbit,” 14 March 2008.)
NASA announced that it had signed a modification to the ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation services. NASA would use the US$141 million, firm-fixed-price extension to meet the United States’ obligations to its international partners for transportation to and from the ISS. The contract’s extension would cover two Soyuz flights, to carry cargo to and from the ISS and to remove trash. The contract allowed for Roscosmos to launch to the ISS 50 kilograms (110.23 pounds) of cargo per person; to return to Earth 17 kilograms (37.48 pounds) of cargo per person; and to dispose of 30 kilograms (66.14 pounds) of trash per person. Additionally, the contract extension covered broad support for a long-duration mission for three ISS crew members, including crew rescue and training and preparation for launch and landing. The crew members would launch aboard two Soyuz rockets in the fall of 2011 and would land on Earth in the spring of 2012.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” news release C08-068, 2 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-317_Dale_resigns.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz TMA-12 passenger-transport craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 12:17 (UT), marking the beginning of the ISS’s Expedition 17 mission. The Soyuz carried Russian cosmonauts, Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko, and South Korean astronaut So-yeon Yi. Yi, the first South Korean to enter space, would stay on the ISS for only 10 days, conducting experiments. She would then return to Earth with the departing Expedition 16 crew members, aboard a Soyuz TMA-11 that had been docked at the ISS since October 2007. Kononenko was Expedition 17’s Flight Engineer, and Volkov was the mission’s Commander. Volkov was the son of cosmonaut Alexander A. Volkov, making this launch the first occasion of a second-generation cosmonaut or astronaut traveling to space. The third member of the expedition, American astronaut Garrett E. Reisman, was already aboard the ISS. Over the course of six months, the crew of Expedition 17 planned to install the large Japanese Kibo laboratory, supervise the undocking of ESA’s Jules Verne ATV, and complete at least one spacewalk.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654, 1 May 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx654.html (accessed 17 February 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “New Station Crew, Korean Astronaut Rocket Into Space,” Space.com, 8 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5217-station-crew-korean-astronaut-rocket-space.html (accessed 3 March 2011).)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held its first hearing to review NASA’s proposed fiscal year (FY) 2009 budget request and FY 2008 Operating Plan. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony in support of NASA’s US$17.6 billion request, which would allocate US$5.78 billion for Space Shuttle and ISS programs, US$4.44 billion for science, US$3.5 billion for development of new crewed spacecraft, and US$447 million for aeronautics research. Griffin devoted much of his oral testimony to NASA’s request for an extension of a statutory waiver, which permits funding for payments to Russia for crew transport to the ISS. The current waiver had been a provision of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Non Proliferation Act (Pub. L. No. 106-178, as amended). Griffin stated that NASA needed legislative authorization for the funding in 2008, because Russia required 36 months to fabricate new transport vehicles; therefore, NASA needed to finalize contractual agreements by late 2008, so that Russia could complete the vehicles by 2012.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Committee Examines FY09 NASA Budget,” press release, 13 February 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID= 2088 (accessed 4 January 2010); United Press International, “NASA Proposes $17.6 Billion Budget,” 4 February 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 February 2008, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG- 110hhrg40598/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg40598.pdf (accessed 4 January 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz spacecraft landed in Kazakhstan at 10:37 p.m. (CDT), returning space tourist Richard A. Garriott and cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko from the ISS. Garriott, who had been the sixth tourist to visit the ISS, had lifted off for the ISS with two American astronauts on 12 October 2008. Commander Volkov and Flight Engineer Kononenko had served 197 days aboard the ISS on the Expedition 17 mission, performing two spacewalks. During their mission, NASA’s Space Shuttle had visited the ISS to deliver a Japanese laboratory. The Expedition 18 crew, American Commander E. Michael Fincke and Russian Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, had replaced Volkov and Kononenko on the ISS.(Tariq Malik, “New Space Station Crew Takes Charge,” Space.com, 22 October 2008, http://www.space.com/ 6011-space-station-crew-takes-charge.html (accessed 11 August 2011); NASA, “Expedition 17 Crew Returns from International Space Station,” news release 08-269, 23 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/ HQ_08-269_Expedition_17_landing.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Yuri V. Lonchakov spent 6 hours on a spacewalk outside the ISS. They installed a device, known as a Langmuir probe, to monitor the electrical field around the ISS. Russian engineers believed that electrical interference might have damaged the explosive bolts on two Soyuz spacecraft, causing the craft to experience rough flight reentries in October 2007 and April 2008. Fincke and Lonchakov also installed a Russian experiment called Impuls, retrieved the Russian microbe experiment Biorisk, and took photographs of the Russian segment of the ISS. The spacewalkers attempted to install the European biological experiment EXPOSE-R, but the experiment would not activate to relay telemetry. Russian flight controllers eventually ordered Fincke and Lonchakov to remove the experiment and to return it to the ISS. The spacewalk was the first for Lonchakov and the fifth for Fincke.(Mark Carreau, “Space Station Astronauts Finish 6-Hour Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 23 December 2008; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Add New Experiments to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2008, http://www. space.com/6254-spacewalkers-add-experiments-space-station.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko removed an explosive bolt from a Soyuz spacecraft docked at the ISS. The spacewalk was the first for both cosmonauts. Despite experiencing some initial delays at the beginning of the 6-hour spacewalk, Volkov and Kononenko were able successfully to pry off the 3-inch (7.62-centimeter) bolt and to deposit it in a blast-proof case. If the bolt had accidentally discharged during its removal, the force of the explosion could have torn open the cosmonauts’ spacesuits. Russian engineers expected that the Soyuz mission scheduled for 23 October 2008 would return the bolt to Earth. The engineers hoped to study the bolt, to determine why similar bolts had failed or misfired during the Soyuz reentries of 21 October 2007 and 19 April 2008. Because of those malfunctions, the spacecraft had entered Earth’s atmosphere at steeper-than-normal angles, subjecting the crews to higher gravitational forces and causing the vehicles to land as far as 300 miles (482.80 kilometers) off course.(Mark Carreau, “Cosmonauts Remove Explosive Bolt on Daring Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 11 July 2008.)
ESA’s ATV Jules Verne successfully docked with the ISS in a 4-hour process completed at 14:52 (GMT). Previously, only Russia had successfully achieved an automated docking in space. To align the ATV with the docking cone on the Zvezda module, the cargo ship used global positioning system (GPS) technology and videometers that pointed toward laser retroreflectors on the ISS. Docking occurred while both of the spacecraft were orbiting at an altitude of 340 kilometers (211.27 miles) above Earth, at approximately 28,000 kilometers per hour (17,398.39 miles per hour). ESA officials supervised the docking from an ESA control center in France, with assistance from the Russian ISS control center near Moscow and from NASA’s JSC. The ISS partners planned for the ATV Jules Verne to remain docked at the ISS for approximately four months, during which time the ATV would serve as an additional module. The mission’s goals were to ferry 7.5 tons (6,803.89 kilograms) of supplies to the crew of the ISS and to use the ATV’s propulsion system to lift the orbit of the ISS.(ESA, “Europe’s Automated Ship Docks to the ISS,” press release no. 20-2008, 3 April 2008, http://www.esa.int/ esaCP/SEMORO5QGEF_index_0.html (accessed 17 February 2011); Warren E. Leary, “Robot Ship Successfully Docks with Space Station,” New York Times, 4 April 2008.)
An uncrewed Russian cargo ship, known as Progress-M 64 or Progress 29, launched at 20:23 (UT) aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. It carried 3.1 tonnes (3,100 kilograms or 6,834.33 pounds) of supplies to the crew of the ISS, including 568 pounds (257.64 kilograms) of food; 282 pounds (127.91 kilograms) of hygiene products; 277 pounds (125.65 kilograms) of medicine; 770 pounds (349.27 kilograms) of propellant; over 100 pounds (45.36 kilograms) of oxygen and air; and 925 pounds (419.57 kilograms) of water. Also traveling to the ISS aboard the cargo craft were 90 snails that would be part of a scientific experiment studying the effects of weightlessness on live organisms. The ISS crew expected Progress to dock automatically with the ISS on 17 May 2008.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655, 1 June 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx655.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Tariq Malik, “Russian Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station,” Space.com, 15 May 2008, http://www. space.com/5344-russian-cargo-ship-launches-space-station.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
Leaders from the partner agencies that work on the ISS met at ESA headquarters in Paris to discuss the configuration, development, and operation of their activities. Those present for the discussion included representatives of the space agencies of Canada, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States. They noted the achievements aboard the ISS since their last meeting, in January 2007, including the delivery of two new laboratories, a node, and a large robot, as well as the launching of ESA’s ATV and the formation of a global ground-operation control center. In addition, the agency heads discussed the ISS’s improved capacity for engineering testing, on- orbit research, and technological development. They also examined future plans for the ISS, including the effects of the planned change to a six-person crew in 2009, the enhanced reliance on the Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles for transportation to the ISS, and the long-term use of the station beyond 2015.(NASA, “Heads of Agency International Space Station Joint Statement,” news release 08-178, 17 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08178_HOA_Joint_Statement.html (accessed 18 May 2011). 87 NASA, “NASA’s Ames, JPL Win NASA Software of Year Award,” news release 08-182, 22 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08182_Software_of_the_Year.html (accessed 18 July 2011). 88 NASA, “NASA, USDA Sign Space Station Research Agreement,” news release 08-184, 23 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08184_USDA_mou.html (accessed 18 May 2011).)
The Russian Soyuz TMA-11 landed in Kazakhstan at 04:30 (EDT), after a ballistic reentry that deposited the spacecraft approximately 295 miles (474.76 kilometers) from its intended landing location. NASA officials explained that, in a ballistic reentry, a spacecraft reenters Earth’s atmosphere at an angle steeper than normal, subjecting the astronauts to higher gravitational forces. Russian officials pledged to investigate the cause of the rough landing. The crew members on board—Peggy A. Whitson, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and So-yeon Yi—did not report any injuries from the incident. The three crew members were returning to Earth after completing Expedition 16 to the ISS. Yi, South Korea’s first astronaut, had been aboard the ISS for 10 days, conducting experiments. Whitson, an American astronaut, had served as the first female commander of the ISS. During this mission, she had set the record for the most cumulative time an American had spent in space. Malenchenko, a Russian cosmonaut, had been Flight Engineer for Expedition 16. During the busy mission, lasting six months, crew members had conducted a wide variety of scientific experiments. During seven spacewalks, they had attached new modules to the ISS, repaired damages to the station, and received three visits from the Shuttle and one visit from ESA’s unpiloted cargo ship Jules Verne.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Land Off-Target, But Safely,” Space.com, 19 April 2008, http://www.space.com/5262-space-station-astronauts-land-target-safely.html (accessed 3 March 2011); NASA, “Expedition 16 Soyuz Lands Safely in Kazakhstan,” news release 08-105, 19 April 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/apr/HQ_08105_Exp_16_lands.html (accessed 17 February 2011).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 07:01 (UT), ferrying an American space tourist and two Expedition 18 crew members to the ISS. Tourist Richard A. Garriott was the son of former astronaut Owen K. Garriott, who had been a crew member of Skylab 3 in 1973. Garriott had reached a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos to spend nine days aboard the ISS and to return to Earth with the Expedition 17 crew on 23 October 2008. The Expedition 18 crew, consisting of Commander E. Michael Fincke of NASA and Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, would replace two members of the Expedition 17 crew, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko. The third crew member, Russian cosmonaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, had arrived at the ISS in June 2008 and planned to stay until November 2008. The main goal of Expedition 17 was to prepare the ISS to accommodate six crew members on long-duration missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, “New Crew Blasts Off for International Space Station,” news release 08-257, 12 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-257_X18_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
In their second spacewalk in five days, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko left the ISS to undertake a spacewalk in which they set up a docking target and worked on two scientific experiments. The ISS partners had originally scheduled the tasks for the 10 July 2008 spacewalk, but officials had postponed those activities to allow time for the removal of an explosive bolt on a Soyuz spacecraft. During the walk, which lasted nearly 6 hours, Volkov and Kononenko placed a docking target on the side of the Zvezda module, in preparation for the scheduled arrival in 2009 of a new airlock, the Mini-Research Module 2 (MRM2). The astronauts then installed a physics experiment called Vsplesk, which would study the effects of high-energy particle streams near Earth. The cosmonauts also retrieved the payload of the Biorisk experiment, which had studied the effects of space radiation and zero gravity on microorganisms. Additionally, they made an impromptu repair of a ham-radio antenna.(Jeremy Hsu, “Cosmonauts’ Second Spacewalk Goes Smoothly,” Space.com, 16 July 2008, http://www.space.com/ 5630-cosmonauts-spacewalk-smoothly.html (accessed 26 May 2011).)
Russia announced the launch of the uncrewed cargo ship Progress 28, also known as Progress M 63, aboard a Soyez rocket at 13:02 (UT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Central Asia. Progress 28 carried 2.5 tons (2,268 kilograms or 5,000 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including 100 pounds (45 kilograms) of oxygen, 925 pounds (420 kilograms) of water, 1,165 pounds (528 kilograms) of rocket propellant, and approximately 2,925 pounds (1,327 kilograms) of food, clothing, and equipment. The previous cargo ship, Progress 27, had undocked from the ISS on 4 February 2008 in preparation for the arrival of Progress 28. Russia had planned to allow Progress 27 to fall to Earth and to burn up in the atmosphere.
NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, and spaceflight participant Charles Simonyi, who had visited the ISS for the second time, landed safely in a Soyuz spacecraft in the steppes of southern Kazakhstan after undocking from the station on 7 April. The Russian federal space agency Roscosmos had delayed the landing for one day after discovering that spring flooding had affected the original landing site. Roscosmos had moved the landing to a location further south. Fincke and Lonchakov were returning from Expedition 18. During that expedition, the ISS had gained full power and had begun water-supply recycling in preparation for the station’s first six-person crew. In addition, the crew of Expedition 18 had performed scientific experiments, including many experiments designed to gather information about the effects of long-duration spaceflight on the human body.
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev launched aboard Soyuz TMA-16 from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 a.m. (CDT), to become the next residents of the ISS. Also aboard was spaceflight participant Guy Laliberté, the Canadian founder of Cirque du Soleil, who was flying to the ISS under an agreement with Space Adventures and the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Laliberté had paid US$35 million to travel to and from the ISS and to reside at the ISS for nine days. He planned to use his experience to publicize a growing global problem—the shortage of clean water.(NASA, “New Space Station Crew Launches; In-Orbit News Conference Set,” news release 09-226, 30 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-226_Soyuz_Exp21_Launch.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Canadian Circus Billionaire Heads to Space Station,” 30 September 2009.)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, “Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt undertook a 4-hour, 54-minute spacewalk to install a pair of antennas for automated rendezvous equipment. The astronauts undertook the work to prepare for the arrival of the Russian Mini Research Module 2 (MRM 2), which would serve as an additional docking port for Russian vehicles. Padalka and Barratt also connected each antenna to a series of power cables and photographed them from aboard the long Strela extension pole. Padalka operated the Strela boom, while Barratt took pictures from multiple vantage points, to allow Russian mission control to analyze the antennas and to ensure that the crew had installed them correctly.
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA announced that, in 2012 and 2013, it had signed a US$306 million modification to its ISS contract with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos for crew transportation and related services. According to Alexei B. Krasnov, Director of Human Flight Programs at Roscosmos, NASA would pay US$51 million per astronaut aboard the Soyuz craft. The modification covered all necessary Soyuz training and preparation for launch, crew rescue, and landing of a long- duration mission for six individual ISS crew members. The agreement covered four Soyuz launches—two in the spring of 2012 and two in the fall of 2012, with landings scheduled for the fall of 2012 and the spring of 2013—as well as postflight rehabilitation, medical exams, and services. The agreement allowed for limited cargo per person, to and from the station: 110 pounds (49.9 kilograms) launched to the ISS, 37 pounds (16.8 kilograms) returned to Earth, and 66 pounds (29.9 kilograms) of trash disposal.(NASA, “NASA Extends Contract with Russian Federal Space Agency,” contract release C09-024, 28 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_C09-024_Soyuz_Con_Mod.html (accessed 20 June 2011); RIA Novosti, “Russia To Charge NASA $51 Mln for Seats on Soyuz Spacecraft,” 29 May 2009.)
ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
Progress 32 successfully carried out an automated docking at the ISS Pirs docking compartment, with Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov monitoring the process from a terminal inside the space station. The two spacecraft linked up flawlessly and the docking required no intervention from Lonchakov.(Tariq Malik, “New Russian Cargo Ship Docks at Space Station,” Space.com, 13 February 2009, http://www. space.com/4777-russian-cargo-ship-docks-space-station.html (accessed 10 March 2011).)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
NASA announced that it had named Robert M. Lightfoot Jr. as Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Lightfoot had begun his career at NASA’s MSFC in 1989, working as a Test Engineer and Program Manager for the Space Shuttle’s main-engine-technology testbed program and for the Atlas launch vehicle’s Russian RD-180-engine-testing program. In 1998 NASA had appointed Lightfoot Deputy Division Chief of MFSC’s propulsion-test division. A year later, he had moved to SSC in Mississippi to serve as Chief of Propulsion Test Operations, and in 2002 he had become Director of the Propulsion Test Directorate at Stennis. Between 2003 and 2005, Lightfoot had served as Assistant Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program in the Office of Space Operations at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. He had moved to MSFC in 2005 to serve as Manager of the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office. Lightfoot had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MFSC from 2007 to 2009 and as MSFC’s Acting Director since March 2009.(NASA, “Lightfoot Named Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 09-195, 24 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-195_Lightfoot.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt carried out a 12-minute spacewalk inside the station, tying the record for the shortest spacewalk. The record dates to 1965, the first spacewalk ever conducted. Although the men remained inside the ISS, NASA considered the activity a spacewalk because they were working in a vacuum, wearing their Orlan MK spacesuits, connected to umbilicals. Padalka and Barratt’s task was to connect a port in the Zvezda command module, in preparation for the arrival of a new docking module, the MRM 2. The new module, the fourth Russian docking port, would support the increased traffic at the station associated with the full-time crew of six.(William Harwood, “Crew Performs Unusual Spacewalk Inside Station,” Spaceflight Now, 10 June 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
Soyuz TMA-17, carrying Timothy J. Creamer, Soichi Noguchi, and Oleg V. Kotov, docked with the ISS at 22:48 (GMT). An automated docking system successfully brought the craft into port on the Earth-facing side of the Russian Zarya module. Hatches opened at 00:30 (GMT). The new arrivals floated onto the station wearing red Santa hats and elf hats and carrying a small Christmas tree and a white sack of gifts. Jeffrey N. Williams and Maxim V. Suraev welcomed them on board the ISS, where they would live for six months as members of the Expedition 22 and Expedition 23 missions.(James Dean, “New Crew Set To Begin Six-Month Stay on Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Arrives at Space Station,” Space.com, 23 December 2009, http://www.space. com/7704-crew-arrives-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
A new Russian MRM 2 named Poisk, or Explore, docked with the ISS at 10:41 a.m. (EST). A cargo ship carrying Poisk had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 November. The 4-ton (3.63-tonne, or 3,628-kilogram) module, measuring 13 feet long (4 meters long) and 8 feet (2.4 meters) in diameter, attached to the space-facing port of the Zvezda service module. Poisk would provide a fourth Russian docking port, an airlock for Russian spacewalkers, and an experiment platform. In addition to Poisk, the Russian delivery included water-supply equipment, hygiene supplies for the crew, medical equipment, personal items, and spare parts.(Associated Press, “Space Station Gets New Research Module,” 13 November 2009; James Dean, “Watch Live: Russian Module Docking at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Gets New Russian Module,” Space.com, 12 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7518-space-station-russian- module.html (accessed 28 November 2011).)
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
Eilene Marie Galloway, a pioneer in space law and policy, died of cancer at the age of 102. As a national defense analyst at the Library of Congress, Galloway had helped organize hearings on U.S. space preparedness following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik in 1957, which had led to the creation of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Aeronautics. Galloway had also served as an advisor during the formation of the House Select Committee on Astronautics and Space Exploration. When the House Select Committee recommended the creation of a national space agency, Galloway had suggested that Congress constitute the new entity as an administration responsible for coordinating space-related activities across the federal government. In addition to advising Congress on space policy, Galloway had helped establish the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UNCOPUOS). She had frequently served on UNCOPUOS as a representative of the United States. Galloway had also been a founding member of the International Institute of Space Law (IISL) and had frequently voiced her support for Article II of the Outer Space Treaty, which states, “celestial bodies are not subject to national appropriations by claims of sovereignty, by means of use or occupation, or by any other means.” In 2006 Galloway had become the first woman elected Honorary Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. She had also been a fellow of the AAS, an Honorary Director of the IISL, a Trustee Emeritus of the International Academy of Astronautics, the first recipient of a Lifetime Achievement Award from Women in Aerospace, and the recipient of the NASA Public Service Award and Gold Medal.(Frank Morring Jr., “Space-Law Pioneer Eilene Galloway Dead at 102,” Aviation Week, 5 May 2009.)
Participants in a simulated mission to Mars, the Mars-500 project at the Russian Institute of Biomedical Problems (IMBP) in Moscow, completed a 105-day session locked in a series of hermetically sealed tubes. The project was a joint venture between ESA and the IMPB. In addition to the isolation, the simulation experiment included communication delays of up to 20 minutes and unexpected emergency situations. Since 31 March 2009, the Mars-500 crew, comprising four Russians, a German soldier, and a French airline pilot, had conducted approximately 70 experiments testing psychological and physical reactions to long-term isolation. The international team of scientists, representing Europe and the United States, was seeking ways to help subjects avoid mental breakdowns and other consequences that could result from prolonged monotony. For this experiment, researchers locked participants into a Soviet-era isolation chamber and observed their responses. Mission physician Aleksei V. Baranov described daily life for the crew members participating in the experiment, explaining that their work did not stop from day to day. During the rare moments when a crew member was free to relax, he remembered that he was away from home, far from loved ones, and that the schedule required that he wake up early to work every day. Baranov added that individuals find preparing for unceasing, monotonous work psychologically difficult. The experiment was the precursor to a longer simulation planned for early 2010, in which the researchers planned to isolate another six- member crew in the same capsule for 520 days.
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
A Russian Soyuz craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 10:34 (UT), carrying Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) Robert B. Thirsk, Russia’s Roman Y. Romanenko, and ESA’s Frank De Winne of Belgium on a landmark mission to expand the crew of the ISS from three crew members to six. At the ISS, the Soyuz crew would join ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka of Russia and Flight Engineers Michael R. Barratt of NASA and Koichi Wakata of JAXA. De Winne, scheduled to replace Padalka as station commander in October, would be the first ESA astronaut to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “New Station Crew Launches on Soyuz; Briefing from Space on June 1,” media advisory M09-094, 27 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_M09-094_ISS_crew_briefing.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Peter Leonard, “Russian Capsule Blasts Off for Space Station,” Associated Press, 28 May 2009; Benoit Finck, “Astronauts Blast Off To Double Space Station Crew,” Agence France-Presse, 28 May 2009; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667.)
Progress 31, a new digitally controlled Russian Progress M-01M-series cargo spacecraft, completed its mission when its remaining fragments fell into the Pacific Ocean after reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The craft had launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, on 26 November 2008, to deliver 2.5 tons (2,267 kilograms, or 2.27 tonnes) of cargo to the ISS, including scientific equipment and supplies of food, fuel, and water. The craft had undocked from the ISS on 6 17 February, undergoing tests at a safe distance from the space station before decommissioning.
A Russian satellite launched in 1993, and that engineers believed to be nonfunctioning, crashed into an Iridium commercial satellite that had been in orbit since 1997. The collision marked the first instance of high-speed impact between two intact spacecraft. At the time of the event, Iridium had a system of 65 active satellites relaying calls from portable telephones approximately twice the size of regular mobile phones. Iridium was serving approximately 300,000 subscribers, including one of its largest cellular subscribers, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The loss of the satellite caused brief, occasional outages in service. Iridium planned to replace the lost satellite within 30 days with one of eight in-orbit spares. Communications satellites, which typically orbit at high altitudes and travel separately, rarely collide. However, Iridium satellites traveled fast, at a low orbit. The Iridium collision, which occurred approximately 500 miles (805 kilometers) from Earth, created a huge debris field. Nicholas L. Johnson of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) explained that the risk of the ISS encountering debris was low, because the space station is 215 miles (346 kilometers) from Earth.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Big Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” 12 February 2009; Traci Watson, “Two Satellites Collide 500 Miles Over Siberia,” USA Today, 12 February 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earth’s atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1’s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Korea’s launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (North Korea’s) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Korea’s launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Korea’s complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, “South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space,” 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, “South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch,” Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
