JSC reported that its engineers had designed, built, and installed an emergency communications console at the medical center in Odessa, Texas, control center for the 17-county Permian Basin emergency medical system. The prototype console would allow physicians and nurses to consult with paramedics in the field, receive incoming electrocardiograms, set up radio-to-telephone patches, page hospital staff members, and automatically dial special care centers and other facilities in the area. After field tests and modification, JSC engineers would make console plans available to interested communities, according to a NASA announcement. (JSC Release 77-27; NASA Release 77-86)
JSC reported it had modified its mission control center to use solar power for dehumidifying the building. Solar panels installed on the roof would provide heat 60% of the time, according to weather calculations for the Houston area, and would save about 1.5 million ft3 of natural gas per yr at a construction cost of about $240 000. The modification was part of a joint NASA/DOE solar-energy demonstration project. (JSC Release 77-86)
United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim and delegates from 14 nations had recorded messages to be carried with music and natural sounds on a copper phonograph record by the Voyagers scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral Aug. 20 and Sept. 1, Today newspaper reported. Messages were from Australia, Canada, the U.S., Chile, France, Belgium, Austria, Sweden, Egypt, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Iran, Pakistan, and Indonesia. They included poems in French and Swedish, a passage from the Koran in Arabic, and various texts in Esperanto, English, Flemish, German, Spanish, Persian, Urdu, Indonesian, the Creole language of Sierra Leone, and the Efik language of Nigeria. In his message, Waldheim said: “As the Secretary General of the United Nations, an organization of 147 member states who represent almost all of the human inhabitants of the planet Earth, I send greetings on behalf of the people of our planet. We step out of our solar system into the universe seeking only peace and friendship, to teach if we are called upon, to be taught if we are fortunate.” NASA spokesman Timothy Ferris said the messages, aimed at extraterrestrial intelligences, would be “like a note in a bottle for the extraterrestrials, if they exist.” Voyager 1, which would reach Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in 1980, would pass out of the solar system several yr later. (Today, June 3/77, 10A; NYT, June 3/77, A4)
