Congressman V. Anfuso and Senator H. Humphrey introduced similar bills (H.R. 10203 and S. 2849) to provide for research into and development of practical means for the utilization of solar energy.
George C. Barnhart, pioneer airman and inventor, died in Pasadena. Barnhart held 70 aircraft patents, including one for wing tanks. In 1942, he had turned over his patent for split-edge wing flap, a landing brake used on conventional and jet aircraft, to the Army Air Forces for the duration of the war, thousands of planes being built 1946-51 using the Barnhart flap for which he received no royalties as World War II had (not been officially ended. He had intended to sue the Government for $10 million.
Senator Howard W. Cannon of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences spoke on the floor on the short supply of scientists available to nasa and to its private industry contractors. He proposed a closer relationship between nasa and the universities: “We need to develop and develop from the beginning, space-oriented physicists, space engineers, space chemists, and space biologists.” He cited nasa’s cooperative program with universities established without the benefit of legislation, and said that he proposed to introduce legislation to amend the nasa Act for the purpose of: “(1) to increase the number of undergraduates who wlli make space science and space engineeringtheir primary field of work; (2) to provide nasa with clear directive and the necessary funds to establish an integrated and intimate program of research, fellowships, grants and curriculum specialization with universities . . .; and (3) to establish one or more university-operated space laboratories which wlli stimulate basic research and train professionals. . . .”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved a bill to revise space research patent laws. Bill allowed private companies to retain title to patents earned under Government contract, with Government retaining a license to use such inventions without cost.
nasa announced appointment of Robert H. Charles as procurement consllitant to the Administrator. Charles previously had served as executive vice president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp.
In statement before the House Space Subcommittee, Grant L. Hansen, Vice President of the Astronautics Division of General Dynamics and Director of the Centaur program, stated that preliminary data on May 9 explosion indicated that structural failure was caused by the “design of the weather shield between the nose fairing and the Centaur itself” and the design of weather shield “was an engineering mistake.” Design of the weather shield was based, he said, upon assumptions that “turned out to be false . . ., very difficult to define by laboratory analysis and without full-scale wind-tunnel tests.” In spite of program delays, Hansen said that the Centaur program had been subjected to “unwarranted criticisms.”
In testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Gen. Bernard Schriever, Commander of afsc, discussed the “reciprocal support” between nasa and the usaf, and the national requirement for mllitary space weapons systems. He pointed out that: (1) 102 usaf officers were assigned full-time with nasa as well as 23 Navy and 33 Army; (2) $49 millions of nasa support was funded by the usaf through FY 61 and over $200 millions in FY 62; (3) $270 millions of nasa funds were processed under cognizance of afsc during FY 61; and (4) nasa use of usaf booster, launch, and tracking capabllities and the joint X-15 program further demonstrated “the work nasa and the Air Force are doing together as a team.” Gen. Schriever pointed to the fundamental capabilities of future space weapon systems and the assignment by the Secretary of Defense of major responsibility for mllitary space systems development to the Air Force.
H.R. 12812, blli to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 regarding property rights in inventions by private companies under nasa contract, was reported from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
Walter C. Scott, Chief of nasa’s Space Power Technology Program, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said one of the promising developments in solar cells was the possibility of producing thin strips of silicon solar cells on some kind of substrata. If this can be done, the “much lower cost, lower weight and improved mechanical properties wlli be attractive to the space industry and for that matter to the civilian economy. Thin films of cadmium sulfide have been produced in small areas with conversion efficiencies of 3%. It has been stated that if this efficiency collid be increased to 5% and produced in large areas, solar power wollid be economically competitive with conventional sources at rates of 3 to 4 mils per kilowatt hour.”
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, summarized the year’s activities of the committee in speech on House floor: “It has been another busy year for the committee, highlighted by action on the fourth annual budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, now rapidly approaching the $4 billion mark. In addition to the intensive study the space budget underwent, the committee also conducted 26 investigations, issued 16 reports, held 124 days of hearings, and heard 236 witnesses. “Indicative of the committee’s activity is the more than 2,175,000	words of testimony taken this year incorporated into approximately 3,860 pages of printed hearings. . . .”
Senator Hubert Humphrey announced public hearing on improvement of Government management of information and coordination of reporting would be conducted by Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations, September 20. Among officials testifying would be Melvin Day, Director of nasa Office of Technical Information. September 14: mariner ii, U.S. Venus probe, continued to transmit signals from interplanetary space to earth on its nineteenth day of flight, thus surpassing record of U.S.S.R. Venus probe which stopped transmitting on its eighteenth day of flight in February 1961. At 8:00 PM edt the spacecraft was estimated to be 3,067,471 mi. from earth and traveling at a speed of 6,463 mph relative to the earth, jpl scientists said the probe appeared to be continuing “right on course.”
Speaking on the floor of the Senate, Senator Thomas Dodd supported statements by Senator Cannon on August 20, and added: “The primary goals of our foreign policy, as I see it, are first, the protection of our Nation; second, the maintenance and extension of freedom; and third, the preservation of peace. . . . Our ability to protect our freedoms and preserve the peace depends ... on our military power in-being—on land, on sea, in the air and, tomorrow, in space. ... “I earnestly hope that it will prove possible to maintain our scientific space program and our moon program intact while instituting an immediate program to bolster our flagging military effort in space. . . . “The reorganization of our space effort will require a number of changes. First, and preceding everything else, there must be a change in policy, which clearly and publicly assigns a greater emphasis to the military potentialities of space. . . . “Second, there must be a specific directive to the Defense Department to proceed as a matter of the utmost urgency with the development of military space systems, in particular of manned space vehicles . . . “Third, I believe that while proceeding with the development of specialized military spacecraft, our Military Establishment should be authorized to embark immediately on a launching program of its own for manned space vehicles, perhaps employing modified versions of the equipment now under development by NASA. . . . “Fourth, to support the establishment of military launching and vehicle development programs, our astronaut training program will have to be stepped up, and military personnel will have to be trained in the use of the complex monitoring and control systems that constitute the brain of our entire space vehicle effort. “Fifth, our defense program in space wlli have to be provided with whatever money may be necessary to achieve its objectives, and to overtake the Soviet lead in manned space vehicles. “Sixth, the machinery of cooperation between nasa and Defense wlli have to be overhauled in a manner which gives due consideration to the requirements of defense as well as to the requirements of science. . . .”
Sir Frederick Handley Page, British aviation pioneer, and chairman and managing director of Handley Page Ltd., died in London at age 76. Inventor of the slotted wing, he provided England with its first bombers in 1915 and his Halifax bomber of World War II, of which more than 60,000 were produced, was a key weapon of raf Bomber Command.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reportedly ordered an investigation of alleged government discrimination against women, naming in executive session Congressman Victor L. Anfuso as chairman of a special nine-man, two-woman investigation subcommittee.
Jessie G. Vincent, automotive and airplane engine designer and holder of over 400 patents, died in Detroit at age 82. Vice president of the Packard Motor Car Co. from 1915 to 1948, Mr. Vincent was codesigner of the Liberty Marine engine in World War I and as an Army major helped get the Liberty engine into production, at which time it was regarded as the world’s finest power plant of its kind.
Senator Wiley of Wisconsin urged that Congress before adjournment conduct hearings on the military implications of U.S.S.R. two-man orbital space flights.
House Appropriations Committee cut a $65 million nasa item for purchase of land at Cape Canaveral and in Mississippi from a supplemental appropriations bill for the balance of FY 1962. The action was taken because the House Science and Astronautics Committee had not authorized the expenditure. Approved was $80 million for development, $5 million less than nasa asked for.
Dr. Launor F. Carter was appointed Chief Scientist, usaf, to take office in July succeeding Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold. Dr. Carter, Vice President and Director of Research for System Development Corp. of Santa Monica, Calif., has been a member of the usaf Scientific Advisory Board since 1955. A psychologist, Dr. Carter has done much work on leadership, perception, and group behavior.
During hearings of the Joint Senate and House Economic Committee, Senator Paul H. Douglas stated that “the public has never really had a chance to consider” the space program and that one third of the members of the American Astronautical Society had indicated in a poll that “a man landing on the moon was not desirable.” Budget Director David E. Bell stoutly defended the space program. Senator Sparkman questioned Senator Douglas: “I wonder whether Congress felt the same way when it put up money for Samuel Morse” to develop the telegraph.
Senator Hubert Humphrey, in hearings of the Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, told Melvin S. Day, Director of nasa Office of Scientific and Technical Information: “Mr. Day, I want to commend you for blueprinting one of the finest intra-agency systems in the Federal government today in the information field and, of course, I speak of nasa. While the work is being done by private contractor, it is you who have set the high standards for performance. . . . We feel what has been done within the agency, from our limited examination, is an outstanding job, and we want to compliment you on it.” During October: Geophysical Institute of University of Alaska reported to nasa that specially instrumented sounding rockets would be desirable for measuring extent of solar cosmic rays associated with ionization of the upper atmosphere. Auroral-zone absorption disturbances make ground measurements difficult.
Special subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics conducted hearings on solid propellants. Chairman David King of Utah was quoted as saying he wanted the hearings to be detailed enough to commit dod and nasa to a definite plan for solid-propellant rockets. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator Thomas F. Dixon said that nasa was “giving solid rockets equal consideration with liquid rockets in decisions on future launch vehicle designs. . . . We have provided the Air Force with our requirements for an advanced technology or feasibility demonstration program on large solid rocket motors pertinent to the development of solid rocket-powered launch vehicles. “To make an informed choice of propulsion between liquid propellant engines (where the technology is fairly well in hand) and solid propellant motors (where it is not), it is necessary to advance the technology of large solid motors to the point of actual demonstration firings. The demonstration program we have proposed wlli allow us to make a wise choice between the two types of propulsions because a better understanding of costs and schedules as well as developmental problems wlli be available.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued report based on nasa’s authorization hearings and two days of specific testimony on the Centaur program.
President Kennedy released part of a report submitted earlier by Vice President Johnson, Chairman of the Space Council. The report stated that the U.S. had generated a greater rate of progress in space in 1961 than in any other year but that “it is too early to make definitive comparisons as between our newly developing competence and the capabilities of the U.S.S.R.”
nasa submitted to the Congress a draft nasa authorization for FY 1963 bill. It would provide legislative authority to support the nasa budget for FY 1963, and authorize nasa to spend $2,968,278,000 for research, development, and operations and $818,998,000 for construction of facilities.
Soviet scientists claimed to have discovered the third radiation belt around the earth and published such findings two years before the findings of explorer xii were made public by nasa on January 19, 1962. Academician Blagonravov, Vice President of the International Committee on Space Research, said in an Izvestia interview that the existence of a dense belt with energies of 200 to 20,000 electron volts at a distance of 25.000	to 50,000 miles was recorded by Soviet space launchings in 1958. Such findings, he said, were published by Dr. K. Gringauz and associates in the February and April issues of the Soviet Academy oj Sciences Proceedings in 1960, and in later publications. Commenting on the view that the three radiation belts really formed a single large pulsating band that might be called a “magnetosphere,” Blagonravov agreed that the boundaries might be arbitrary but that the charged particles in each belt had distinctive characteristics and that it would be “inexpedient” to reject the theory of three belts.
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in press interview that the greatest accomplishment of Soviet vostok iii and iv flight was putting two men in orbit and bringing them close together. “They’re well ahead in that respect. But we can meet that in a couple of years. We’ll be ahead when Titan 3 is ready.”
Senator Thomas Kuchel of California, speaking in the Senate, said that the bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (H.R. 12812) would provide nasa a needed flexibility in {>atent regulations, including authorization to secure royalty-free icense or complete title for Government-sponsored research, and he recommended that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hold hearings on the bill.
Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke on the floor on the coordination of information between dod, nasa, and aec, and inserted in the record a memo of June 13, 1962, in which he criticized nasa’s information exchanges. He stated: “nasa has developed highly advanced blueprints, so to speak, for information exchange. . . . The blueprints are a long way from realization. . . . [nasa] possesses, moreover, in-house personnel and a principal information contractor with a very high degree of professional competence.”
Tracking network that operated during Glenn orbital flight would for the most part be sufficient to handle the 18-orbit flights to follow, according to Edmond C. Buckley, nasa’s Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. For the Glenn flight, the ground stations had to provide five minutes of contact and communication for every 15 minutes of flight during the 4K-hour mission. For 18 orbits the current requirement was one contact per orbit. This would require repositioning of the two ship stations and adding more telemetryreceiving equipment and command systems to some of the existing sites.
According to the Washington Post, usaf second attempt to orbit belt of copper filaments in Project West Ford experiment was apparently inadvertently revealed by Eugene C. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The attempted orbiting was inferred to have been made sometime this summer, failed because of launch vehicle malfunction (first failure and only attempt publicized had been made on Oct. 21, 1961). Of this report, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Arthur Sylvester, said to the press: “The facts are that only one attempt has been made [to orbit tiny metal filaments] and the U.S. Air Force will coordinate with the National Academy of Sciences on any future attempt.” Confusion had arisen when the Washington Post had reported that the usaf had made an unsuccessful attempt to orbit such a payload during the summer.
The House of Representatives (342-0) approved the nasa authorization for FY 1963 of $3.67 billion. This was almost three times the nasa budget for FY 1962.
