dod named Dr. Albert C. Hall, Vice President and General Manager of Martin Co. Space Systems Div., as Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering for Space Technology. Post was formerly that of Special Assistant to the Director (Harold Brown), held by Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau. (dod Release 969-63; Av. Wk., 7/15/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, spoke to the 1963 Annual Conference of the Atomic Industrial Forum in New York on the relationship between Congress and science. Sen. Anderson offered four main reasons for the new level of Congressional concern over the Federal investment in science and technology: (1) cost consciousness; (2) “the belief among some Members that Congress has lost the ability to oversee effectively the vast diffusion of r&d activities for which it appropriates funds”; (3) “concern that the procedures of Congress, in some respects, may not measure up to the demands of ‘big science’ ”; and (4) “criticism of the space program as ‘moon madness’ and ‘lunacy’ gets lumped in with the criticism of heavy spending for research and development.” Sen. Anderson agreed with the aims of those who were cost conscious, although he noted that many r&d programs that had been canceled as “failures” had in fact left a valuable technological legacy to subsequent programs. He agreed that Congress needed more advice on technical matters, but doubted that the need would be solved by Congress hiring its own technical staff; rather it needed more help from specially convened panels; more engineering advice—since the bulk of the Nation’s $15 billion annual investment in science and technology is in the engineering of hardware rather than in science; improved presentations by the Executive Department, including more briefing by the Office of Science and Technology; expansion of channels of information such as Library of Congress, nas, nsf; reports by the scientific and engineering communities to Congress on the state of science and of engineering; and more long-term planning, (iOR, 12/3/63, 21997-22000)	_
A change in the political climate in the last few months had nasa in trouble on its fifth anniversary, according to John Finney of the New York Times: The trouble really began when scientists began to question the validity of the manned lunar landing. “The approach being urged by the scientific critics is a step-by-step program calling first for lunar investigation by instruments and then a manned program that would not divert resources from other fields of scientific research.” It was this apnroach that was being followed until May 1961, when President Kennedy declared the high priority goal of a manned lunar landing in this decade. “Increasingly, the attack on the space budget is taking on a partisan tinge, and the Administration in turn is reacting m a partisan manner. It is significant, for example, that in the House Appropriations subcommittee the votes to cut the space budget were strictly along partisan lines with the exception of Clarence Cannon . . . .” (Finney, NYT, 10/6/63)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics held its organizational meeting, with Chairman George P. Miller of California announcing names and ranking of committee members. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/6/63)
16th annual McGraw-Hill Survey of Business Plans for New Plaids and Equipment—1963-66 was cited in Congressional Record by Senator Carl T. Curtis (R.-Neb.). Survey showed that 25% of manufacturers’ 1962 sales were in new products not made 10 years ago; manufacturers expect that by 196613% of their sales wiil be in new products not now known. {CR, 5/8/63, 7630)
Six Republican members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended establishment of a special Congressional committee, composed of members of Armed Services Committee and Science and Astronautics Committee, to re-evaluate the national goals in space. The Congressmen said U.S. was ignoring “the main thrust of the Soviet space aim, which is to dominate inner space through the ability to exercise control over the surface of the earth.” Statement was included in a Committee report on nasa FY 1964 authorization bill. (AP, NYT, 7/29/63,12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics met in executive session and ordered nasa FY 1964 authorization bill (H.R. 7500) favorably reported to the House, (nasa Leg. Act. Rept. 11/107)
Senator Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.), asked in televison interview about the pace of the U.S. manned lunar effort, said: “I think we might move forward a little more slowly, but I do believe that those who control space, in the years to come, will control the world.” (“Meet the Press,” nbo—TV, 4/28/63)
nasa budget recommendation for FY 1964 indicated that nasa Electronics Center would bo established in the Greater Boston (Mass.) area. (Boston Globe, 1/18/63)
Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R.-Wis.) introduced resolution (H. Res. 473) to create select committee for investigating expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by Government departments and agencies; proposal was referred to House Committee on Rules, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/119)
nasa Director of Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before Space Sciences subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described one laboratory-tested theory picturing the lunar surface as made of finely powdered sand forming “fairy castles” full of caverns and empty spaces, unable to support a weight. Dr. Newell said an equally plausible theory directly opposed this theory. “. . . This means we have to go there and find out.” (AP, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
National Science Foundation appropriations of $323 million were voted by the House Appropriations Committee, a cut of $265 million from the $589 million requested by the Administration. No funds were approved for new programs. Specifically eliminated were two new programs to improve the Nation’s scientific manpower by (1) encouraging new “centers of scientific excellence” in universities that had unrealized potential, and (2) encouraging more students to go into engineering, mathematics, and physical science. {NYT, 10/8/63, 26)
Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) announced he had asked Senate Committe on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to investigate complaint from three scientists that nasa was using “coercion” to recruit scientists. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reviewed Centaur development in speech on the House floor: “. . . Centaur began as a low-priority, financially austere feasibility study, in competition with high-priority defense programs. As its importance to the national space effort became more apparent, its terms of reference were changed; and, as time passed, its inherent technical difficulties came to the surface; technical difficulties, I might add, that we have learned to expect in most new programs. “Certainly, the original flight schedule of Centaur was overly optimistic. Hindsight also tells us that the complexity of the program was greatly underestimated . . . .” Referring to press articles charging $100 million was wasted in Centaur program, based on gao investigative report, Rep. Miller pointed out: “That report was misinterpreted by the press, and a closer look at it will reveal that no such conclusion was drawn by the Comptroller General. The alleged $100 million waste included $76 million reportedly lost in Hie Advent project, the military communications satellite project .... “While there can be no doubt that certain programs incurred losses because of the unavailability of Centaur on schedule, it is incorrect and unfair to attribute the entire unrecoverable loss associated with the Advent program to Centaur, as the press apparently did. Suffice it to say that the Advent project had its own severe management and technical difficulties which led to its cancellation in June 1962.” He called the Nov. 27 flight test of AC-2 “a significant advance in the development of a new technology upon which much of America’s future space effort depends . . . .”	(67?, 12/2/63, 21906 ff.)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby announced at news conference that Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner hall joined interagency committee studying supersonic transport development. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A2)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported H.R. 7500, nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, to House. Committee’s authorization recommendation was $5.2 billion, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/113)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Rural Electric Cooperatives Association's annual meeting in Las Vegas, said: “In less than 5 years, our country has assumed a solid and secure place of leadership in developing the peaceful and practical uses of outer space. Where once we were, in the judgment of some, lagging behind, today we are, on the basis of clear evidence, forging ahead. Our efforts in space are in no way dictated by a policy of duplicating the activities of the Soviet. We are not engaged in a race with the Communist scientists—we are engaged in a race to extend the horizons of man’s knowledge and to increase the benefits which will better the lives of all men who live on this earth ....’' {CR. 2/18/63,2299)
U.S. Senate paid tributes to the late Senator Robert S. Kerr (D.Okla.) who had been Chairman of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (C7?, 3/1/63,3156-79)
Editorializing on cuts made by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics in the nasa FY 64 appropriations, New York Times said: “Now for the first time it is taking a closer look at nasa’s activities and is making a belated attempt to reduce the waste and duplication uncovered there. “This approach should have been utilized all along. Instead, the committee’s largesse and laxity encouraged nasa to act as if there were no limit to what could be spent in the skies.” (NYT, 6/28/63, 28)
Senator Russell Long (D.-La.) introduced bill (S. 1436) “to prescribe with greater particularity the conditions under which proprietary interests of the United States in inventions may be waived pursuant to section 305 of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.” Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/64)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson quoted in article in Washing4- s\/,n T~i /ii 7/» < ojima ao	f Vi a m atitia/1 Irninv* lotirlm Of TMVyfltlTM • l/(/ / v IVM/y if OU/O UO Ijttj All^ \JX. 1/11V lilUiUllV/U. iUllUA KAllVAUlg	Will • “To default would be as catastrophic as if we had defaulted exploration of the atom.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut $95.5 million from nasa proposed FY 1964 budget, based upon recommendation of Committee’s Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. Today’s reduction brought Committee’s total reduction to $488.88 million, cutting requested $5,712 billion authorization to $5,223 billion. (NYT, 7/10/63, 12; upi, Wash. Post, 7/10/63)
Reported that Senator Strom Thurmond (D.-S.C.) told closed session of Senate that U.S.S.R. was deploying antimissile missiles capable of intercepting Polaris missiles and possibly even Minute-man missiles. Senator Thurmond spoke in favor of speeding up U.S. Nike-Zeus antimissile missile development, but Senate roll call vote (58-to-16) cut a proposed $196 million authorization for Nike-Zeus from the military spending authorization bill for FY 1964. Senate Armed Services Committee had added the Nike-Zeus funds to the Administration’s proposed bill. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/13/63)
Senator Clifford Case (R.-N.J.), in interview taped for radio and television, urged public spotlight on awards of multi-million-dollar defense and space contracts to prevent “political payoffs” and other improprieties. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/63)
James A. Van Allen, speaking at science hearing of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “The spectacular nature of many space achievements, especially those involving human passengers, is such that the space race stirs the enthusiasm of all but the most obtuse or superstitious persons, and makes possible widespread support by the tax-paying public.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/23/63)
Sen. A. S. Monronev (D.-Okla.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Aviation of the Senate Commerce Committee, speaking at the Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Washington, said that the Government’s plan of cost sharing for the development of the supersonic transport aircraft ($1 billion, the U.S. putting up %, the aviation industry the other y4) was “a firm figure that must be considered final .... “I am afraid that many of our finest businessmen still hope to consider this project in the nature of a defense contract. This effort must stand alone as a civil aviation need . . . .” The Senator did concede that if the market turned out to be for 100 aircraft instead of 200, the Government “might be able to give the companies some bail-out on this.” (NYT, 10/81/63, 58)
President Kennedy transmitted to Congress the 1962 report on UJS. Aeronautics and Space Activities, stating in Preface: “The year 1962 was a period of acceleration, accomplishment, and relative progress for the United States in its space leadership drive. In both numbers and complexity of space projects, the past year was the most successful in our brief but active space history.” In accompanying message, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson told Congress that, during 1962, U.S. “generated a greater rate of progress in space than did the U.S.S.R. [However] . . . the records of the two countries were closely similar in regard to the ratio of space successes to space failures.” (Annual Report for 1962; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, A2)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,-nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined status of current nasa activities, described proposed nasa program for FY 1964, and presented nasa budget estimates for FY 1964. (Testimony)
Ford Foundation announced a grant of $300,000 to take young engineering professors from the university campus into industry for one year to give them experience in “manufacturing, marketing, financing, and other considerations that influence engineering decisions in practice.” The program would cover three years and would involve some 60 faculty members. Program would be directed by Clarence E. Watson, former vice president of Columbia Broadcasting System Laboratories. Another $200,000 grant was made to the Univ. of Tenn. to take outstanding scientists and engineers into parttime teaching. (NYT, 11/7/63, 41)
Boston Globe carried article which cited leading electronic industrialists who endorsed nasa’s placement of an Electronics Center in the Boston area. .Public discussion had been triggered by Wall Street Journal article which said that “electronic and other scientific Yankee businessmen are looking critically at a proffered Federal gift [nasa proposed electronics center].” Ephron Catlin, executive vice president of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, commented: “The story completely misrepresents the true feeling of the vast majority of the business and academic community in this area. “Almost the entire area is in favor of the center, and in fact, working for it . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A663)
Raytheon Co. announced appointment of D. Brainerd Holmes as senior vice president, effective Oct. 1. (NYT, 8/6/63,8)
House Resolution 504 to create a select committee to investigate expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by departments and agencies of the Federal Government was reported to House floor from House Committee on Rules. (CR, 8/28/63, 15297-98)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director of nasa Procurement and Supply said in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “ . . . nasa is trying a new contract system which we hope will accomplish the incentive objectives. The base fee in the contract will be lower than the usual fee. Criteria will be set up in the contract for evaluation of the contractor’s performance. These criteria may include reduction and control of costs, excellence of performance, delivery on schedule, and other points. Periodically a nasa board, also specified in the contract, will evaluate the contractor’s performance and may award some higher fee, up to a set maximum, if the facts justify an increase . . . .” (Testimony)
House Appropriations Committee voted $5.1 billion appropriation for nasa in FY 1964, $612 million less than the Administration request and $250 million less than previously authorized by Congress, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the 1970 target date for landing a man on the moon could not be met unless Congress restored the $250 million cut, either by putting it back now or by approving a supplemental request in Jan. 1964. Furthermore, Webb said, the FY 1965 budget would have to make up the “shortfall” from the original Administration request for $5.7 billion. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D.-Mo.), Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said he had wanted the nasa budget cut further to $4.9 billion, tbat the Subcommittee on Independent Offices had wanted $5.3 billion, and that the $5.1 billion represented a compromise. He predicted House approval, said: “Although it’s only a token cut, it shows the attitude of the Committee and the House towards the space budget.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.), Chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, said the cut had nothing to do with President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar landing program. “There was simply one big thing. Everybody wants a tax cut, and many people want a reduction in spending. Of all the spots, this was a good one to cut.” (NYT, 10/8/63,1)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said in commencement address at Univ. of Maryland: “We are not reaching for prestige in space—we are reaching for peace. And this is considerably more urgent than many realize or others will yet admit .... “In exploring space, we are exploring the environment of the earth itself. We are finding paths through a new dimension—and historically civilizations have stood or fallen according to their ability to move through a dimension. “We seek to make space an instrument for peace and the development of mankind. But if we abandon the field, space can be preempted by others as an instrument for aggression. “And in a world of competing social systems, we would be naive indeed if we failed to recognize how bleak the future would be if this new dimension became the realm of tyranny. For your children, and your children’s children, an iron curtain would be drawn across the pathway to the- stars . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/18/63, A3867)
Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity (usaf), dcs Systems and Logistics, Hq. usaf, testifying before the Subcommittee on dod Appropriations of the House Appropriations Committee, stated that usaf was going to modify as space boosters at least 15 of the 64 Thor irbm’s being withdrawn from the U.K. but was dismantling the 45 Jupiter missiles that were withdrawn from Turkey and Italy. Rep. Daniel J. Flood (D.-Penn.) recalled that this Subcommittee had been in the thick of the original Thor-Jupiter controversy, asked “what is the peculiar, special, and significant and distinct thing about the Thor missile which would argue that 15 at least be modified” while Jupiter missiles were being discarded as “garbage.” Gen. Gerrity replied that the reason was quantity rather than quality, that usaf had had more experience with Thor, and “We have launch facilities for the Thor but do not have launch facilities for the Jupiter.” Rep. Flood pressed Gen. Gerrity on “the marked physical distinction [between Thor and Jupiter] which would rush you into this conclusion?” The General did not recall a marked distinction. Rep. Flood asked “did nasa twist your arm and insist they get Thor instead of Jupiter ?” Gen. Gerrity said he knew “of no such circumstances.” (DOD Appro-riations Hearings, House, 88th Congress, 1st Session, Pt. 5, 973- •
Testimony of Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara before House Committee on Armed Services Feb. 2 was released, in which Secretary McNamara said: “A substantial amount of funds [for FY 1964] is requested for dyna-soar. I mention this only to say . . . that technology as it applies to space advances so rapidly that we must expect many changes in programs before they are completed. I personally believe that rather substantial changes lie ahead of us in this dyna-soar. “I say this, in part, because of the gemini development, gemini is a satellite project carried on up to the present time by nasa, on which has been spent to date about $300 million, and for which they will request $300 million in 1964, toward a total program cost of $800 million; it will provide a capsule capable of carrying two men into earth orbit . . . . “gemini is a competitive development with dyna-soar in the sense that each of them are [sic] designed to provide low earth orbit manned flight with controlled re-entry, dyna-soar does it one way, and with flexibility, and gemini another .... “[The nasa-dod Project Gemini joint planning committee] . . . will insure that the military requirement for near-earth orbit is properly taken account of in the gemini project. “We don’t have any clear military requirement, or any known military requirement, per se. But 1 think we do have a requirement for environmental testing and experimentation in nearearth orbit. “We are very much interested, therefore, in the Gemini project. When we become more familiar with it and understand its potential I suspect it will have a great influence on the future of DYNA-SOAR .... “I guess that we will find that gemini has a greater military potential for us, even though a rather ill-defined military potential, than does dyna-soar, and, moreover, that it will be available much sooner than dyna-soar ....	' “I think the dyna-soar project can work out satisfactorily. The real question is, what do we have when we finish it. It will cost to complete, in total, including funds spent to date, something on the order of $800 million to a billion dollars. The question is, do we meet a rather ill-defined military requirement better by proceeding down that track, or do we meet it better bv modifying gemini in some joint project with nasa . . . .” (Hearings on H.R. 2440, pp. 465-67) During March: Space Orientation Center, designed for briefing Marshall Space Flight Center visitors and new employees and operated by the Historical Office, was opened at msfc. (Marshall Historian; Huntsville Times,3/6/63)
At nasa Budget Briefing Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans commented on rumor that nasa planned another Mercury flight after the Cooper flight scheduled for April: “You will note that the Mercury and one-day [manned orbital] effort is presumed to be completed in fiscal ’64. We have a flight scheduled for this April. ... In planning flights of that importance we always have a back-up possibility. We do have two back-up capsules as well as the two back-up Atlas boosters that could be used in the event that we don’t obtain all the information that we anticipate obtaining in the Cooper flight. . . .” (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript, 1/17/63)
President Kennedy visited San Antonio and Houston. In San Antonio, he participated in the dedication of the new $6-million Aerospace Medical Health Center at Brooks afb. “Too many Americans make the mistake of assuming that space research has no value here on earth. Nothing could be further from the truth,” the President said, and then went on to enumerate some of the advances in medical science and technique that had come from space research. Referring to the reduced nasa budget passed by the Senate the previous day, the President said: “There will be pressures for our country to do less and temptations to do something else. But this research must and will go ahead. That much we know. That much we can say with confidence and conviction .... “Our effort in space is not, as some have suggested, a competitor for the national resources needed to improve our living standards. It is instead a working partner and coproducer of those resources.” (Wicker, NTT, 11/22/63; Kiker, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 11/22/63)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) spoke on the Senate floor about the results of the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ five-year fight for more comprehensive, integrated technical information programs in Government. The Senator said that useful programs were now at last underway in all major Federal agencies; he particularly cited the Science Information Exchange, which as of June 30, 1963, had a roster of 75,000 research proposals and projects in the life sciences and physical sciences. {CR, 10/9/63,18128)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking at the Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, said the space age was “one of the great movements in human history . . . . Our ability to maintain the peace and deter aggression depends on keeping ahead—or at least abreast—of any other nation in space technology.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/22/63)
Senator Howard Cannon, speaking on Senate floor, said: “. . . It is my personal belief—and a belief held by many other people knowledgeable in the field—that our entire scientific effort in the decades ahead might well run aground because of an insufficient supply of trained technical personnel. “. . . I again ask this body to consider the shortage of engineers and scientists to be a matter of most vital national urgency; and I reiterate my resolve to see that the legislative branch does not default in its obligation to take action in this area.” {CR, 2/7/63, 1949-50)
Senate Appropriations Committee completed action on nasa’s FY 1964 appropriation by approving a $5.19 billion nasa budget. This was only $90 million more than approved by the House of Representatives. It had been thought that the Senate would raise the House figure to about $5.3 billion. The Senate Committee also retained its version of the Pelly amendment, forbidding a joint lunar program without consent of Congress. (Finney, NYT, 11/14/63,21)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.), minority member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, asked that the Committee investigate alleged waste in the space program to determine how much money has been wasted, by whom, and whether some projects have fallen so far behind that money earmarked for them m the FY 1964 budget can be cut out because it cannot be spent within the fiscal year. He requested that the investigation be undertaken immediately so that it can be finished before Congress takes final action on the nasa budget. (Troan, Wash. Danly News, 10/5/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testified on nasa facility planning before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology. “There are several basic agency guidelines under which the Program Directors establish tlieir facility requirements. In addition to money constraints, always present, every effort is made to meet requirements through modifications to existing facilities and the use of government owned facilities and sites in lieu of new construction and land purchase. As a result, facilities and sites which otherwise might be obsolete or unused become effective tools for the conduct of our program. I think nasa has an unusually fine record in this respect . . . .” (Testimony)
Charles H. Zimmerman, nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “Our goals are to provide the research and advanced technology which will: “1. Enable our aircraft industry to produce aircraft which will, to the greatest practicable extent, make the convenience and speed of air transportation available, and economically feasible, to the people of this country; “2. Enable our armed services, working with our industry, to develop military aircraft superior in performance, in utility, and in requirements for logistics and manpower support to those of any other country. “In working toward these goals, we coordinate our efforts closely with the Federal Aviation Agency, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies . . . and with the aircraft manufacturers and their customers .... “Aviation no longer offers the glamor and excitement which so strongly influenced its growth in its early years. We are not striving for speed and altitude records. Men have circled the earth at orbital speeds. The X-15 has flown practically out of the atmosphere. Our objective now is transportation, economically feasible transportation for commercial purposes, militarily superior transportation for military purposes. I would like for you to consider our program as directed toward maintenance and enhancement of our leadership in air transportation . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa Director of Procurement Ernest W. Brackett, testifying before Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Date Acquisition of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “During fiscal year 1962, approximately 90% of funds appropriated by the Congress were spent by contracts as compared to 64% in fiscal year 1960. In fiscal year 1964, the percentage of funds going to contractors may increase further . . . .” (Testimony)
W. C. Mentzer, United Air Lines Vice President, told Wings Club in New York that projected British-French supersonic airliner was a challenge to U.S. If this country accepts challenge, it must be prepared to accept “two specific obligations . . . : First, to develop an intelligent long-term program of subsidy, and second, to encourage an economic environment in which the supersonic transport eventually may thrive.” (NYT, 5/14/63)
In letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.), ranking minority member, recommended the committee carefully re-examine U.S. space activities and resource allocations “because I think the priority given the manned lunar program is inure of an issue now than it was 2 years ago .... “It is interesting to note that criticisms expressed concerning the allocation of funds within the space budget, and the amount of the total budget, are coming from members of both political parties as well as from some scientists and engineers who are not identified with either party. “I do not, therefore, regard nasa’s budget for fiscal 1964 as a partisan matter . . . .” (Letter, 5/10/63, m CR, 5/13/63, 7803)
Addressing meeting of Aviation and Space Writers Association, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Co. Aerospace Div., Lysle A. Wood, proposed: (1) orjttting weather control station that could provide a “better foreign aid program than any of our efforts to date”; (2) orbiting industrial laboratories to supplement Government space laboratories; (3) orbiting cardiovascular laboratory for studying and treating selected patients in space environment; (4) research by chemists and others for substances, compounds, and organisms “for which we do not recognize a need or desire because we cannot imagine the possibility of their existence”; and (5) orbiting vehicles as new medium of advertising. He suggested that U.S. would benefit from commercial ventures into space, and such benefits could help pay for scientific and military programs. (NYT, 4/19/63, 86)
Urging a “breakthrough” by cab and faa “toward more economical AnowitiAno in IQ rtncvanmu* tn OA naoOQmrm*^ r*Qr»rro rtf rtrtTTlTTlOnmQ 1 opoi UiHOliO AAA XU p««MVllgVi	UA ptMAJOUgVA A	va waaaaaava vawa aircraft, Sen. Thomas J. McIntyre (D.-N.H.) pointed out that in 1958 “the passage of the Federal Aviation Act provided the basis for such [design] studies. . . . Originally, of course, such studies were the province of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, set up as early as 1915. Senator Ralph Flanders said, in 1955:
