Journal of the Armed Forces noted that Philip Bono, with Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co., had redeveloped Itha-cus (formerly Icarus), his study concept of a spacecraft which could move 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 troops anywhere in the world in 30 or 40 min. Ithacus was formerly conceived for launch from fixed land site, but under the new concept, there would be seaborne launch from nuclear aircraft carrier of Enterprise class. This would reduce vulnerability of the system. (Haggerty, JjArmed Forces, 7/11/64, 2) *	Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations (codsia) formed under sponsorship of Aerospace Industries Association, National Security Industrial Association, and Electronic Industries Association. Council would operate solely as coordinating and communicating vehicle between Government and industry, not as master association. (// Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15)
George Friedl, Jr., was appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D. Hilbum, who was recently named Deputy Associate Administrator. Since 1962 a management consultant in Santa Ana, Calif., Friedl served from 1960 to 1962 as Chairman of the Board and President of Matthews Corp. and from 1956 to 1960 as Corporate Vice President of Litton Industries, Inc., and General Manager of its Electronic Equipment Div. (NASA Announcement 64-140; nasa Release 64-157)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that Scout space vehicle had not been performing with desired reliability. Ground tests and modifications were conducted, and when a test vehicle was fired the fixes were shown to be “adequate.” Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), replied that “if NASA spent half as much money on solids as it did on liquid vehicles, the solid rocket program would have 100 per cent reliability.” Discussing Surveyor lunar probe, Dr. Newell said first nine Surveyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs. to 2,100 lbs., and it was hoped flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaur space vehicles would be available to launch the subsequent Surveyors. (SBD, 2/20/64,279)
Welcoming Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II as eighth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Senator Claiborne Pell (D.-R.I.) quoted Dr. Ripley in the Senate:
Senator Wayne L. Morse (D.-Ore.) said on Senate floor that “the most recent developments in the strike of the Florida East Coast Railway by the 11 nonoperating railroad unions, which is now in its second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shutdown of the vital construction work at Cape Kennedy by tomorrow night. . . . “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has just announced that, contrary to the recommendations of the President’s Board of Inquiry last October, it will permit the Florida East Coast, operating its trains with strikebreakers, to use the 18-mile spur newly constructed by the Federal Government to move freight into Cape Kennedy. . . . “This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will, I fear, lead to new labor trouble in the Cape Kennedy area, for the FEC strike still continues. . . .” (CR, 2/5/64,2035-36)	,
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R. 10456, NASA’s FY 1965 authorization bill, for $5,193,810,500, which was $110 million less than the $5,304 billion NASA had requested. Of this amount, $4,327,950,000 was for r&d; $248,335,000 was for CofF; and $617,525,500 was for Administrative Operations. (H.R. 10456; NASA lar III/48 and III/49)
House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued a report on its hearings on the repeated failures in the Ranger spacecraft program. The committee concluded that NASA provided too little direction on Ranger, while jpl was too resistant to following NASA orders when they were issued. To strengthen management over JPL, the committee recommended: (1) JPL should be restricted to doing the work of a center rather than that of an industrial contractor; (2) a general manager with industrial experience should be appointed as deputy to jpl director to be in charge of complex projects such as Ranger; (3) NASA should streamline its relationship to jpl to achieve jpl responsiveness to NASA direction. (Text; Finney, NYT, 6/17/64; Wash. Post, 6/17/64)
In interview with Space Business Daily, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) cited two factors he believed would improve NASA’s relations with House Committee on Science and Astronautics this session. First, committee members now have more knowledge of NASA’s problems and needs, having visited NASA installations and learned first-hand about NASA’s activities. Last session, he pointed out, 10 of committee’s 31 members were new to space legislation. Second, NASA was perfecting its procedures of informing Congress, improving the information flow and clarifying its justifications. (SBD, 1/16/64,80)
In Warsaw at the luncheon of the International Academy of Astronautics (iaa), Rep. George P. Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, expressed the intent of the U.S. to engage in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes as instituted in National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and implemented by NASA. Prof. C. Stark Draper of mit was re-elected as president of iaa for the coming year. In Missiles and Rockets interview while in Warsaw, Rep. Miller said that “the U.S. would be happy to open up negotiations with Poland on space projects.” A possible means of such cooperation, he said, might be incorporation of Polish scientific experiments on U.S. satellites and sharing of data they would acquire, a program such as U.S. already conducts with U.K., France, and Italy, (nasa Hist.; M&R, 9/14/64,
House Appropriations Committee reported $46,785,867,000 military appropriations bill for FY 1965. Report said: “The committee explored in detail the question of missile dependability. . . . [The committee] is inclined to conclude with the Secretary [of Defense] that the missile force we have programmed can be depended upon to carry out its military mission under all of the conditions we can foresee.” The committee also proposed appropriation of $47 million for initiating development of a new manned bomber. (Raymond, NYT, 4/18/64,1)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that DOD would establish a Contract Audit Agency whose principal function would be to consolidate the activities and the 3,600 personnel of various units formerly engaged separately in auditing defense and space contracts. He estimated that this would result in a “manpower” saving of $1.8 million. (NYT, 12/13/64)
Senator Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in interview that aircraft manufacturers must bear the 25% share of supersonic transport development cost, rejecting the 10% formula advocated by Eugene R. Black in recently reported study. Senator Monroney said usaf should be assigned task of developing sst’s engine and the airframe manufacturers should join together to build the sst body. He said the builder of the aircraft would “have the greatest property ever owned in aviation, a superplane good for at least 20 years. They’ve got to take some risk.” (Steif, Wash. Daily News, 2/27/64)
Four-man panel of former dod r&d directors, under auspices of Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and Humphrey, responded to Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and stifled innovation. . . .” Panel said: “We favor maintaining a substantial base of defense research and development which is essential if we are to maintain the flow of new ideas and new devices. But support of R&D does not mean the innovation of a large number of operational systems without regard for military requirements or without ample attention to technical and operational feasibility. Senator Goldwater and his advisors have ignored the fact that many of the projects cancelled during previous administrations had proved unfeasible or too expensive in relation to the military benefits they would yield. . . .” (SBD, 11/2/64,5)
CAB Chairman Alan S. Boyd told House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce’s Public Health and Safety Subcommittee hearings on recent jet airliner crashes that investigation showed air turbulence no more hazardous for jets than for other airliners. (Witkin, NYT, 1/9/64, 52)
Vice president of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail A. Lavrentev’s disclosure that U.S.S.R. had been forced to abandon attempt to drill through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington Post. Soviet drillers reached depth of about 20,000 ft. near Caspian Sea when economic and technical difficulties forced them to give up the project. Lavrentev said Soviet scientists now were “seeking more effective methods of drilling and shoring up the hole.” Project was akin to U.S. Project Mohole, directed by National Science Foundation, which would attempt to drill through sea floor to penetrate earth’s crust and sample the mantle beneath. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
Following Senator Goldwater’s charge that U.S. missiles are undependable, unnamed official sources at Cape Kennedy pointed out that newest U.S. ICBm’s—Minutemen and Titan II’s—can be fired in less than a minute’s notice, have been successful in nearly 7 out of 10 test firings, partially successful in 2 out of 10, and completely unsuccessful in only 1 out of 10 firings, (upi, NYT, 1/10/64,14)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara testified in military posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasizing that U.S. missile and bomber force was neither too large nor too small for today’s “damage limiting” military strategy. He pointed out that missiles are more reliable than bombers, being mechanically reliable, capable of surviving enemy attack, and able to penetrate enemy defenses in war-time, while the bombers are vulnerable to enemy attack and less likely to reach target enemy defenses. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/64)
House Appropriations Committee cut off developmental funds for the aec’s Pluto low-flying, nuclear-powered missile, proposing the missile be mothballed until dod decided whether it needed the weapon. Having gone through nearly 10 years of development costing $196 million, Pluto was nearing the flight stage. The committee provided $1 million to mothball it. aec had requested $8 million additional funds to get the missile to operating stage. (Finney, NYT, 6/12/64, 1, 23)
Sen. Kenneth B. Keating (R.—N.Y.) discussed in the Senate NASA’s program of research in aircraft noise abatement. Senator Keating introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA on its past and present noise research and said: “NASA spending on aircraft noise abatement research has increased by 628 percent since 1962, rising from $148,000 in that year to $247,000 in 1963, to $931,000 in 1964. The Space Committee . . . has tentatively approved a sum of $1.4 million for this program next year, a decision which I strongly support. . . .” (CR, 5/22/64, 11344-46)
At request of Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) and by unanimous consent to motion of Senator Mike Mansfield (D.—Mont.), Senate requested House to return H.R. 10456, NASA authorization bill for FY 1965. Senator Morse was requesting record vote on the bill; action of the previous day was taken without quorum call and with only voice vote. (NASA LARIII/126; CR, 6/23/64,14234-35 and 6/24/64, 14392)
Senate-House Conference Committee on H.R. 11296 filed its Conference Report on the Independent Offices Appropriation Bill for FY 1965. Committee recommended 85,250,000,000 NASA appropriation, which was 850,000,000 less than Senate-passed bill had provided and 850,000,000 more than House Committee had recommended. One amendment, regarding use of funds for a manned lunar landing by U.S. and another country, was reported in disagreement. (House Rpt. 1781)
Plans for formation of National Academy of Engineering were drawn up by committee of 25 leading engineers appointed by nas president Dr. Frederick Seitz. The committee, which would seek Congressional charter for the proposed academy, elected Dr. Augustus B. KinzeL, Union Carbide Corp.’s Vice President for Research, as chairman, (nas-nrc Release)
NASA submitted report to Congress on patent legislation: to House Committee on the Judiciary on H.R. 4482, to provide administration in the public interest of property rights to inventions resulting from R&D financed wholly or partially by public funds; to Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 1290, to establish uniform national policy for proprietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of public funds; and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on S. 1444, to amend National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to waive proprietary interests of the U.S. in inventions, (nasa LAR III/19)
Patent for system of space communications using x-rays has been granted to Henry R. Chope, executive vice president of Industrial Nucleonics Corp., Columbus, Ohio. The l^-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope as source of energy, (nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64)
NASA’s equal opportunity employment activities were commended on Senate floor by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R.—N.Y.). Senator Javits introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA indicating specific measures taken in broad-based equal opportunity program, especially in Huntsville, Ala., and Wallops Station, Va. (CR, 1/30/64, 1328-29)
HF—24 fighter-bombers designed by a team of 18 German aeronautical engineers and manufactured in Bangalore at the Hindustan Aircraft Co. were reportedly being delivered to the Indian government. The chief of the team designing the HF—24 was reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank, principal designer for Germany’s World War II Luftwaffe, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/64)
The Federal Aviation Agency (faa), following up Defense Secretary Mc; Namara’s announced deactivation of 19 airfields, called attention to the procedures by which surplus military airfields could be transferred to state or local public agencies for development as civil airports. The procedures were established by the Surplus Property Act of 1944 and its amendments. More than 600 airports had been transferred to state and local agencies under this statute since the end of World War II. (faa Release 64-108)
House Appropriations Committee voted to approve $5.2 billion in funds for NASA in FY 1965, $245 million less than the requested $5,445 hillion ($5,304 billion for FY 1965 and $141 million FY 1964 supplemental combined by the Committee). The appropriation was contained in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill. (Finney, NYT, 5/19/64,1)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Assistant Director for Flight Operations of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, was appointed flight operations director for the second Gemini-Titan flight (GT—2), an unmanned suborbited flight scheduled for autumn. Kraft had been responsible for flight direction in Project Mercury and in the first Gemini-Titan flight. For the GT—2 mission he would replace Dr. Walter C. Williams, who resigned from NASA last March to become Vice President and General Manager, Manned Systems Div., Aerospace Corp. (nasa Release 64-185)
Bill to authorize appropriations to NASA for FY 1965 (S. 2446) was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, (nasa lar III/9)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, amplified his concern for solar radiation danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70, saying it would be a “sound” decision to delay the Apollo flight into the 1970’s to increase safety. “We don’t know all there is to know about these flares.” He repeated that adding shielding to Apollo spacecraft could impose weight penalty, added that NASA was “intensifying” its study of solar radiation. (SBD, 1/21/64, 104)
