Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Independent Offices, paid tribute to NASA on the floor of the House: “. . . too much credit cannot be given the top management of the Space Agency . . . “To this group of distinguished gentlemen, must go the credit of spending some $17 billion without the slightest breath of scandal attached to the many thousands of transactions.” (CR, 6/11/65, 12829)
Department of Defense should, without further delay, commence full-scale development of a manned orbital laboratory (Mol) project, recommended a report by the Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations. The report also suggested that DOD “pursue a more realistic security policy in its program,” and that “careful and intensive consideration be given to achieving future economies in space operations with greater standardization of systems and subsystems and through such techniques as recoverable and reusable boosters and spacecraft.” Moreover, “NASA and DOD [should] use each other’s facilities and resources to the greatest possible extent.” (Text)
The National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress, established by law in 1964 to find out what technological change was doing to the economic and social fabric of the country and how to obtain its maximum benefits with the least possible harm, met for the first time with Vice President Hubert Humphrey. The Commission would meet again Feb. 18-19 to determine the areas to be explored intensively and possibly to select outside personnel to help with basic research in these studies. (NYT, 1/30/65, 6)
Dr. Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, appeared before the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations, in testimony supporting DOD’s request for $6,709 billion new obligational authority for FY 1966 research, development, testing, and evaluation. He discussed the Vela nuclear detection satellites, orbiting in nearly circular orbits. “All four satellites remain in operation, providing data on the radiation background and the operation of detectors in space.” He outlined the aacb’s 1964 launch vehicle study, which “was intended to identify overall effects and provide a data base for, rather than to resolve, individual user program booster selections or nearterm booster improvement questions.” The study “confirmed earlier estimates” of launch vehicle needs for the near future. [See Jan. 26, Jan. 27] (DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 1—30)
Writing about the visit of President Johnson and Vice President Humphrey to NASA Hq. for a briefing on NASA programs on Feb. 25, Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in an article for the San Diego Union: “1 was particularly pleased at the deserved tribute the President paid Jim Webb and Hugh Dryden. I have known them both since 1937. They are extremely modest men. They avoid personal publicity. They are not jealous of subordinates, but prefer that the publicity and credit for NASA successes carry the pictures and headline the names of those members of the NASA team most directly responsible. For this reason they can attract and hold able people. . . . “While we are giving out the space medals, it is only fair to say that without the vision and tenacity of Lyndon Johnson, the first man on the moon could not be an American. “To have man’s most dramatic and significant adventure become the achievement of a slave state instead of a free society would be intolerable.” (Eaker, cns, San Diego Union, 3/14/65)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries of America, Inc., addressed the Economic Club of Detroit: “. . . the aerospace industry of today does indeed represent a truly unique phenomenon in industrial history in almost all of its aspects. ... it is that industry which places at the disposal of the nation—both its public and its private sectors—the capacity to manage the research, development and production of the most technologically advanced product that is possible—for whatever purpose desired. . . it is essential that we all understand the principal factors—■ historical, present and future—that have produced and will continue to produce this uniqueness. “First, the genesis and evolution of what is today’s aerospace industry is a direct product of the nation’s post-World War II history and is inextricably linked thereto. . . . World War II unleashed for the world, but particularly for the United States, two revolutions which have been gaining momentum ever since. The first of these was a form of economic revolution which saw the economy of the United States surge into new dimensions. The second was a scientific/ technological revolution which saw all that had gone before in man’s scientific history fade into a pale background. . . . “World War II itself provided an extreme example of the explosive expansibility of the industrial base of the United States. This expanded industrial base remained after the war to serve as a foundation for a general economic upsurge. “. . . the aerospace industry has become and remains, in a very real sense, an instrument of national policy, not only in terms of the hardware directly provided the government, but also as it underpins the economic/technological advances in the private sector of our economy. ...” Discussing the future of the industry, Harr noted that “the size and viability of this industry is not tied to defense and space programs, important as these have been and will continue to be in shaping its destiny. It is tied, rather, to the total technological progress of the nation, meaning the application of advanced technology to whatever purposes may be desired. Programs now well underway in such diverse fields as air freight, urban transportation, desalination, oceanography, 2000-mph aircraft and hundreds of others serve to illustrate this fact. . . .” (Text)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of nasa Space Vehicle Research and Technical Div., told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that lightweight, flexible plastic baffles had proved more efficient for controlling fuel “sloshing” in launch vehicle’s propellant tanks than heavy metal baffles. He said plastic baffles could also serve to prevent leakage of propellant gas used in fuel-pumping during weightlessness. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings, 133-50)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee that about $1.2 billion—80 per cent of the allocated money—had been wasted on the abortive b-70 bomber project, Howard Margolis reported in the Washington Post. The question of how much of the money spent was wasted arose when McNamara was asked whether knowledge from the b-70 work would be valuable to other military and civilian projects. McNamara suggested that at least 80 per cent of the money had been wasted, Margolis said. McNamara’s general view had been that substantial “waste” of this sort was unavoidable in the defense program since it was rarely possible to know how valuable a development project would be before large sums had been spent. Margolis added that McNamara suggested minimizing such waste by insisting on good evidence of probable value before allocating large expenditures and, even then, by limiting spending as much as possible until the value of a project was proven. (Margolis, Wash. Post, 5/15/65)
In a Christian Science Monitor editorial, Leonard Schwartz posed the problem of “how the capability represented by manned orbiting space stations can be used to enhance national security and promote peaceful-scientific uses of outer space.” Schwartz suggested formation of an inspection agency—International Space Patrol—to neutralize military potential represented by manned space stations and to ensure usage of outer space for peaceful purposes only. He pointed out that Vice President Humphrey, one of the first proponents of an arms control agency and an international space agency, was now Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, on which sat the Secretaries of Defense and State and administrators of AEC and NASA. This position provided him with “an appropriate vantage to supervise their arms control capabilities in order to reach a national decision which would reconcile control with security and scientific use of outer space.” (CSM, 3/2/65, 4)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey wrote to Cape Kennedy technician Richard Tennis: “I understand that you are the gentleman who corrected the problem of the oxidizer leak on the Gemini-Titan [GT-3]. “I simply wanted to express to you the thanks of all of us here in Washington who have watched so carefully the success of this program. It is the excellent and quick efforts of people like yourself that have made this program so successful.” ( ksc Spaceport News, 4/15/65, 2)
Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.) introduced a bill (S. 1899) in the Senate “to prescribe a national policy with respect to the acquisition, disposition, and use of proprietary rights in inventions made, and in scientific and technical information obtained, through the expenditure of public funds.” Senator Long said in introducing the bill: “New discoveries derived from research supported by public funds belong to the people and constitute a part of the public domain to which all citizens should have access on terms of equality.” (CR, 5/4/65, 9023-9027)
In an address at Duke University, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said: “How fortunate we are to live in this dramatic and creative period of change, of challenge, of opportunity. How great is our responsibility to achieve excellence of mind and spirit to do the tasks that must be done. “I appeal, therefore, to you the generation of 1965. “Make no little plans. “Have not little dreams. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of your mother and father. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of this time. “Challenge the impossible. Do what cannot be done. “Thirty years ago it was ‘Brother, can you spare a dime.’ “Today we reach the stars.” (Text, CR, 4/26/65, 8179-80)
House Rules Committee deferred bill to study conversion to the metric system, proposed by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 41)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey urged establishment of research and experimental institutions in underdeveloped nations that would enable young scientists and technologists there to develop their own countries. “To train people without giving them the opportunity to put their training to full use can only result in frustration at home or migration abroad,” he said. The Vice President, speaking at a dinner given in New York by the American Committee for the Weizman Institute of Science, emphasized that measures must be taken “to make these talented people actually want to work in their own countries, by opening up to them careers which are genuinely and deeply rewarding in professional advancement and service to their people.” (ATT, 12/7/65, 10)
Eighty per cent of the $4 million needed to construct new bridges, modernizing the access road complex to Cape Kennedy, would be contributed by the Federal Government. The announcement was made jointly by Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Florida Governor Haydon Burns, and Florida Senators George Smathers and Spessard Holland. NASA and USAF would divide the $3.2 million Federal share and the state of Florida would provide $.8 million. (Cocoa Tribune, 8/24/65; KSC Spaceport News, 8/26/65, 1)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight issued a report on investigation of Project Surveyor
Civil Aeronautics Board request for $2.1 million in subsidies for commercial helicopter lines in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, to be paid during July-December period, was denied by House Appropriations Committee. {WSJ, 5/7/65, 2)
In summary of activities of the NASA Office of Lunar and Planetary Programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “The Ranger pictures represent our major scientific achievement in 1964. In addition to their direct value as new information, the subtle significance of these pictures toward increasing the value of other astronomical data is perhaps worthy of mention, as it may not be recognized generally. It is interesting to note how the information presented in the high resolution Ranger pictures has sent scientists scurrying back to the files of photographic plates taken years before to discover features which have remained unnoticed throughout the years. Some new interpretations of long recognized features have also been made possible by the close-up look obtained by Ranger.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 56-111)
President Johnson named Dr. Finn J. Larsen, Honeywell vice president, as Principal Director of Defense Research and Engineering for DOD, succeeding Dr. E. G. Fubini, who left the job July 15. (ap, NYT, 12/3/65, 22; Pres. Doc., 12/6/65, 546)
Vice President Humphrey announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council, of which he is chairman, would meet July 1 to consider a proposed USAF manned orbiting laboratory. Meeting was later postponed to July 9. (NYT, 6/26/65, 5; eph)
Machinist union members at Boeing Co. installations throughout the country voted to accept a new contract and end their 19-day-old strike against Boeing Co., announced Charles F. West, the union’s general vice president. Under the contract, IAM would be free to strike again after six months if agreement were not reached on performance analysis—system by which the company graded employees for promotion, demotion, or discharge, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 10/5/65; Wash. Post, 10/5/65)
Expansion of the role of the National Science Foundation and expenditure by Federal mission-oriented research agencies of more money on basic research were two major recommendations of a special panel of the National Academy of Sciences to Congress. Recommendations were in a report, Basic Research and National Goals, submitted to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The panel, headed by Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky of Harvard Univ., former science adviser to the President, was comprised of 15 scientists, engineers, and economists. The panel held that the National Science Foundation, as the sole agency of Government whose purpose was support of science across the board without regard for immediate practical gains, should be expanded to serve as a “balance wheel” to soften the impact of variable research policies of mission-oriented agencies on “little science.” The recommendation that agencies should devote greater portions of their budgets to basic research was based on the view that in many cases these budgets were becoming stationary while the capacity for scientific growth was expanding. The panel also recommended that in some cases the Congress should extend the mission of the agency to include the pursuit of certain branches of basic research. Three general opinions were widely held by the panel regarding the balance of science support today: first, Federal funds should be allocated with some consideration to the geographical-social effects of their expenditure; second, biological sciences had been under-supported and should receive support to expand them faster than the physical sciences; third, there was an impending crisis in the physical sciences because mission-oriented agencies, faced with stationary budgets, would probably not expand their support of basic physical research as fast as capacity to do basic research expanded. (Clark, NYT, 4/26/65, 55; SBD, 4/30/65, 330)
Speaking before the Senate Commerce Committee in support of his bill calling for a three-year feasibility study of this country’s adopting the metric system, Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) said: “Should Canada follow Great Britain’s example and convert, the United States would be virtually the only remaining country that uses a system of weights and measures based on other than the metric system. Actually, 90 percent of the people in the world use metric measures right now.” The proposed three-year Dept, of Commerce study, Senator Pell said, would include not only a detailed estimate of the cost of conversion, but also a statement of the possible side benefits in foreign trade, (ap, NYT, 7/15/65, 35)
Rep. Adam Clayton Powell (D-N.Y.), Chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor, personally wrote the presidents of the Nation’s 116 predominantly Negro colleges and universities urging them to apply for NASA grants and research contracts. In his letter he noted that of 187 colleges and universities receiving NASA grants, only one—Howard Univ.—was predominantly Negro and that 20 universities (10%) received $61,451,000 (50%) of the $121,115,000 total expenditure. (House Comm, on Education and Labor Release)
Aerospace and defense planning concepts could be applied to many of the Nation’s major social problems, Dr. Ruben F. Mettler, executive vice president of TRW, Inc., told a luncheon meeting of aiaa in New York. Dr. Mettler listed transportation, medical services, and housing as areas where the systems approach to problems would prove beneficial. He said that he thought the application of aerospace systems concepts had a bright and profitable future in civilian endeavors. (NYT, 10/27/65, 74M)
The National Science Foundation’s past activities were reviewed in a report by the Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. No judgments were made, but the 286-page report called attention to broad areas of concern: (1) Could the Foundation meaningfully promote the progress of American science on a very limited budget? (2) What was its relationship to the Office of Science and Technology which was developing national science policy? (3) What was its relationship to American universities conducting research? (4) Had it effectively gathered data and made statistical analyses essential to research planning and administration? (5) Should the Foundation continue to manage large-scale research projects? (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 10329, which would authorize the Secretary of Commerce to conduct a feasibility study on adoption of the metric system. {CR, 8/24/ 65, 19007)
Members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting to consider H.J. Res. 597 providing for a monument to Dr. Robert H. Goddard at Clark Univ., agreed to limit cost of the memorial to $150,000.	(CR, 9/7/65, 23315)
The British Defense Ministry announced that its fleet of Valiant bombers would be scrapped because of weakened structure caused by metal fatigue. Valiant was the first of the three “V” types of jet bombers built by U.K. following World War II. They had been in service nine years and only about half the original force remained in service as reconnaissance or tankers. This would not affect Britain’s contribution to nato or its proposal for an Atlantic nuclear force. {NYT, 1/27/65)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, addressing 4,000 employees and officials of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., warned Grumman to reduce contract proposals sharply if it expected to gain a share of future defense contracts. McNamara said Grumman’s proposals for construction of a portion of the f-111 fighter’s tail assembly were “higher than other competitive sources. “There is no question in my mind that you can reduce costs on this $1 billion contract. They’ve got to come down,” he said. The contract he was referring to had not yet been awarded. McNamara, accompanied by Senator Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) and Asst. Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester, was making a brief tour of defense plants on Long Island. (Maiorana, NYT, 10/14/65, 41)
In NASA fy 1966 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb testified: “Among the hard decisions and difficult choices which had to be made in the preparation of this budget was the decision to terminate the programs to develop the m—1 large liquid hydrogen fueled engine, the large 260-inch solid propellant motor, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power supply. The reduction in the requests for space technology activities amounting to about $18 million when compared with fiscal year 1965, results mostly from these terminations. However, as this Committee knows, there is pending before it notification of a plan to reprogram $16,950,000 of 1965 funds so that these projects can be carried forward into 1966 to appropriate developmental points at which important segments of the engineering data for which the projects were originally planned can be obtained for incorporation in our total bank of technological and engineering knowledge.” Mr. Webb was questioned by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D—Minn.) on when the first U.S. extravehicular activity was planned, and he replied: “Within the next year. We are not sure on which Gemini flight we will do it as yet.” Senator Mondale asked: “When do we plan our first rendezvous maneuver?” and Mr. Webb replied: “Within the next year, maybe the latter part of this year.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 623, 663)
Curtiss-Wright Corp. could participate in future naval weapons procurement, including the procurement of weapon system trainers, DOD announced. Last March when R/Adm. Allan M. Shinn, Chief of the Bureau of Weapons, testified before a closed session of the House Appropriations Committee he disclosed “inadequate performance” on the part of Curtiss-Wright in connection with the p3-a trainer program. (Text; NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
