House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed its report on H.R. 1441, the $4.986-billion nasa budget authorization, (nasa lar V/65-66)
nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Breene M. Kerr, reviewing nasa technology utilization program for 1965 in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, stated that the total number of NASA Tech Briefs now published was more than 600. He continued: "We anticipate publication of approximately 700 Tech Briefs during calendar year 1966. ... we estimate the average Tech Brief is seen by more than 10,000 persons. . . . Industry interest in our program is . . . indicated by the fact that approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field Center Technology Utilization Offices during calendar 1965. . . . Two additional Regional Dissemination Programs have been started in the last year, one at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and the other at Southeastern State College in Durant, Okla. One hundred and thirty-one companies are now paying annual membership fees at our established computer-based centers. ... Of real significance ... is the fact that approximately 3,000 companies have received some degree of service from these centers. . . . We have also recently concluded an interagency agreement with the Small Business Administration whereby several of that organization’s field offices, under an experimental program, will be providing NASA technology to selected small business concerns.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634-9)
President Johnson signed into law Marine Resources and Engineering Development Act of 1966, establishing national goals for an expanding national oceanographic effort. Legislation, sponsored by Sen. Warren G.	Magnuson (D-Wash.), provided for Cabinet-level National Council of Marine Resources and Engineering Development—and administrative and coordinating organization similar to nasc. Chairman would be Vice President. Bill also provided for 15-member Marine Science, Engineering and Resources Commission to conduct 18-mo. study of U.S. oceanographic capabilities and recommend Government organizational plan for oceanography. (CR, 6/2/66, 11490-92; Wash. Post, 6/19/66, A17)
In letter to Congress transmitting report on the Nation’s oceanographic work, President Johnson urged that funds be voted to continue work on Project Mohole. House Appropriations Committee had denied (May 5) $19.7-million Presidential request for nsf work on Mohole in FY 1967. Total cost was estimated as $110 million; about $25 million had already been spent. President Johnson wrote: "The Mohole Project will provide the answer to many basic questions about the earth’s crust and the origin of ocean basins. It will teach us how to drill in the ocean depths— the prelude to the future exploitation of resources at the bottom of the sea.” (Pres. Doc., 5/23/66, 661; AP, NYT, 5/19/66, 23; Wash. Post, 5/19/66, A6)
ucla dedicated new center for space sciences, Schlichter Hall, made possible by $2-million NASA grant. Six-story building, named for Dr. Louis Byrne Schlichter, Prof. Emeritus of Geophysics and Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics from 1947 to 1962, would contain 30 large laboratories and 50 research and administrative offices. Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator, said in a dedication speech: "nasa thinks that this is a singularly important type of activity as many of the problems confronting NASA in the space program reach across disciplinary lines and require the combined efforts of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, biologists, psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists and economists.” Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cornell Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics; ucla Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Schlichter; Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald; and Nobel Laureate Willard F. Libby, director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, (ucla Release, 4/3/66; Text)
Vice president of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Boris Konstantinov discussed mission of Proton spacecraft series in Tass interview: "Research already carried out with the help of the Proton stations gives reason to expect that the growing weight of such laboratories will allow scientists to delve deeper into the processes occurring within the universe.” He revealed that proton in, launched July 6, would attempt to experimentally detect "quarks,” fundamental particles believed to appear during collision of cosmic ray particles with atoms of interstellar environment. Spacecraft carried "new, complicated instrumentation which is more sensitive than the old equipment.” (Tass, 6/8/66)
Aerospace rather than shipbuilding companies were competing for $l-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) program because of USn’s new contract policy, Robert Wright reported in the New York Times. Under new policy, firms were required to bid for total package— concept, design, and construction—instead of construction only. Vernon A. Johnson, a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president, believed Lockheed, General Dynamics Corp., and Litton Industries, Inc., were competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked resources and experience for total-package systems design. Goal of Fdl program was fleet of 30-40 ships capable of remaining at sea for indefinite periods and making fast delivery of heavy supplies to fight small wars. (Wright, ATT, 12/11/66, 12)
Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (usaf), special consultant to President Johnson, was appointed president of Institute for Defense Analysis replacing Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would return to mit. ida also named Dr. Gordon J. F.	MacDonald, of ucla’s Dept, of Planetary and Space Sciences, vice president for research. Both appointments would take effect in September. (ida Release)
Tonnage of U.S. bombs dropped on Vietnam in 1966 would surpass that dropped by U.S. in the entire Pacific during World War II or during three years of the Korean War, Ted Sell reported in the World Journal Tribune. U.S. planned to drop 638,000 tons of bombs in 1966 compared to 502,781 tons dropped by usaf in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945. (Sell, WJT, 10/3/66, 4)
U.S. Sst program had been assigned "Dx” priority—highest manufacturing priority usually reserved for key defense and space programs—by President Johnson in April without public announcement, the press reported. The New York Times questioned secrecy and priority implied by President’s decision: "It was an error to keep the decision secret.” (Clark, NYT, 8/7/66, 1; WSJ, 8/9/66, 1; NYT, 8/8/66, C26)
Rebutting Aug. 14 Washington Sunday Star editorial which called the U.S. Sst program "a dubious venture moved by extraordinary pressures,” Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) told Senate that program was "moving forward on a logical basis” to make Sst available for commercial use in 1974 at total cost of about $4.5 billion-—25% of which would be paid by manufacturers. Senator Magnuson said that planners were "well aware” of potential hazards of excess radiation, internal heat, lack of maneuverability, and structural stress suggested by Star and assured the Senate that aircraft had been designed "to preclude catastrophic conditions. . .	(CR, 9/6/66, 20909-10; Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 17)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Appropriations’ Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of cancer. A member of the House for almost 30 yrs., Thomas had heen deeply interested in Congressional funding for naca, nsf, and NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/66, B8)
More than 70 tethered balloon ascensions to 1,500-ft. altitude for vehicle drop tests had been conducted by afcrl at Holloman afb over past three years to test Surveyor spacecraft’s retrofire descent and impact capabilities, oar Research Review reported, (oar Res. Rev., 6/66, 17) During June: Dr. Dorothy Martin Simon, Avco Corp. vice president and director of Corporate Research, received 1966 Achievement Award of Society of Women Engineers. She was cited for "significant contributions to engineering administration and space engineering, especially in the fields of combustion and ablative coatings.” (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 46)
Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane fighter used in World War II, the Hunter fighter, the P-1127 Vtol aircraft, and other combat aircraft, died in London. Sir Sydney, honorary fellow and member of council of Royal Aeronautical Society, had received the Society’s Gold Medal in 1958 and had been selected to receive the Guggenheim Medal, highest U.S. aeronautical award, in the spring. (NYT, 3/14/66, 31)
