North American Aviation, Inc. (naa) , NASA’s prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, announced major management changes: (1) William B. Bergen, former President of Martin Marietta Co., who joined naa April 7, replaced Harrison A. Storms, Jr., as President of Space Div.—formerly Space and Information Systems Div.; (2) Ralph H. Ruud, corporate vice president in charge of manufacturing, replaced William Snelling as executive vice president of Space Div. Snelling assumed new post of assistant vice president; (3) Bastian Hello, former Martin Marietta Co. executive, assumed new post of vice president in charge of Space Div.’s launch operations at ksc; and (4) Paul R. Vogt, former vice president of engineering at naa’s Rocketdyne Div., assumed new post of assistant to President of Space Div. in charge of quality control. (Clark, NYT, 5/2/67,1,53; upi, W Star, 5/2/67, A13; O’Toole, W Post, 5/2/67, A4; Wilford, NYT, 5/4/67, 9)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, and his Deputy Dr. Alfred J. Eggers testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. U.S. space program was entering a period when NASA would . utilize existing capabilities, Dr. Adams said, and it was therefore particularly important for oart to “emphasize new technology so that new systems will be available for the next major thrust in aeronautics and space.” He mentioned highlights of the program to develop new technology: (1) Nerva nuclear rocket engine; (2) experimental research related to hypersonic propulsion; (3) advanced cryogenic engine; (4) improved life-support systems; and (5) increased effort in electronics problems because “electronics systems may well be the limiting factor in our future exploration.” Dr. Eggers noted that r&d budget request in aeronautics for FY 1968 nearly doubled that for 1967 and said the expansion reflected “recognition of the rapidly growing importance of air transportation and the need for increased r&d to provide required advances in the associated technology. Aeronautics is already the order of a $24 billion a year industry and it is netting the nation better than $1 billion per annum in favorable balance of payments. Accordingly, our proposed major strengthening of aeronautics r&d will be to the great commercial as well as military benefit of the nation in the future.” (Transcript, 8, 13; Testimony)
Report on spaceflight emergencies and spaceflight safety, released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, made several specific recommendations: (1) NASA and USAF continue to devote intensive study effort to spaceflight safety and report periodically to the committee; (2) NASA and usaf establish joint working-level committee to eliminate duplication of effort, assure compatibility in equipment features, conduct joint accident reviews, and achieve a coordinated effort; (3) each agency establish a separate flight safety group to monitor system designs for specific missions to ensure close attention to the problem of flight safety; (4) development of possible space rescue or escape capabilities be considered in the design and development of all future manned spacecraft; and (5) NASA prepare a long-range “plan for meeting future spaceflight emergencies”—including program identification and long-range funding requirements—by the end of 1967. (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed $>4.9-billion nasa authorization bill (H.R. 10340) with the House and recommended that it he passed without amendment [see May 16]. (NASA lar VI/64)
As of .Nov. 15, U.S. had dropped 1,630,500 bombs on North and South Vietnam since July 1965—twice the tonnage dropped during the Korean War, and three times that dropped in the Pacific Theater during World War II. (Wilson, W Post, 1/5/68, 4)
Manned expeditions to every part of the solar system would be achieved by the end of the 20th century, Vice President Humphrey predicted in his opening statement to a student panel at North Dakota State Univ. in Fargo. He envisioned “the development of a whole family of earth orbiting stations, manned and supplied by regular ferry services; the launching of unmanned probes to every part of our solar system, and probably manned expeditions as well.” (upi, NYT, 5/14/67)
House Appropriations Committee reported $ 1.53-billion dot authorization bill (H.R. 11456) which included $142.3 million for development of two sst prototypes. Bill was approved by House July 18. (AP, NYT, 7/14/67,5)
Senate and House adopted conference report on amended NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) totaling $4.6 billion, and legislation was cleared for President’s signature. Report approved $3,925 billion for R&D, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization and decrease of $356.5 million from budget; report approved $35.9 million for Construction of Facilities, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget; report approved $628.0 million for Administrative Operations, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of House, said that “Voyager and nerva II programs should be funded this fiscal year. Voyager is the only major planetary exploration program this Nation will have in the 1970’s. If this program is abandoned, we will be abdicating our responsibilities. . . . This is particularly significant following the recent Russian Venus IV soft landing on the planet Venus.” Sen. Gordon L. Allott (R-Col.), ranking minority member of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Space Appropriations Subcommittee, was forced to accept no specific funding for Voyager and Nerva programs (in final version) but said in statement read by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) on floor of Senate that “agreement was reached to add $15.5 million to [r&d] over the House figure.” He added that the agreement would provide that NASA’s Administrator “may reprogram funds . . . with approval of the appropriate committees of the Congress.” He added: “. . . conferees share this belief, that this country must move ahead now in [r&d] leading to interplanetary exploration.” (CR, 10/26/67, H14036-8, S15405-8)
Congressional cuts in the nasa budget had forced an agency-wide hiring freeze, Aerospace Technology reported. No job vacancies might be filled or new positions created unless there were exceptionally mitigating circumstances, jpl expected to lose about 200 engineers during the freeze, but no estimates had been released by NASA field centers. There was no indication of how long the freeze would last. (Aero Tech, 9/25/67,3)
Current attacks on the SST project appeared to stem from ignorance of the plan and a failure to appreciate what it would contribute to the economy and security of this country, reported columnist l/g Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.). He had presented estimates of the sales volume and financial aspect of the SST programs which had been developed, checked, and rechecked by civil advisory groups, the airlines, and individual experts in transportation, industry, and finance. He said no Federal program since World War II had had the thorough analysis, careful examination, and close scrutiny accorded the present sst plan. He emphasized that the sst was not competitive in any way with social reform programs. On the other hand, it would stimulate continued growth of the economy, create employment, and provide a higher standard of living for thousands. (Eaker, Detroit News, 9/4/67)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA did not know whether U.S.S.R. was adequately sterilizing its interplanetary spacecraft. “If we find . . . that . . . [Soviet] sterilization procedure is many orders of magnitude less good than ours, then we will be able to relax in our standards simply because there will be no value in our going through an expensive process only to find that they have already contaminated the planet. “However, we do not know at the present time, and there is reason to believe that their procedures may well turn out to be adequate.” (Transcript, 446)
The number of scientists, engineers, and physicians immigrating to the U.S. had increased 77% between 1956 and 1966, according to report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee. Report said this influx from poor nations was an “involuntary gift of valuable resources. “Such a loss by the developing countries is. of direct concern to the United States. To the extent that it undermines development, it also defeats a major United States foreign policy objective for the sake of which this country is currently spending about $3.7 billion per year. . . .” Reduction of this influx would probably have to be the joint responsibility of the U.S. and the nations that were losing their skilled professionals, report said. (Text; Science, 8/18/67, 783; NYT, 8/3/67, 13)
House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill—$516.6 million less than NASA had requested and $282 million less than NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). Committee said the bill was “less than would be recommended under less stringent fiscal circumstances,” but it would support “a viable space program, and one that is consistent with available resources. “The reductions . . . should in no respect be interpreted as an expression of a lack of confidence in our space endeavors. . . .” Cuts included: (1) $50.5 million from Apollo program; (2) $154.7 million from aa program; (3) $27.5 million from Nuclear Rocket Program; (4)	$37.7 million from Tracking and Data Acquisition; and (5) $71.5 million from Voyager (funding eliminated), (nasa lar VI/91; WSJ, 8/21/67,4; O’Toole, W Post, 8/19/67, A4)
National Academy of Sciences had concurred in House Committee on Government Operations recommendation that outside experts as well as those in Government be used to advise decisionmakers of R&D deficiencies and remedies. Committee released report of NAS and Bureau of the Budget comments on recommendations to improve Federal r&d decisionmaking process, which also showed nas had concurred that Executive Office should examine program-level recommendations but had warned of danger of attempting to determine gaps or establish levels of support on too centralized a basis. NAS also had voiced strong reservations on a cost-benefit approach to R&D evaluation. (Text)
Vice President Humphrey commissioned into service usn’s $130-million Atlantic undersea test center, which he predicted might become the Cape Kennedy of oceanography. Speaking at West Palm Beach, the Vice President said: “This center has been established primarily for purposes of national security. But the knowledge we gain here will help us in other ways.” It would contribute to man’s knowledge of tides and provide information on untapped mineral resources and unutilized food sources. “We may learn how to divert and even prevent hurricanes,” Mr. Humphrey said. “But perhaps the greatest promise of all lies in food from the sea.” (AP, NYT, 2/27/67, 46)
Ronnie J. Lagoe, 17-yr-old high school senior whose %-scale model , of NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft had made five successful soft-landings on earth from varying heights, was introduced at a New York news conference by Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President of Hughes Aircraft Co., manufacturer of Surveyor spacecraft. Lagoe built his 2-lb model—designated Surveyor-R (“for revised”)—with wood strips, foam rubber, bathtub calk, glue, ping-pong balls, cork fishing floats, a battery, and four tiny rockets. Total cost: $28.95. He described the 85-ft flight sequence following Surveyor-R’s launch from the top of a water tower: “After retro-fire, a marked decrease in spacecraft velocity was noted until retro-burnout occurred at 20 feet and the verniers burned alone. Complete counteraction of gravity was achieved at two feet, after which vernier shut-off occurred and the craft dropped to the surface.” Hughes presented Lagoe with a summer job at ksc, a free trip to its Culver City, Calif., plant, and a $5,000 college scholarship. (Wilford, NYT, 5/25/67, 43)
nasa should prepare a list of priorities for its future programs to guide Congress in making any budget cuts required by the Vietnam war, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson (D—N. Mex.) told Baltimore Sun reporter Albert Sehlstedt, Jr. Senator Anderson insisted he was not necessarily predicting cuts in the FY 1968 budget, but observed that “something might have to give a little” while so much was being spent on the war. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 1/21/67)
President Johnson presented National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Trophy to Rep. George P. Miller (EX—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, in special White House ceremony. The Trophy, founded in 1958 to recognize outstanding national space leadership, was presented to President Johnson in 1966. (Off of Rep. Miller; CR, 3/9/67, H2408-9)
1967 Robert J. Collier Trophy was presented to James S. McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., by Vice President Humphrey in ceremony at Smithsonian Institution. Making the award on behalf of President Johnson, Mr. Humphrey said McDonnell had been selected because of his leadership in aeronautics and astronautics as demonstrated by the performance of the McDonnell Gemini spacecraft and the F-4 Phantom II jet fighter. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, “for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” ( naa News; AP, NYT, 5/25/67,81)
sst design refinements reflecting 1966 recommendations made by 240-man Government and airline evaluation team were announced by Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington. Prototype refinements were still to be reviewed by FAA and described in detail to the 26 airlines which had reserved sst deliveries. Changes included addition of canard surfaces, incorporation of direct-lift control, -lengthening fuselage by 12 ft, and provision of more convenience in passenger boarding and deplaning. Withington cited progress in component and subsystem testing and in wind-tunnel investigations. The first metal (titanium alloy billets) for airliner prototypes was under production. Major contractors were preparing for work on assemblies and Boeing was making ready facilities for construction of the two prototypes. A titanium fabrication facility would be completed as part of the Boeing Development Center and would include a furnace large enough for heat-treating sheets of titanium 70 ft long and 10 ft wide. The full-scale demonstration mockup, constructed in 1966, had recently been dismantled to make room for a dimensionally accurate engineering mockup to be constructed at Boeing Co. (Boeing Release)
F-111B was “a very easy plane to fly” with outstanding low-speed qualities, V/Adm. T. F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Air), said in April 18 testimony released by the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Defense. Admiral Connolly’s description of the F—111 (formerly tfx), subject of increasing criticism since April 21 crash of usn test model, was described by Rep. George Andrews (D-Ala.) as “the most complimentary statement [about the F-lll] . . . which has been made before this committee.” Basing his views on his personal inflight observations, Admiral Connolly conceded that there was “a lot of work to do on the airplane,” including making configuration changes to improve pilot visibility. He asserted that when difficulties involving engine stall were overcome there should be no major problems and said that aircraft’s anticipated weight satisfied usn requirements. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 6/2/67, 23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences staff report released by Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) disputed theory that any nation would have a military advantage with orbiting nuclear weapons. Report, prepared “to provide information for . . . legislative evaluation” on the space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] submitted for Senate approval Feb. 7, noted: “Majority military opinion holds that orbital bombardment is not an effective strategic weapon as compared to land-based ballistic missiles. An effort to use space-based nuclear weapons would have the effect of a strategic warning, thus placing an aggressor in the position of being open to retaliation by strategic weapons.” (Text)
President Johnson signed $4.86-billion NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) into law. Noting that on Aug. 18 House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill, $516.6 million less than NASA had requested, the President said: “Under other circumstances I would have opposed such a cut. However, conditions have greatly changed since I submitted my January budget request. . . . “I recognize—as also must the Congress—that the reduction in funds recommended by the House Appropriations Committee will require the deferral and reduction of some desirable space projects. Yet, in the face of present circumstances, I join with the Congress and accept this reduction.” (PD, 8/28/67, 1192-3)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, an ibm vice president, told ieee meeting in New York that too many scientists and engineers—as prime movers of change—were not sufficiently attentive to the results of their discoveries and inventions. “Historically, scientists and engineers have underestimated or ignored the social and moral consequences of their work. Don’t continue to make that mistake,” he warned. Dr. Charles H. Townes, mit provost, received ieee’s 1967 Medal of Honor for his “significant contributions in the fields of quantum electronics which have led to the maser and the laser.” (Lieberman, NYT, 3/26/67, FI; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 97)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams outlined nasa’s supporting role in sst development at hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1965 NASA provided the faa with the services of 50 technical people for six weeks for the evaluation of industry-proposed airframe and engine designs. During final evaluations last fall, 75 professionals were provided for two months and two major facilities at Langley and Ames were operated 10 hours a day and 6 days a week during September. We are assisting FAA contractors by making available to them facilities such as wind tunnels and simulators and have helped solve specific problems growing out of detail design. The contractors used about 4100 hours of NASA wind tunnel time for each of the past two years.” NASA was carrying a major research responsibility as a member of a Federal team on the SST sonic boom program—including definition of sonic boom signatures and effects of sonic boom on structures, Dr. Adams said, and was also continuing its own study of materials suitable for sst structures. “In addition to supporting the faa on the present SST, we are continuing our general research program aimed at an improved second-generation supersonic transport.” (Testimony)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s decision to go ahead with “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm) system [see Sept. 18] was praised by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on floor of Senate: “I indicate my support of this decision [and] under present world circumstances, we have no choice but to go ahead with [abm] system.” (CR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
