Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, described progressive decline of LeRC funding from peak $389.2 million in FY 1965 to $242.4 million in FY 1967, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Dollar value of procurement had decreased, from $324.5 million in FY 1964 to $211.6 million in FY 1967, while workload was maintained and lead time reduced. Power usage had increased “but costs had declined significantly.” However in last several years, “funds available for maintenance had been less than those believed necessary for proper upkeep and repair.” In long run, Dr. Silverstein said, delays “may prove more costly to the Government.” (Testimony)
House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce approved bill to control aircraft noise levels and sonic boom. Committee, by voice vote, agreed on provisions empowering FAA to set standards for measurement and regulations for control (H.R. 1463; W Post, 5/17/68, 5)
National Academy of Engineering announced award of its third Founders Medal to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin, Honorary Vice President of Radio Corporation of America and technical consultant to RCA Laboratories, in recognition of his many contributions to engineering and to betterment of human society. Dr. Zworykin, known as “Father of Television” for invention of iconoscope, first practical picture transmission tube, was cited also for “his role in developing the first commercial electron microscope in the western hemisphere . . . promoting the cause of traffic safety through the imaginative concept of an automated ‘electronic highway,’ and . . . working ... to bring about a union of electronics and medicine.” Medal would be presented April 24 during nae’s 4th Annual Meeting, (nae Release, 2/20/68)
NASA management officials continued to testify on their programs, within NASA’s FY 1969 budget request, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said omsf’s $2.815-billion FY 1969 request was lowest request since FY 1963, $332.8 million below FY 1968, and “almost $700 million below the peak Manned Space Flight budget year, Fiscal Year 1966.” Dr. Mueller included $2,483 billion for R&D, $18.7 million for construction of facilities, and $313 million for administrative operations. Over 80% of total r&d report was committed to Apollo. “The program of Apollo and Apollo Applications Flights, with the development of the Saturn V Workshop and the Advanced Missions studies leading to a space station of longer duration and greater earth orbital capabilities, constitute a minimum effort to continue manned space flight into the early 1970s.” Dr. Mueller warned against failing “to capitalize on the investment in the Apollo Program” and said it was “economically prudent to proceed now with the Apollo Program and the definition study of the . . . long duration space station . . . keystone in the future of manned space flight.” NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Harold B. Finger, citing 27% decrease in procurement for first three months of FY 1968 below same period in 1967, predicted 94% of procurement dollars going to industry would decrease to less than 90% by end of FY 1969 as industry-developed systems came into NASA for testing and launch. Presenting $ 10-million Sustaining University program budget—equal to 1968 budget but one-third 1967’s $30 million—Finger stressed need for university contributions and combining universities’ “demonstrated competence in physical sciences with their social science strengths to deal with the total impact of the nation’s aerospace effort.” Finger submitted statement of Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, describing programs “to experimentally test and develop methods for bringing about the multiple use of the new knowledge gained as a result of NASA activities.” nasa Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly charged $7.8-million increase in FY 1969 administrative operations budget request (from $640.4-million budget for FY 1968) to cost of 1967 Pay Act and conversion to civil service of certain gsfc support services. He cited personnel reduction of 1,704 positions since freeze on hiring new employees on Aug. 24, 1967. (Testimony)
Lawrence A. Hyland (right), Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., looks at Surveyor model with Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey at Smithsonian Institution. Vice President presented Hyland 1967 Robert /. Coffier Trophy (background) in Smithsonian ceremonies honoring Hughes Surveyor team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and General Dynamics Corp. for program which “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the moonP the frontiers of the unknown—is the test of a vital society, a nation that intends to meet the challenge of tomorrow.” (Text; AP, W Star, 5/8/68, A4; Aero Tech, 5/20/68,19)
Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) wrote in Data he believed sonic boom problem would be eliminated, permitting transcontinental flight and realization of estimated 1,200 ssts in service by 1990. “No federal program since World War II had ever had the thorough analysis, careful examination and close scrutiny accorded the present SST plan.” (Data, 5/68, 8)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of House Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate: “Ten years from now nasa will be celebrating its 20th anniversary. I hope that the chairman of the Committee ... at that time will be able to stand here and congratulate the agency and its people for 20 years of accomplishment and say that the United States is still first in space and in aeronautics. But unless we are vigilant and supply the agency with the needed authorizations and appropriations, that statement will not be made.” (CR, 10/2/68, SI1844)
nas in The Mathematical Sciences: A Report said that before World War II U.S. was consumer of mathematical talent but now was “universally recognized as the leading producer.” Graduate education in mathematical sciences at major U.S. centers was “far superior to that in all but two or three centers in the rest of the world,” but shortage of college teachers was likely to worsen. Report recommended increased Federal support for basic research, including NASA programs, computer science, applied mathematics, graduate apprenticeships, and faculty improvement. (Text; Schwartz, NYT, 11/24/68, 74)
Bernhardt L. Dorman had resigned as nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs to return to Aerojet-General Corp., NASA announced. He would be succeeded Aug. 5 by Philip N. Whittaker, Vice President of IBM Federal Systems Div. (nasa Release 68—137)
House Committee on Government Operations issued report urging immediate curtailment of Federal grants to foreign scientists, especially in developed countries, to conduct nonessential research. Committee said, despite balance of payments deficit, Government grants for foreign research projects amounted to $20 million yearly, more than $15 million in developed countries. Committee recommended limiting funds to projects urgently needed by U.S. until end of emergency. (H.R. 1578; AP, W Star, 6/24/68)
Response from U.S.S.R. and other nations to proposal for international decade of ocean exploration in 1970s had been “quite favorable,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, said in report released by council. “I welcome the enthusiasm with which the Decade is being received. . . . We look forward to a continuation of this spirit of close collaboration, for the seas can, and must serve the interest of mankind.” (Text; ncmred Rpt, 5/68; Madden, NYT, 6/18/68,16)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member, introduced S. 2918, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee. Total authorization of $4.37 billion would provide r&d, $3,677 billion; construction of facilities, $45 million; and administrative operations, $648.2 million, (nasa LAR VII/8)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 15086, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee, (nasa LAR VII/9)
Testimony on NASA’s FY 1969 Budget request was presented to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by three NASA Associate Administrators. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented ossa’s budget for “an austere program for the immediate future,” yet one that would make “effective use in the years ahead of the capabilities we have developed in the past decade” and that would advance scientific knowledge and useful applications. “New starts are at a minimum,” he said, “but if this budget request is approved, we can continue the most useful of our on-going programs, we can avoid abandoning the field of planetary exploration, and we can hold together teams and capabilities to meet future national needs. ...” Authorization request for ossa for 1969 was for $538.2 million, $14.7 million below FY 1968 operating plan, with “the decrease . . . primarily in the Lunar and Planetary Programs budget, reflecting the completion of the initial automated phase of lunar exploration and cancellation of Voyager.” Space applications budget request had increased for FY 1969 (to $112.2 million) because of “demonstrated value of communications and meteorological programs and the potential value of applying space technology on a global basis.” NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, described oart program as “the key to tomorrow’s leadership in aeronautics and space.” He explained: “. . . our FY 69 budget request for the R&D line items ... is $336,800,000, up 5.7 percent over FY 68. The increase is primarily due to increases in effort on aircraft technology [up to $10.1 million] and nuclear rockets [up $6 million], . . . Major changes also included more v/stol research, noise research for subsonic jets, and development of NERVA I nuclear rocket engine at thrust level of 75,000 lb. nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski presented FY 1969 budget request of $304.8 million for R&D and $21.8 million for construction of facilities and reported that “50 satellites by the end of 1968” would be supported by network while “some 16 new missions” would be launched in FY 1969. For FY 1969, “the great majority of funds requested will be directed toward operating and maintaining present network capability. Much of the existing equipment has been operated almost continuously for at least eight years and must be refurbished or replaced.” Construction of facilities budget would fund: two 210-ft-dia antennas for Spain and Australia; power generating plant for Fairbanks, Alaska, tracking station; and Sunblazer antenna. (Testimony)
aiaa announced Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of arc’s Space Science Div., would receive Space Science Award, including $500 honorarium, “for his personal contribution as planner, leader and individual experimenter in maj or space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” He had worked’ in magnetospheric physics and nuclear physics and was currently concentrating on interplanetary physics. He had been principal investigator on several NASA experiments and ALSEP. Award would be presented at ALVA 7th Aerospace Science Meeting in New York Jan. 20—22, 1969. Dr. Stanley G. Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol Engine Div., Rolls-Royce Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., had been selected to share $10,000 Goddard Award for their separate work in developing gas turbine engines. Goddard Award, named for late rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard, was awarded annually to “a person who has made a brilliant discovery or a series of outstanding contributions over a period of time, in the engineering science of propulsion or energy conversion.” Prof. Rene H. Miller, head of mit Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, would receive Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for “outstanding contributions” to rotary-wing aircraft. Dr. Robert D. Fletcher, usaf Air Weather Service’s Deputy Chief of Staff for Aerospace Sciences, would receive Robert M. Losey Award for “outstanding and dedicated leadership and service” for 30 yr to aeronautical meteorology, (aiaa Release; NASA Biog, 11/29/68; NYT, 12/31/68, 52)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski, testifying on FY 1969 budget before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee, cautioned: “The many actions we have taken to reduce operating costs have, however, lowered the level of support we provide to the flight projects. In our judgment, further reductions are not possible without reducing network reliability to the point of jeopardizing the success of flight missions.” (Testimony)
Resignation of Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, announced May 21, became effective. He rejoined Avco Corp., where he had worked from 1955 to 1965, as Corporate Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Government Products and Services Group. (NYT, 7/2/68, 63)
House Appropriations Committee cut $550.5 million from dod FY 1969 appropriations, including $85 million from usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. (CR, 7/18/68; SBD, 7/19/68, 71)
Dr. Finn J. Larsen, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “If our civil aviation is to continue its dramatic progress, the greatest single requirement is to accomplish . . . complete system engineering. The . . . planning must consider not only the aircraft in flight as a system, but also the entire problem of moving people from destination to destination,” requiring “planning and resources on a considerably larger scale than are now available.” NASA’s responsibility for U.S. aeronautical research “should continue.” DOD had used NASA research, augmenting it for defense as necessary, with “excellent coordination for many years.” Military R&D was specialized, but much was transferable to civil aviation. Long-term goals of smokeless combustors and silent aircraft would be of mutual benefit, sage air defense computer system had contributed to faa radar beacon system and new national standards. Much improved altimetry reporting came from dod development for high-performance jet aircraft. Common digitizer was joint dod—faa project, as was TPX—42 airport traffic control facility. Eleven aircraft carriers had pilot “hands-off” capability for blind landing. Microwave scanning-beam landing systems were in testing. Collision avoidance, v/sTOL, and cargo-handling R&D had civil application. (Text)
U.S. patent No. 3,402,295 was issued to Robert W. Astheimer, Vice President of Barnes Engineering Co., for process by which aircraft pilot could spot clear air turbulence (cat) far enough ahead to avoid danger. To discover rise in temperature which marked cat, pilot would scan ahead with radiometer to detect significant heat radiation from carbon dioxide uniformly distributed through air. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 9/21/68,45)	' nonproliferation treaty by vote of 13 to 3 after three previous meetings failed to attract majority of members. Senate Democratic leaders expressed hope treaty could be brought to vote on Senate floor before mid-October Congressional adjournment. In formal statement after Committee approval, Vice President Humphrey, Democratic Presidential candidate, called upon Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon to support ratification. U.S.S.R.’s occupation of Czechoslovakia, Humphrey said, should not deter Senate approval of “crucial” treaty. It was not agreement between Washington and Moscow, but a treaty already signed by 81 nations and developed among many signers as well as the United Nations. (Sherman, W. Star, 9/17/68, A5; Unna, W. Post, 9/18/68, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/18/68,1; Furgurson, B Sun, 9/19/68, 1)
House Appropriations Committee struck all funds for sst development from Administration’s FY 1969 budget and asked return of $30-million carryover to Treasury. President Johnson had requested authorization of $223 million. Cut was unlikely to postpone development of project, which would be continued during FY 1969 entirely with carryover funds. First flight had been scheduled for first quarter, 1972. (CR, 6/27/68, H5766-7; Hoffman, W Post, 6/28/68, A3)
Research on concepts for high lift capability for stol aircraft and special hover and speed requirements for VTOL aircraft would continue in FY 1969, nasa Director of Aeronautical Vehicles, oart, Albert J. Evans reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Aircraft noise program would pursue efforts to suppress noise by acoustic treatment of engine nacelles (with results expected from McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Aircraft Co. investigations by October 1969 and January 1970), by engine redesign (with construction of engine components in Quiet Research Engine Program initiated in FY 1969), and by operational techniques. Major NASA program in flight dynamics and propulsion in support of sst program would be continued. Phase III of Hypersonic Research Engine (hre) program, test of hre on X—15 in flight as well as on ground, would not be conducted because of X—15 program termination. Major emphasis in general-aviation technology would be on flight safety, with flight tests of “typical twin-engine vehicle” at frc in FY 1969. (Testimony)
Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wis.), Chairman of House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee, released Scientific Brain Drain from the Developing Countries (dated March 28). Immigration to U.S. of scientific manpower from developing countries had more than quadrupled in past 12 yr. Report, based on Subcommittee hearings held Jan. 23, said, “the long-sustained U.S. foreign aid program has devoted substantial sums and given high priority” to educating and training professional manpower. When these countries “suffer an emigration drain of the very skills and talents they are attempting to increase, an important part of the foreign aid program is undermined.” (Text; NYT, 3/28/68, 33)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut of $48.3 million from request for FY 1969 nerva program “would essentially wipe out the entire program. With the $11.7 million authorized by the House Committee [see March 1]—it is not clear that would even cover termination of the contracts. ... We would immediately have to start termination of not only the engine development, but also termination of the technology work. I feel that we would waste a very valuable investment.” Dr. Adams described “substantial progress” in OART programs in 1967: initial acoustic absorber tests showed reduction in jet transport noise; parawing (steerable parachute) showed promise for spacecraft and precise military landings; static firing of 260-in-dia solid rocket motor had reached 5.9-million-lb thrust in 80-sec test; NERVA had been successfully tested at full power 60 min; all major components of SNAP—8 nuclear turbo-generator system had completed 1,800 hr of endurance tests, one exceeding 13,000 hr; and new Beta cloth for astronaut clothing had passed wear and flammability tests. In “beneficial crossflow between engineering and life sciences,” he named development of garment to give physicians three-dimensional data on heart activity, new blood velocity meter, and sensor to measure blood pressure in heart—small enough to be threaded through hypodermic needle and derived from instruments developed for small flight models for wind-tunnel tests. (Transcript)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford asked House Committee on Armed Services to restore funds cut by Senate for compromise development program for Navy F— 111B aircraft. According to compromise plan, USN would continue tests on F—11 IB experimental models and exploratory work on alternate aircraft, VFX—1, until March 1969 and then decide whether to proceed with F—11 IB or to cancel program after first eight models and develop alternate. If VFX—1 were chosen, F—11 IBs already produced would provide sophisticated air defense until alternate aircraft became operational in 1973. dod had requested $425 million for 8 F—11 IBs and 60 Phoenix missiles and $30 million for R&D. on VFX—1. Senate instead had approved $170 million for VFX—31. (Testimony; Sheehan, NYT, 5/1/68, 4; upi, W Star, 5/1/68, A12) '
NASA had asked its contractors to cut ksc personnel 10% in effort to save $40 million by July 1. Boeing Co. had already announced plans to reduce 4,400-man force to 4,000. Chrysler Corp. would keep 1,000 of its 1,200. Cutbacks were due to nasa budget cuts and affected only 2% of work force, (nasa pao; W Star, 10/11/68, A3)
House Appropriations Committee released hearings on dod appropriations for FY 1969 which helped explain why Vietnam war had produced strain on President Johnson’s budget, usaf was now paying $2.4 million for single rescue helicopter; during World War II, each B—17 aircraft that had bombed Germany had cost $190,000 and each B—29 used over Japan had cost $635,000. Government had bought 200 World War II fighters for the $1.1 million it cost USAF for technical manuals for single type of aircraft in 1968. usn was spending $30,000 for single torpedo and $20.3 million for ammunition for battleship U.S.S. New Jersey to fire at Vietnam shore targets. It was requesting $51.8 million for one-year supply of aerial targets. Super Jolly helicopter which USAF was introducing in Vietnam was twice as expensive as predecessor, Jolly Green Giant, and could carry 60 passengers or 18,500-lb cargo at 195 knots. F—111 was being produced at $8 million each; C—5A, world’s largest aircraft, had a unit cost of $25 million, with USAF requesting 120 aircraft. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 6/30/68, 2)
