nasa announced resignation of Ronald J. Philips, Director of Office of Technology Utilization, effective July 3. He would become Senior Vice President of technology application program sponsored jointly by International City Management Assn., National League of Cities, U.S. Conference of Mayors, and Ford Foundation, (nasa Release 71—117)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences published Statements by Presidents of the United States on International Cooperation in Space—A Chronology: October 1957—August 1971 (Sen. Doc. 92-40). Statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon had been compiled by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian. In letter of transmittal to Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Committee Staff Director James J. Gehrig said statements revealed “unanimous agreement that space research and exploration should be an international undertaking.” (Text)
NASA oart officials testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on FY 1972 NASA authorization. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said aeronautics was largest part of OART program for first time. In military aviation, “work is under way at the Centers in support of the F-14 for the Navy. . . . Over a dozen wind tunnels and simulators . . . are used in this support. We are helping the usaf with . . . the F—15, their new B—1 bomber and we plan to assist” with the A—X. One ARC facility was on indefinite loan to USA. “In all, we use over a third of our available facility time to support military needs. Research on transonic aerodynamics, the NASA supercritical airfoil, fly-by-wire flight controls, spin stabilization, and advanced structures using beryllium or composites are some of the areas where NASA is making research contributions to meet military requirements in the future.” In civil aviation effort, OART was providing DOT with assistance on sst. arc was assisting faa in certification studies of Concorde and sst. arc flight simulator for advanced aircraft was “proving to be the most useful facility available in the free world for studying airworthiness standards for supersonic transports.” NASA and DOT were completing joint study of “relationships between the benefits that accrue to the Nation from aviation and the level of R&D effort. The study displays the ways in which civil aviation can affect regional development, population distribution, [and] land use, and contribute to many other social and economic goals of the Nation.” Problems under study included aircraft noise, air pollution from aircraft engine emissions, and aeronautical operating problems “such as approach and landing safety, delays, congestion, and community noise caused by operation of aircraft.” oart Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. had established joint stol operating problems experiments program with dot and faa, and Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. “to study man’s role in advanced aeronautical systems ... as an operator, as a passenger, and as a member of the community exposed to air operations.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), described improvements in aircraft materials and structural design: “I have been particularly impressed with the progress of the composite materials. The potential of boron and carbon fibers imbedded in an epoxy resin matrix to provide high strength, low weight structures has been discussed with you for several years. This year the testing of special glass fibers has revealed the possibility that low cost, stiff composites may be fabricated with much greater strengths than previously thought possible. Composites are finding application both as a replacement for metallic components and by augmenting metal strengths using selective reinforcement. In the forthcoming year we propose to construct several airplane components of primary structure for installation and flight demonstration. We believe that these new materials will find widespread use in the industry when the technical risk has been demonstrated to be acceptable.” Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Systems Office, reported on progress of nerva program: “Through the systematic engineering design process . . . design concepts to be incorporated in nerva were formulated, requirements were specified, and a baseline engine design has been established. The design provides a thrust level of 75 000 lbs [ 334 000 newtons], and a specific impulse of 825 seconds. High reliability and safety in operation are provided through the use of redundancy in critical areas and conservative design approaches. The endurance goal for the reusable system is 10 hours, coupled with the ability to undergo 60 start-and-stop cycles, and the key fuel element technology continued to make good progress toward that goal.” (Transcript)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns From Space Investment. Report updated and expanded study of tangible benefits and practical returns from space investment based on material from Government, industry, and press—including extensive NASA research in technology utilization at Committee’s request. Committee concluded that illustrations in report were “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, science, government, the medical profession and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (H Rpt 92-748)
House agreed to H.R. 461 electing Rep. Mendel J. Davis (D-S.C.) to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 6/3/71, H4628)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had announced “voluntary” early retirement of Lockheed-California Div. President Charles S. Wagner, Senior Vice President Dudley E. Browne, and Corporate Vice President for Manufacturing W. A. Pulver, Wall Street Journal reported. Browne would remain a director and member of board’s executive and finance committees. (WSJ, 11/2/71, 16)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
NASA announced appointment of Harry W. Johnson, Vice President for Engineering in Gates Learjet Corp.’s Aircraft Div., as Director of oart’s Aeronautical Propulsion Div. (nasa Release 71-19)
Bruce N. Torell was elected President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. at regular meeting of board of directors. Torell would succeed Bernard A. Schmickrath, who was elected a vice president. Changes would be effective July 1. (p&w Eagle, 7/71, 2)
Subcommittee on nasa Oversight transmitted report Review of Recent Launch Failures to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee had held hearings June 15-17 on failure of Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to place Ats 4 in planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968, and failure to orbit oao-b Nov. 30, 1970, and Mariner 8 May 8, Subcommittee concluded that NASA’s decision not to attempt recovery program for unsuccessful Mariner 8 mission using proof-test model “seems justified” on grounds Mariner 9 (launched May 30) had been conceived as backup mission for Mariner 8 from beginning; to alter Atlas-Centaur for different project would have been “challenging;” and proof-test model could better be used as Mariner 9 backup, if necessary, or in 1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking projects. While NASA’s backup mission and recovery policies after failures “seem to have been sound in the past,” decision not to have OAO-B recovery program “appears ... to have been an unwise exception.” To forego oao-b goals “which have occupied the talents and efforts of many scientists and engineers for more than a decade in order to initiate new astronomical experiments [heao Project] in different portions of the magnetic spectrum strikes the Committee as a decision of questionable merit.” Committee recommended future use of prototype spacecraft that could be reengineered and launched as part of flight program to extract full value from expensive hardware. Manufacturing and quality control procedures in Centaur program could be improved. “It is quite clear that a great deal can and should be done short of ‘man-rating’ Centaur, which would significantly improve its reliability.” Centaur stage problems “seem serious enough to justify . . . broad scale, independent examination by disinterested experts” so that Centaur, “which figures so importantly in the space program of the next decade, can be utilized with renewed confidence.” (Text)
D. J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of Space Div., told Ninth International Symposium on Space Technology and Science in Tokyo that U.S. did not have monopoly on earth resources programs. “All of us heed the ingenuity of the entire world on how to utilize this technology, so I encourage your expanding participation and cooperation.” (GE Reprint)
Development of lift-distribution system to alleviate stress problems in C—5A aircraft by spreading aerodynamic loads through wings rather than concentrating stress on small areas was announced by Lockheed-Georgia Co. Vice President Robert B. Ormsby. Modification could be installed during regular modification and inspection periods and would not affect aircraft’s handling. (AP, W Post, 12/12/71, A3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-biIlion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
U.S. faced no dire threat from current “numbers or accuracy” of Soviet SS—9 missiles, but must extend its own antimissile system as “bargaining chip” with U.S.S.R. at salt, Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard said in testimony before House Committee on Foreign Relations’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. {NYT, 7/14/71, 7)
House Committee on Appropriations by vote of 26 to 15 approved full $290 million requested by DOT for continued SST development. (CR, 3/15/71, D164; AP, NYT, 3/16/71, 62)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972	HUD-space-science appropriations bill which contained $3,272 billion NASA appropriation. Committee recommended reduction in Apollo program funding from $612.2 million requested to $610.2 million; increase in Skylab funding from $535.4 million to $550.4 million to provide rescue capability; additional $5 million over estimate for stol development, to total $115 million; deferment of $20 million proposed for space shuttle facilities; and reduction of $6.6 million in $726.6 million requested for research and program management. (H Rpt 92-305)
Boeing Co. Vice President for Industrial Relations Lowell P. Mickelwait said company would lay off about 7000 workers and disband sst program as result of Senate’s rejection of SST financing. Plans were in anticipation of notice of sst program termination from dot. Of workers to be laid off within seven weeks of notice, 4500 were force working directly on sst production. Others were clerical and office workers. Mickelwait said Seattle-area work force could drop to 26 500 or remain as high as 31 000 after sst program cancellation. Estimate of 29 000 workers was “reasonable.” (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71, Al)
NSF published Unemployment Rates for Scientists, Spring 1971. Rate was 2.6% in 1971, jumping from 1.5% in 1970. National unemployment rate for all workers for first quarter 1971 averaged 6.5%. Doctorates experienced 1.4% unemployment rate in 1971 and 0.9% in 1970, while nondoctorate scientists were reported at 3.5% rate in 1971 and 2.9% in 1970. Defense and space constituted largest areas of activity, with 11% and 4% of unemployed. Approximately 45% of 1971 unemployed scientists reported last science-related job had been supported to some degree by Government funds, (nsf Highlights, 7/2/71, 1)	_	_	_
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Albert C. Hall, Vice President for Engineering and Research with Martin Marietta Corp., to be Assistant Secretary of Defense (Administration). Hall would succeed Robert F. Froehlke, who had become Secretary of the Armv July 1. (PD, 10/25/71, 1430, 1441; usa pio)
Dr. Clarence L. Johnson, Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., received NAE’s sixth Founders Medal for designing advanced aircraft and for experimental and theoretical investigations in aerospace sciences. Dr. Johnson was best known for his work in designing Hudson bomber, Constellation and Superconstellation transports, P-38, T-33 trainer, F-90, JetStar, U-2, Warning Star, YF-12A, and SR-71. (nae Release, 7/13/71; nae Bridge, 7/71,1)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, introduced S. 720, $3.271-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill, identical to House bill introduced Feb. 9 (CR, 2/10/71, S1193)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 3981, $3.271-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill authorized appropriations of $2,518 billion for r&d, $56.3 million for construction of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. (CR, 2/9/71, H588; NASA LAR X/ll)
