Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) criticized Sept. 13 action of Office of Management and Budget in impounding $44.9 million of $50.5-million FY 1973 NASA appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program. As Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, he signed telegram to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, protesting action. (CR, 10/14/72, H10111)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill [see March 23]. (H Rpt 92-976)
v/a Charles E. Weakley (usn, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 66. He had retired in 1967 as commander of Atlantic Fleet’s antisubmarine warfare force and had held NASA post since 1968. Adm. Weakley had received Legion of Merit and Bronze Star. During World War II he had devised random-screen method of protecting merchant convoys in experiment with early sonar. (W Star & News, 12/26/72, A6)
Annual Dept, of Defense report to Congress, National Security Strategy of Realistic Deterrence, was presented by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird to House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations during hearings on FY 1973 dod budget and FY 1973—1977 program. U.S.S.R. had reached position “where—unless we take appropriate action—there could be new surprises and new ‘sputniks.’ But they are less likely to be in areas such as the peaceful exploration of space; rather they are more likely to be a part of a major new Soviet military capability.” (Text)
Atomic Energy Commission named its Los Alamos, N. Mex., Meson Physics Facility for Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), member of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, and celebrated “Clinton P. Anderson Day” with ceremonies in Los Alamos. History of space and nuclear rocket programs was recounted by AEC Commissioner James T. Ramey in welcoming speech: “Senator Anderson with some help from the Chairman of the aec almost had the Joint Committee and AEC responsible for the emerging space program after Sputnik.” Joint Committee “held one of the first series of hearings on the development of rocket technology for outer space. These hearings represented one of the times . . . that Senator Anderson . . . and Admiral [Lewis L.] Strauss of the aec were in entire public agreement on a project. Senator Anderson was thinking of putting space under the Joint Committee and Admiral Strauss was interested in the space development program being under aec. Their mutual interest was short-lived, however, since the then Senate Majority Leader Lyndon [B.] Johnson apparently had different ideas on this subject!” (aec Release P—95; Text) April 9:	Americans were wondering why U.S. spent “$40 billion” to land on moon rather than on programs for social action, Jeffrey St. John commented in Los Angeles Times article. “The fact remains, however, that long before the landing of Apollo 11 public funds for social problems on earth had risen far beyond the annual space budgets. In 1972, the federal government has earmarked $100 billion for social action programs, as opposed to $3.2 billion for space. The ratio of expenditures for space and social action programs during the 15 years of the space effort has been roughly 11 to 1 in favor of social action.” Lunar landing had been “triumph of 400,000 scientists, engineers, and technologists and the sophisticated expertise of 20,000 private companies, large and small.” Apollo had been “clear-cut example of a successful government venture” but on earth Government had “made a mess of the social landscape.” Compounding irrationality was refusal of liberals to understand why “space program succeeded, largely as a private endeavor coordinated by government, and why social problems grow worse under government’s guidance.” To accomplish lunar mission, space program participants had needed two crucial elements: “intellectual freedom” to analyze a problem correctly and “strict observance of natural laws.” In social problemsolving, intellectual freedom was abandoned for political expediency that played one pressure group against another and “there is a continual violation of certain immutable natural laws. Namely, the refusal of the social planners to believe the slums and poverty can be the products of an absence of individual initiative and enterprise.” (LA Times, 4/9/72)
Rep. Bob S. Bergland (D-Minn.) was elected member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 1/27/72, H367)
Effect of 1972 elections on congressional committees dealing with science and environment was discussed in Science article. Chairmen of both House and Senate space committees had been replaced. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, was retiring at age 77 after 31-year career in Congress. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had been defeated in Democratic primary and would leave Congress at age 81 after serving in House since 1945. Rep. Earle Cabell (D-Tex.), member of Science and Astronautics Committee, was defeated in the general election. He was to have been one of six House members of congressional board to oversee new Office of Technology Assessment. Board also lost prospective member with defeat of Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). (Walsh, Science, 11/17/72, 25-6) November 18:	NASA and Boston Univ. Dept, of Astronomy sponsored symposium “Life Beyond Earth and the Human Mind” at Boston Univ. Panel Chairman Richard Berendzen, Boston Univ. astronomer, had said symposium was being held because recent findings in astronomy, biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics had indicated high probability of existence of extraterrestrial life. Many scientists believed that “within the next few decades some form of communication will be achieved with intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe.” Panelists were anthropologist Dr. Ashley Montagu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology physicist Dr. Philip Morrison, Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Dean Krister Stendahl of Harvard Divinity School, and Dr. George Wald of Harvard Univ., winner of 1967 Nobel Prize for medicine and researcher in biochemical evolution. Dr. Sagan said human technology had reached stage where man could detect another civilization as advanced as his. “Most optimistic estimate of civilizations in our galaxy is one million, which means one per many hundred thousand stars.” Searching stars one by one could take hundreds of years. Dr. Montagu said that “some other forms of life are probably more intelligent than we, which can explain why they haven’t contacted us.” Dean Stendahl said discovery of life elsewhere would teach mem that God’s domain is larger and would give man better idea of his place in it. Contacting other beings might help man to stop viewing God in his own image. Dr. Wald said he was convinced that life existed elsewhere in galaxy but he doubted man would ever contact it. Dr. Morrison predicted man would receive and verify message from another civilization. Message would be technical, scientifically coded communication received over many months or years. NASA filmed symposium to produce educational film. (NASA Release 72-213; Leary, W Post, 11/24/72, CIO)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. Johnson reported that in 1971 Thor-Delta launch vehicle had had five launches with four successes. One failure, on itos-b mission Oct. 21, had been caused by leak in 2nd-stage oxidizer system. Review board recommendations had been carried out and Jan. 31 launch of Heos 2 had been successful. Thorough design review and certification was in process for launch by new-configuration Thor-Delta of itos-c in April. All critical components of old and new configurations had been completely and intensively reviewed by independent group and most previous qualifications had been verified. Estimated cost of responding to review board recommendations was $2 million for FY 1972, $3 million for FY 1973, and $5 million per year thereafter. (Transcript)
Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, during hearings hy House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology on FY 1973 NASA authorization, testified that recently developed NASA technology could have increased supersonic transport’s investment return rate. Calculations had been made showing that “incorporation of now emerging technology for static stability augmentation and active flutter control could have allowed a weight savings, and thus a payload increase, of better than 16,000 pounds, or an additional return on investment of about 7.5 NASA research and technology in aerodynamics, configurations, materials, structures, propulsion, and avionics applicable to advanced long-haul transport aircraft design showed “real promise.” Application of automated active control concepts “could result in considerable weight savings by eliminating the need for inherent aerodynamic stability and thereby reducing the size of control surfaces. It could also result in reduced structural fatigue for longer life, lower structural loads for lighter structures, and ride quality control and active damping of aircraft flutter for a more comfortable ride.” (Transcript)
H.R. 12824, $3.379-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, was introduced by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/1/72, H556)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics since 1961, was defeated as candidate for reelection to Congress during Democratic primary in California. (Dem Natl Com; Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Office of Senate Republican Leader Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said Sen. Scott would nominate President Nixon for Nobel Peace Prize to be awarded in winter 1972. Scott aide said Senator was preparing documentation citing President’s initiatives in People’s Republic of China visit and Soviet summit meetings, (upi, NYT, 7/19/72, 15)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at closing session of term, elected to defer action on S.R. 193, bill passed by Senate July 21 to return Cape Kennedy to original name of Cape Canaveral, and on similar House bill originated by Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-FIa.), in 1971. (O Sen, 10/1/72)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space announced it would hold hearings in July on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for cooperation in space, medicine, science, and environment. (Reuters, W Post, 5/27/72, A23)
NASA applications program was reviewed by Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Objectives of program were “to establish useful applications of space and space know-how through the development of user relationships, through the development of requisite technology, and through the conduct of appropriate ground, airborne and space flight investigations.” Space was “a magnificent vantage point to survey the surface of the earth and to expedite and enhance the flow of information around the globe.” Core of program was new applications of earth observations and communications, but “other areas associated with the unique environment of space, particularly weightlessness, show promises which must be explored, developed and exploited.” Space manufacturing processes offered good example. “Space applications, however, should not be envisioned just as activities that lead to satellites or laboratories in space, for . . . applications relate to contributions to men and women who . . . reside right here on the ground. Know-how provided by experience with the development of space systems can be applied to . . . areas involving housing, transportation, health care and many others.” NASA participation in Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would increase significantly in FY 1973 as transition occurred from planning to carrying out Tropical Experiment and Data Systems Test, both planned for CY 1974. Planning would be accelerated for Global Experiment during 1976-1977. garp was being conducted by World Meteorological Organization and International Council of Scientific Unions to increase understanding of circulation of atmosphere and provide mathematical and physical basis for long-range weather prediction, determination of feasibility of large-scale climatic modification, and assessment of consequences of man’s pollution of atmosphere. (Transcript)
