Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), Committee member, introduced H. Con. Res. 223 requesting the President to proclaim July 16—22 of each year as “U.S. Space Week.” The resolution was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. (CR, 5/23/73, H3976)
Resignation of NASA Associate Administrator for Astronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, effective Oct. 26, was announced. Jackson would rejoin Northrop Corp. as Corporate Vice President, Program Management. He had joined Northrop in 1953 and left to become NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Nov. 2, 1970. (nasa Release 73-221)
Office of Technology Assessment: Background and Status, a report to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was published by the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, Science Policy Div. No appropriations had been approved as yet for the OTA, which had been established “as an aid in the identification and consideration of existing and probable impacts of technological application” under Public Law 92-484 Oct. 13, 1972. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had requested $289 000 for OTA salaries and expenses under H.R. 7447, an FY 1973 supplemental appropriations bill. No funds had been requested by the House, and the requested appropriation had been deleted in conference. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had recommended a $3 980 000 FY 1974 ota appropriation. The FY 1974 legislative branch appropriations bill (H.R. 6691) had been passed July 19, but the conference committee had not yet met to resolve differences between the House and Senate versions, ota funding would not be allotted until the appropriation was available. (Text)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing on H.R. 8348 [see June 4] and H.R. 9133, duplicate bills to authorize the National Science Foundation to designate certain institutions of higher learning national energy research centers. Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NSF Deputy Director, described the NSF program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) devoted to energy: “It includes research on analytic techniques and potential conservation measures directed at meeting U.S. energy requirements while satisfying environmental quality restraints; energy conversion research directed at developing technologies that allow more efficient use of our energy resources; research on superconducting transmission lines and other aspects of energy and fuel transportation; and research on advanced coal technology, geothermal energy, and perhaps most importantly, on solar energy.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Armed Services voted in closed session to appropriate $172.7 million to continue production of F-llls at a one-a-month rate through 1975 [see June 6]. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/21/73)
U.S.S. Wasp, World War II aircraft carrier and NASA prime recovery vessel, made her last voyage—to the ship breakers’ yards at Kearny, N.J. The 30-yr-old ship had been purchased for scrap metal by Union Mineral Alloys Corp. for $505 250. She had served as the prime recovery vessel for NASA Gemini-Titan manned space flights: Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965), Gemini 6 (Dec. 15-16, 1965), Gemini 7 (Dec. 4-18, 1965), Gemini 9 (June 3-6, 1966), and Gemini 12 (Nov. 11-15, 1966). (Phalon, NYT, 6/19/73, 39; nasa Hist Off)
President Nixon addressed himself to the energy crisis in a speech over nationwide radio and TV: “We are heading toward the most acute shortages of energy since World War II. Our supply of petroleum this winter will be at least 10 percent short of our anticipated demands, and it could fall short by as much as 17 percent. Now, even before war broke out in the Middle East, these prospective shortages were the subject of intensive discussions among members of my Administration, leaders of the Congress, Governors, mayors, and other groups. From these discussions has emerged a broad agreement that we, as a Nation, must now set upon a new course. In the short run, this course means that we must use less energy—that means less heat, less electricity, less gasoline. In the long run, it means that we must develop new sources of energy which will give us the capacity to meet our needs without relying on any foreign nation.” The President announced steps to lower energy consumption. He asked the Atomic Energy Commission to speed licensing and construction of nuclear plants and would ask development of an emergency energy act. {PD, 11/12/73, 1312-8)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on short-term energy shortages. Acting Director Darrell M. Trent of the Office of Emergency Preparedness testified that the U.S. “economy’s demand for all types of energy continues to increase at an amazing rate. However, our ability to find and produce domestic supplies of energy is not keeping pace with rising demand.” The U.S. was becoming increasingly dependent on foreign supplies. “Except for Alaskan discoveries, additions to domestic petroleum reserves have fallen behind production since 1967. Gas is already in short supply. ... At current growth rates, demand could double within the next 12 years over what it was in 1970. Because of the growing imbalance between domestic supply and demand, we may have to import as much as 60 percent of all the oil and gas we need in 1985. Such reliance on foreign sources of supply could pose serious problems for our national security. . . . The cost of our petroleum products alone could rise from about $6 billion in 1972 to as high as $45 billion by 1985, with grim implications for our troubled balance of payments.” (Transcript)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) introduced H.R. 32, National Science and Policy Priorities Act of 1973. The bill differed from S. 32, passed by the Senate in 1972 but never reported out by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics [see Jan. 4]. The new bill sought to protect the National Science Foundation’s pure science functions by allocating at least 40% of the science budget to nsf. {CR, 1/3/73, H27; nasa LAR,
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1973, introduced Dec. 10 as a clean bill incorporating amendments to H.R. 10952 [see Oct. 16] and 17 similar bills. Language changes more explicitly delineated agency responsibilities and two distinct program , phases. NASA would have major responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling equipment in the first phase. In the second, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would be responsible for installation, testing, and evaluation. A major amendment would require HUD to establish a Solar Heating and Cooling Information Data Bank. If a law created a permanent Federal energy agency, responsibility assigned to NASA and the National Science Foundation would he transferred to that agency. (House Rpt 93-769, reprint in Com Print, 2/74)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified on NASA’s balloon program as the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications concluded FY 1974 authorization hearings: “Balloons are used for a variety of programs in both atmospheric science and astronomy. We, in many cases, launch with a balloon a prototype of an as-■ tronomical instrument which we may later fly on a sounding rocket or orbiting satellite.” Payloads ranged from test instruments to an infrared experiment; “as you get above the water vapor in the atmosphere you can do very good infrared experiments, and you can keep the instrument pointed precisely for quite long periods . . . and do very valuable scientific work at nominal cost.” Balloons were launched from Texas, South Dakota, Missouri, and Alabama in the U.S., and from Canada, Australia, and Argentina. “One of the beauties of the balloon program is that they can be launched from many areas, and we can recover the payloads. . . . We use the same payload many times for balloon observations, and it’s not at all unusual to use the same payload for half a dozen flights with sometimes slightly different instrumentation each time.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA’s third Administrator, became a senior vice president and member of the corporate executive staff of General Electric Co. He had resigned from nasa Sept. 15, 1970, to join GE as Vice President and Group Executive, Power Generation Group. (Av Wk, 7/2/73; GE pio)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), new Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had promised an “in depth” inquiry into the FY 1974 Nasa budget request at early date, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The Committee staff was being expanded and Sen. Moss would visit Manned Spacecraft Center in February. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.), the Committee’s new ranking minority member, had urged that more attention be paid to aeronautics. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), minority member, had said the Committee should be more forceful in pushing aerospace programs “because nasa seems reticent at times to speak for itself.” (Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13)
nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during nasa FY 1974 authorization hearings: Support in 1972 had been provided to more than 40 ongoing missions as well as 18 new flight projects. New launches—which included Apollo 16 and 17 and the first probe to Jupiter, Pioneer 10—“placed increased demands on the capacity and reliability of the tracking systems.” During the two-year, 1 000 000 000-km (621 400 000-mi) journey of Pioneer 10 to Jupiter’s vicinity, the Deep Space Network would continuously monitor the spacecraft’s condition and acquire data from its 13 experiments. Major changes in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) had been the installation of a transportable station at St. John’s, Newfoundland, to provide Skylab launch support and the closing of the station at Fort Myers, Fla. The closing was “the first of the station closures planned to take place over the next few years as the spaceflight tracking and data network moves toward a single integrated network in the post-Apollo-Soyuz test project time.” (Transcript)
The Army announced award of a $1 969 269 firm-fixed-price contract to Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modification of the acoustic model engine test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, (dod Release 63-73) February 7:	The House passed and cleared for the President’s signature S.J.R. 37, to designate the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), for himself and Rep. Kenneth J. Gray (D-Ill.), introduced H.J.R. 328 for the same purpose. H.J.R. 328 was referred to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/7/73, H838.9, H877)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., released Monopsony: A Fundamental Problem in Government Procurement. The report, prepared by the Orkand Corp., said the problems of a monopsony—a market dominated by a single buyer—were no longer restricted to defense and space suppliers as Government agencies took increasingly active roles in mass transit, education, health, and environmental protection. Results of Government monopsony power were higher final costs and lowered or nonexistent profits that compounded industry’s difficulty in attracting capital. In the end, “what is in jeopardy is not one or two industries but rather our capability, as a nation, to undertake programs in which the resources of government and industry must be committed to the development and implementation of solutions to society’s problems. The study recommended: establishment of a Government Procurement Practices Board (gppb) to limit governmental monopsony power; a continuing review by gppb of procurement policies, regulations, and practices; a “free market test” criterion to govern the procurement process; and formulation by gppb of procurement principles that could be submitted to Congress and enacted into law. (Text)
Rep. Lawrence R. Coughlin (R-Pa.) resigned from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and was elected to the House Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa LAR XII/26)
