Louis Morton, one of the foremost U.S. military historians and chairman of NASA’S historical advisory committee from 1970 to 1973, died at the age of 63 in Burlington, Vt., after surgery. A member of the National Archives advisory council since 1968, he had worked strongly for separation of the National Archives and Records Service from the General Services Administration, and had advocated a coordinating office for the federal government’s entire historical program with a chief government historian. Based at Dartmouth College, where since 1960 he had been teacher, writer, and administrator, Morton was active in national organizations related to history and had served on history and biography juries for the Pulitzer prize. He had been with the Army’s office of military history from 1946 to 1959, serving as historian, then as deputy chief and chief of the Pacific branch; he was editor of an 11-vol. history of the U.S. Army in the Pacific during World War II, and general editor of the 17-vol. “Wars and Military Institutions of the U.S.” (W Post, 15 Feb 76, B 12)
The General Services Administration goofed in agreeing to an exchange of California property with Rockwell Inti. Corp., said Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Government Operations. GSA agreed 3 yr ago to accept a $ 19.5-million piece of property on the former Rockwell AFB at Canoga Park, Calif., in exchange for a surplus $ 16-million building. No other agency had been found willing to occupy the Rockwell AFB property, and the corporation had claimed $1.8 million worth of special installations at the former base. Rep. Rrooks urged GSA to fight the corporation’s attempt to get more out of the trade. (C Trib, 14 Sept 76, 4-7)
Arnold Palmer, piloting the Learjet “200 Yankee” named in honor of the U.S. Bicentennial, landed at Arapahoe County airport near Denver after a record-setting flight around the world that took 57 hr 25 min 42 sec and covered 37 000 km. Palmer’s flight was 28 hr 43 min 19 sec faster than the longstanding record set by Arthur Godfrey and Dick Merrill in 1966. Accompanied by the official observer and timer for the National Aeronautic Assn., Robert J. Serling, and by copilots James E. Bir and L.L. Purkey, Palmer averaged better than 770 kph on the 2.5-day flight that made 9 stops in 7 countries. In meeting officials at each of the stops, Palmer presented Bicentennial flags and bronze replicas of the Declaration of Independence; at Wake Is., he left a silver plaque commemorating the U.S. Marine Corps defense of the island in World War II. In addition to the speed-around-the-world record, NAA planned to claim for the Palmer flight 18 additional records for speed over recognized course: e.g., Boston to Paris, Paris to Tehran, etc. Since he took up flying in the 1950s, champion golfer Palmer had logged about 4500 hr as a pilot. (NAA News, July 76, 1)
Rockwell International—prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle—announced that it had purchased more than $18 million of goods and services from minority businesses throughout the U.S. in 1976, a 58% increase over 1975. Rockwell had been cited by the Black Businessmen’s Assn, of Los Angeles for its participation in “Black Economic Development,” and by the Natl. Assn, of Black Manufacturers for its contributions to industry development. Kenneth B. Gay, Rockwell vice president for purchasing, said that “qualified minority businesses in the more technical areas” had been hard to find in the past, but there were “many highly skilled, competent small companies competing aggressively for our business” at present. The more than 500 minority firms supplying Rockwell received about $5 million for machining and specialty fabrication; more than $2 million for metal structures; another $2 million each for raw materials and supplies and for technical services; and more than $ 1 million each for electrical equipment and for maintenance and repair services. (Rockwell Release R-46)
The U.S. Senate by unanimous vote of 88 ratified the multination convention on registration of objects launched into outer space. All 37 countries now members of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space—which drafted the convention—were expected to ratify it; France and Bulgaria had already ratified, and 24 nations including the USSR had signed it. Registration would be with the secretary general of the UN, reporting was mandatory, and the information to be provided “as soon as practicable” included the name of the launching state (or states), appropriate designator of the space object (or its registration number), date and territory or location of the launch, basic orbital parameters (apogee, perigee, orbital period, inclination), and general functions of the space object. The convention embraced objects launched into earth orbit or into space transit—lunar or deep-space probes—but did not require reporting on objects in brief transit through outer space, such as sounding rockets or ballistic-missile test vehicles. The convention would supersede the voluntary system that had been in operation since 1962; the U.S. State Department had told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that, although nearly all countries launching objects into outer space had respected the voluntary system, there had never been agreement on the kinds of information to be supplied and the information conveyed to the secretary general had never been uniform. The committee’s only question regarding cooperation was the People’s Republic of China, which had not reported on its outer space launchings; Senator Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) had asked Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger to find out if mainland China would register under the new convention. NASA had told the committee that the U.S. would not incur substantial costs from the convention’s requirement that participating states with space tracking facilities help in identifying a space object, when requested by another participant on the grounds that the object to be identified was “hazardous or deleterious.” NASA was already tracking nearly 5000 space objects, some as small as a dinner plate, and knew which nation owned most of them. (NASA Ofc Legis. Affairs, report for 21 June 76; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 63)
