INTELSAT announced it had elected Canadian Marcel Perras chairman of its board of governors and Randolph Payne of Australia vice chairman. Perras, vice president of Teleglobe Canada, had been a member of the INTELSAT board since 1975. Payne, director of marketing for the Overseas Telecommunications Commission of Australia, had represented Australia on the INTELSAT board at various times since its formation in 1973. The board had also reappointed C. J. Steffen of Switzerland and N. Tuckwell of Australia as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on planning; and O. Schmeller of the FRG and K. Nosaka of Japan as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on technical matters. (INTELSAT Release 78-17-1)
NASA announced personnel changes at Hq. —Herbert Rowe, acting deputy associate administrator for external relations, would leave to become vice president of the Electronic Industries Association. Rowe had joined NASA in 1975. —NASA had appointed Frank Penaranda director of the institutional Operations Division, Office of Management Operations, effective immediately. He would be responsible for managing the agency’s R&PM budget and institutional management system, including program support negotiations between centers and program offices, coordinating agencywide civil service and contractor manpower planning, and overseeing the center’s aircraft operations. —NASA had appointed C. Ronald Hovell director of the Resource Management/Administration Office, Office of Space Transportation Systems. He would be responsible for budget and control support of each STS program directorate having responsibility for STS funds. —Effective Jan. 1, Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool had become chief scientist in the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Rasool had maintained an active relationship with academic, industrial, and government organizations working on development and use of scientific and technological instrumentation, theory, and techniques for study earth and its nearby space environment. (NASA anno Jan 11, 16, 20, 30/78)
In its report on U.S. R&D spending for 1979, the National Science Foundation pointed out that doubling of the nation’s R&D expenditures since 1969 had been almost entirely attributable to inflation. However, the overall U.S. R&D effort had experienced real growth every year since 1975, mainly from increased emphasis on finding alternative energy sources; it had not provided major stimulus to economic growth or productivity in the short term. The federal government, currently supporting more than half the nation’s R&D effort, had over the last decade emphasized civilian programs rather than defense and space. Largest federal R&D spending increases for 1978 and 1979 were expected in the energy and health areas. During the 1970s, the U.S. had allocated proportionately less of the national R&D effort to basic research. Factors influencing this trend included the federal government’s deemphasizing basic research in defense and space programs during the early to mid-1970s; the industrial sector’s seeking quicker payoffs from R&D efforts aimed at a specific product or process, as opposed to projects with no specific commercial application; and universities’ increased emphasis on applied research over basic research since 1970. (NSF Highlights, May 1/78, 1)
