The NAA newsletter paid tribute to former Senator A.S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), who died February 13 at the age of 77. Known as “Mr. Aviation” during his 30-year tenure in Congress, he was president of NAA 1970-1972. Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 1955 Federal Airport Act promoting civil aviation, which led to establishment of the FAA. He received in 1961 the Wright Brothers; memorial trophy for service to aviation, and the first Collier award for distinguished congressional service. (NAA newsletter Mar-Apr 80, 4)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the flight of Salyut 6, with Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin aboard for 12 weeks. The crew spent the first week of July unloading cargo ship Progress 10, which linked with the Salyut July 1. Unloading was completed, and the orbiting station was refueled by July 15. Experiments with Isparitel apparatus were performed, using a powerful beam of electrons to plate metal and glass surfaces with precious metals and alloys of aluminum and copper. Properties of plating done in weightlessness differed from those under Earth conditions, Tass noted. First tests of the apparatus were made last year when Lyakhov and Ryumin brought back 24 titanium plates with metal covering from Soyuz 32; the current tests should produce about 200 specimens covered with films of varied thicknesses. Progress 10 separated from the Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 complex at 1:21 Moscow time July 18 after a 17-day stay, during which its engine was used to adjust the station’s orbit. On July 19 the cargo ship engines were switched on by ground command; it reentered over the Pacific and “ceased to exist.” Soyuz 37, launched at midnight July 23 Moscow time, carried the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, and veteran cosmonaut Col. Viktor Gorbatko as the sixth Intercosmos crew to visit with Popov and Ryumin, fourth main crew on Salyut 6. At the launch, Boris Petrov, vice president of the Soviet academy of sciences, noted that “although space school in Vietnamese science was established later than in other Soviet countries,” experiments in space medicine and technology and i n mapping of land and ocean surfaces had been prepared for the Soviet-Vietnamese expedition. Soyuz 37 docked with Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 at 2302 Moscow time July 24; on July 25, the visitors began a study of head blood circulation during adaptation to weightlessness, with Pham Tuan as first subject. The visitors returned in Soyuz 36 at 1815 hours July 31 to the preset area; near Dzhezkazgan. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 4-31/80)
The Washington Post reported that Summa Corporation, holding company for the late billionaire Howard Hughes’s estate, would “immediately” disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s 140-ton flying boat, since a last-minute public appeal for $750,000 to preserve it had failed. The Port of Long Beach, Calif., had wanted the 220-foot boat, 80-feet high with a 320-foot wingspan, to display with another transportation mammoth, the ocean liner Queen Mary. Designed to be a World War II troop carrier, the eight-engine Spruce Goose (actually made mostly of birch) had flown only once in 1947. Parts of it would go to nine museums, including the Smithsonian. (W Post, May 23/80, F3)
NASA announced that Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had signed a memorandum of understanding with Dr. David H. Jacobson, vice president of South Africa’s council for scientific and industrial research, for establishment of a Landsat ground station near Johannesburg. The pact would let the South African council, an early user of Landsat data, operate a ground station at Hartebeesthoek and receive, process, and disseminate data. The council would pay for a ground station and attending costs, plus an annual access fee of $200,000 after the first six months of data receipt, and would have to make Landsat data available on a nondiscriminatory basis. Landsat users in southern Africa would have access to regular coverage of the region, as a contribution to development efforts of southern African nations. Nine Landsat stations were operating outside the United States, two in Canada and one each in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. The People’s Republic of China and Thailand were buying ground-station equipment, and other ground stations were being planned. (NASA Release 80-147)
INTELSAT announced election of Irving Goldstein, previously vice chairman of its board of directors, to be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne of Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in the organization, had been working with the board since its formation in 1973. He was vice president and general manager for international communications of ComSatCorp, responsible for activities including planning, installation, and operation of ground stations using the INTELSAT system. (INTELSAT Release 80-10-1)
