The press reported that the subcommittee on investigations and oversight of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on August 1 examined NASA's functioning at a hearing entitled "NASA's Midlife Crisis." The chairman of the subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, cited the need for NASA to be a "prudent steward" and expressed a lack of confidence in NASA's ability to carry out its mission. Various industry representatives testified about NASA's operations and its contracting. NASA inspector general Bill D. Colvin said NASA had failed to keep a sharp eye on its programs, operations, and contractors, resulting in the waste of millions of dollars. (W Post, Aug 2/91; B Sun, Aug 2/91; LA Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; AvWk, Aug 5/91)
President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle received the crew of the Columbia Shuttle and their spouses. (UPI, Jan 10/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check for $87,500 to the Challenger Center for Space Science Education to support a national educational teleconference to be aired in the fall of 1992 on Discovery Networks. (Business Wire, Dec 10/91; LA Times, Dec 12/91)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement in Buenos Aires by Vice President Dan Quayle and Argentine President Carlos Menem on cooperation in the civil uses of space. A framework for future cooperative space projects between NASA and the newly created Argentine National Commission on Space Activities was established. NASA Release 91-126)
The National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, developed a policy directive intended to strengthen the nation's commercial space industry. The policy creates guidelines requiring the government to act more like a private business in dealing with space-related enterprises. It calls for increased efforts to negotiate trade agreements to reduce or eliminate subsidies provided by foreign governments, including the Soviet Union, China, and Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. The policy would also encourage government agencies, particularly NASA and the Defense Department, to support space activity by entering into cooperative research and development efforts with private industry and assuming some of the financial risk; basing contracts with rocket and satellite makers on "performance standards" rather than complex military specifications; and taking into account the government's overhead and development costs in assessing bids by private firms. (P Inq, Feb 12/91; UPI, Feb 13/91)
