President Clinton signed legislation on August 2 authorizing $8 million for planning and design of a $162 million National Air and Space Museum building near Dulles International Airport. (AP, Aug 4/93)
The press reported that the House Appropriations Sub-Committee on Energy and Water had appropriated $629 million for the Superconducting Super Collider for fiscal year 1994. The Clinton Administration had requested $640 million for the Collider. (UPI, June 10/93)
The Clinton Administration decided to increase funding and continue work on the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider under construction in Texas, according to Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and other sources. Krueger said that Clinton's Office of Management and Budget had budgeted the project at $640 million for fiscal 1994, a 24 percent increase over the current year's spending levels. However, just before he left office last month, outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said that the 1994 funding level would have to be $1.2 billion to keep the project on schedule for completion by the end of the decade. (W Post, Feb 17/93)
The New York Times reported that a dispute had broken out in the Clinton Administration over Vice President Al Gore's attempts to convince President Clinton to fulfill a campaign pledge to reduce the threat of global warming. Gore urged
NASA appeared to be receiving little attention from the Clinton Administration. Neither Administration representatives
The Clinton Administration announced that it had launched a complete review of U.S. policy toward cutting global-warming pollution, but had not yet abandoned the stance taken by the Bush Administration. (B Sun, Mar 16/93)
Daniel J. Jones, 80, a senior aeronautical engineer who retired in 1973 after 20 years with the Army Material Command, died January 23 after a heart attack. He served in the Navy from 1941 to 1953, and had tours of duty with the naval Aviation Engineering Division in the South Pacific during World War II and with the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington during the Korean War. (W Post, Jan 26/93)
Defense Secretary Les Aspin announced that the Clinton Administration would continue work on anti-missile weapons but that Reagan's "Star Wars" program was being reduced to small-scale research and renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. In California alone, the cutback threatened more than $1 billion in annual contracts and thousands of jobs, according to economists in the area. (NY Times, May 14/93; LA Times, May 14/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy advisory board released a report stating that "The U.S. government's organization of space activities is not appropriate for the post-Cold War era." The report noted that space bureaucracy must be simplified and centralized and that more technology must be shared between government and industry. It also called U.S. space launch capabilities inefficient and unsafe. (W Post, Jan 5/93; Space News, Jan 5/93)
The Senate approved legislation during the previous week requiring the Smithsonian Institution to build a proposed annex to the National Air and Space Museum near Dulles International Airport.  The bill already had passed the House, and President Clinton was expected to sign it. (W Post, Jul 26/93)
