NASA released “Evaluation of U.S.S.R. versus U.S. Output in Space Science,” a study prepared for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
President Kennedy requested Congress to approve legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson began tour of west coast missile and space installations.
Resolutions calling for the creation of an international space year program and an international space agency, both under the auspices of the United Nations, introduced in the Senate by Senator Hubert Humphrey.
Congressman Overton Brooks, of Louisiana, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics since its creation in January 1959, died at Betkesda Naval Hospital.
House and Senate approved bill to permit Vice President of the United States to serve as Chairman of the National Space Council.
President Kennedy signed legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Senator Robert S. Kerr, chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told a group at the National Radio and Television Convention that President Kennedy accepted the views of NASA and congressional leaders in approving the manned Mercury-Redstone flight of May 5.
Congressman V. Anfuso and Senator H. Humphrey introduced similar bills (H.R. 10203 and S. 2849) to provide for research into and development of practical means for the utilization of solar energy.
George C. Barnhart, pioneer airman and inventor, died in Pasadena. Barnhart held 70 aircraft patents, including one for wing tanks. In 1942, he had turned over his patent for split-edge wing flap, a landing brake used on conventional and jet aircraft, to the Army Air Forces for the duration of the war, thousands of planes being built 1946-51 using the Barnhart flap for which he received no royalties as World War II had (not been officially ended. He had intended to sue the Government for $10 million.
Senator Howard W. Cannon of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences spoke on the floor on the short supply of scientists available to nasa and to its private industry contractors. He proposed a closer relationship between nasa and the universities: “We need to develop and develop from the beginning, space-oriented physicists, space engineers, space chemists, and space biologists.” He cited nasa’s cooperative program with universities established without the benefit of legislation, and said that he proposed to introduce legislation to amend the nasa Act for the purpose of: “(1) to increase the number of undergraduates who wlli make space science and space engineeringtheir primary field of work; (2) to provide nasa with clear directive and the necessary funds to establish an integrated and intimate program of research, fellowships, grants and curriculum specialization with universities . . .; and (3) to establish one or more university-operated space laboratories which wlli stimulate basic research and train professionals. . . .”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved a bill to revise space research patent laws. Bill allowed private companies to retain title to patents earned under Government contract, with Government retaining a license to use such inventions without cost.
nasa announced appointment of Robert H. Charles as procurement consllitant to the Administrator. Charles previously had served as executive vice president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp.
In statement before the House Space Subcommittee, Grant L. Hansen, Vice President of the Astronautics Division of General Dynamics and Director of the Centaur program, stated that preliminary data on May 9 explosion indicated that structural failure was caused by the “design of the weather shield between the nose fairing and the Centaur itself” and the design of weather shield “was an engineering mistake.” Design of the weather shield was based, he said, upon assumptions that “turned out to be false . . ., very difficult to define by laboratory analysis and without full-scale wind-tunnel tests.” In spite of program delays, Hansen said that the Centaur program had been subjected to “unwarranted criticisms.”
In testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Gen. Bernard Schriever, Commander of afsc, discussed the “reciprocal support” between nasa and the usaf, and the national requirement for mllitary space weapons systems. He pointed out that: (1) 102 usaf officers were assigned full-time with nasa as well as 23 Navy and 33 Army; (2) $49 millions of nasa support was funded by the usaf through FY 61 and over $200 millions in FY 62; (3) $270 millions of nasa funds were processed under cognizance of afsc during FY 61; and (4) nasa use of usaf booster, launch, and tracking capabllities and the joint X-15 program further demonstrated “the work nasa and the Air Force are doing together as a team.” Gen. Schriever pointed to the fundamental capabilities of future space weapon systems and the assignment by the Secretary of Defense of major responsibility for mllitary space systems development to the Air Force.
H.R. 12812, blli to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 regarding property rights in inventions by private companies under nasa contract, was reported from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
Walter C. Scott, Chief of nasa’s Space Power Technology Program, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said one of the promising developments in solar cells was the possibility of producing thin strips of silicon solar cells on some kind of substrata. If this can be done, the “much lower cost, lower weight and improved mechanical properties wlli be attractive to the space industry and for that matter to the civilian economy. Thin films of cadmium sulfide have been produced in small areas with conversion efficiencies of 3%. It has been stated that if this efficiency collid be increased to 5% and produced in large areas, solar power wollid be economically competitive with conventional sources at rates of 3 to 4 mils per kilowatt hour.”
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, summarized the year’s activities of the committee in speech on House floor: “It has been another busy year for the committee, highlighted by action on the fourth annual budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, now rapidly approaching the $4 billion mark. In addition to the intensive study the space budget underwent, the committee also conducted 26 investigations, issued 16 reports, held 124 days of hearings, and heard 236 witnesses. “Indicative of the committee’s activity is the more than 2,175,000	words of testimony taken this year incorporated into approximately 3,860 pages of printed hearings. . . .”
Senator Hubert Humphrey announced public hearing on improvement of Government management of information and coordination of reporting would be conducted by Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations, September 20. Among officials testifying would be Melvin Day, Director of nasa Office of Technical Information. September 14: mariner ii, U.S. Venus probe, continued to transmit signals from interplanetary space to earth on its nineteenth day of flight, thus surpassing record of U.S.S.R. Venus probe which stopped transmitting on its eighteenth day of flight in February 1961. At 8:00 PM edt the spacecraft was estimated to be 3,067,471 mi. from earth and traveling at a speed of 6,463 mph relative to the earth, jpl scientists said the probe appeared to be continuing “right on course.”
Speaking on the floor of the Senate, Senator Thomas Dodd supported statements by Senator Cannon on August 20, and added: “The primary goals of our foreign policy, as I see it, are first, the protection of our Nation; second, the maintenance and extension of freedom; and third, the preservation of peace. . . . Our ability to protect our freedoms and preserve the peace depends ... on our military power in-being—on land, on sea, in the air and, tomorrow, in space. ... “I earnestly hope that it will prove possible to maintain our scientific space program and our moon program intact while instituting an immediate program to bolster our flagging military effort in space. . . . “The reorganization of our space effort will require a number of changes. First, and preceding everything else, there must be a change in policy, which clearly and publicly assigns a greater emphasis to the military potentialities of space. . . . “Second, there must be a specific directive to the Defense Department to proceed as a matter of the utmost urgency with the development of military space systems, in particular of manned space vehicles . . . “Third, I believe that while proceeding with the development of specialized military spacecraft, our Military Establishment should be authorized to embark immediately on a launching program of its own for manned space vehicles, perhaps employing modified versions of the equipment now under development by NASA. . . . “Fourth, to support the establishment of military launching and vehicle development programs, our astronaut training program will have to be stepped up, and military personnel will have to be trained in the use of the complex monitoring and control systems that constitute the brain of our entire space vehicle effort. “Fifth, our defense program in space wlli have to be provided with whatever money may be necessary to achieve its objectives, and to overtake the Soviet lead in manned space vehicles. “Sixth, the machinery of cooperation between nasa and Defense wlli have to be overhauled in a manner which gives due consideration to the requirements of defense as well as to the requirements of science. . . .”
Sir Frederick Handley Page, British aviation pioneer, and chairman and managing director of Handley Page Ltd., died in London at age 76. Inventor of the slotted wing, he provided England with its first bombers in 1915 and his Halifax bomber of World War II, of which more than 60,000 were produced, was a key weapon of raf Bomber Command.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reportedly ordered an investigation of alleged government discrimination against women, naming in executive session Congressman Victor L. Anfuso as chairman of a special nine-man, two-woman investigation subcommittee.
Jessie G. Vincent, automotive and airplane engine designer and holder of over 400 patents, died in Detroit at age 82. Vice president of the Packard Motor Car Co. from 1915 to 1948, Mr. Vincent was codesigner of the Liberty Marine engine in World War I and as an Army major helped get the Liberty engine into production, at which time it was regarded as the world’s finest power plant of its kind.
Senator Wiley of Wisconsin urged that Congress before adjournment conduct hearings on the military implications of U.S.S.R. two-man orbital space flights.
House Appropriations Committee cut a $65 million nasa item for purchase of land at Cape Canaveral and in Mississippi from a supplemental appropriations bill for the balance of FY 1962. The action was taken because the House Science and Astronautics Committee had not authorized the expenditure. Approved was $80 million for development, $5 million less than nasa asked for.
Dr. Launor F. Carter was appointed Chief Scientist, usaf, to take office in July succeeding Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold. Dr. Carter, Vice President and Director of Research for System Development Corp. of Santa Monica, Calif., has been a member of the usaf Scientific Advisory Board since 1955. A psychologist, Dr. Carter has done much work on leadership, perception, and group behavior.
During hearings of the Joint Senate and House Economic Committee, Senator Paul H. Douglas stated that “the public has never really had a chance to consider” the space program and that one third of the members of the American Astronautical Society had indicated in a poll that “a man landing on the moon was not desirable.” Budget Director David E. Bell stoutly defended the space program. Senator Sparkman questioned Senator Douglas: “I wonder whether Congress felt the same way when it put up money for Samuel Morse” to develop the telegraph.
Senator Hubert Humphrey, in hearings of the Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, told Melvin S. Day, Director of nasa Office of Scientific and Technical Information: “Mr. Day, I want to commend you for blueprinting one of the finest intra-agency systems in the Federal government today in the information field and, of course, I speak of nasa. While the work is being done by private contractor, it is you who have set the high standards for performance. . . . We feel what has been done within the agency, from our limited examination, is an outstanding job, and we want to compliment you on it.” During October: Geophysical Institute of University of Alaska reported to nasa that specially instrumented sounding rockets would be desirable for measuring extent of solar cosmic rays associated with ionization of the upper atmosphere. Auroral-zone absorption disturbances make ground measurements difficult.
Special subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics conducted hearings on solid propellants. Chairman David King of Utah was quoted as saying he wanted the hearings to be detailed enough to commit dod and nasa to a definite plan for solid-propellant rockets. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator Thomas F. Dixon said that nasa was “giving solid rockets equal consideration with liquid rockets in decisions on future launch vehicle designs. . . . We have provided the Air Force with our requirements for an advanced technology or feasibility demonstration program on large solid rocket motors pertinent to the development of solid rocket-powered launch vehicles. “To make an informed choice of propulsion between liquid propellant engines (where the technology is fairly well in hand) and solid propellant motors (where it is not), it is necessary to advance the technology of large solid motors to the point of actual demonstration firings. The demonstration program we have proposed wlli allow us to make a wise choice between the two types of propulsions because a better understanding of costs and schedules as well as developmental problems wlli be available.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued report based on nasa’s authorization hearings and two days of specific testimony on the Centaur program.
President Kennedy released part of a report submitted earlier by Vice President Johnson, Chairman of the Space Council. The report stated that the U.S. had generated a greater rate of progress in space in 1961 than in any other year but that “it is too early to make definitive comparisons as between our newly developing competence and the capabilities of the U.S.S.R.”
nasa submitted to the Congress a draft nasa authorization for FY 1963 bill. It would provide legislative authority to support the nasa budget for FY 1963, and authorize nasa to spend $2,968,278,000 for research, development, and operations and $818,998,000 for construction of facilities.
Soviet scientists claimed to have discovered the third radiation belt around the earth and published such findings two years before the findings of explorer xii were made public by nasa on January 19, 1962. Academician Blagonravov, Vice President of the International Committee on Space Research, said in an Izvestia interview that the existence of a dense belt with energies of 200 to 20,000 electron volts at a distance of 25.000	to 50,000 miles was recorded by Soviet space launchings in 1958. Such findings, he said, were published by Dr. K. Gringauz and associates in the February and April issues of the Soviet Academy oj Sciences Proceedings in 1960, and in later publications. Commenting on the view that the three radiation belts really formed a single large pulsating band that might be called a “magnetosphere,” Blagonravov agreed that the boundaries might be arbitrary but that the charged particles in each belt had distinctive characteristics and that it would be “inexpedient” to reject the theory of three belts.
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in press interview that the greatest accomplishment of Soviet vostok iii and iv flight was putting two men in orbit and bringing them close together. “They’re well ahead in that respect. But we can meet that in a couple of years. We’ll be ahead when Titan 3 is ready.”
Senator Thomas Kuchel of California, speaking in the Senate, said that the bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (H.R. 12812) would provide nasa a needed flexibility in {>atent regulations, including authorization to secure royalty-free icense or complete title for Government-sponsored research, and he recommended that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hold hearings on the bill.
Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke on the floor on the coordination of information between dod, nasa, and aec, and inserted in the record a memo of June 13, 1962, in which he criticized nasa’s information exchanges. He stated: “nasa has developed highly advanced blueprints, so to speak, for information exchange. . . . The blueprints are a long way from realization. . . . [nasa] possesses, moreover, in-house personnel and a principal information contractor with a very high degree of professional competence.”
Tracking network that operated during Glenn orbital flight would for the most part be sufficient to handle the 18-orbit flights to follow, according to Edmond C. Buckley, nasa’s Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. For the Glenn flight, the ground stations had to provide five minutes of contact and communication for every 15 minutes of flight during the 4K-hour mission. For 18 orbits the current requirement was one contact per orbit. This would require repositioning of the two ship stations and adding more telemetryreceiving equipment and command systems to some of the existing sites.
According to the Washington Post, usaf second attempt to orbit belt of copper filaments in Project West Ford experiment was apparently inadvertently revealed by Eugene C. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The attempted orbiting was inferred to have been made sometime this summer, failed because of launch vehicle malfunction (first failure and only attempt publicized had been made on Oct. 21, 1961). Of this report, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Arthur Sylvester, said to the press: “The facts are that only one attempt has been made [to orbit tiny metal filaments] and the U.S. Air Force will coordinate with the National Academy of Sciences on any future attempt.” Confusion had arisen when the Washington Post had reported that the usaf had made an unsuccessful attempt to orbit such a payload during the summer.
The House of Representatives (342-0) approved the nasa authorization for FY 1963 of $3.67 billion. This was almost three times the nasa budget for FY 1962.
dod named Dr. Albert C. Hall, Vice President and General Manager of Martin Co. Space Systems Div., as Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering for Space Technology. Post was formerly that of Special Assistant to the Director (Harold Brown), held by Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau. (dod Release 969-63; Av. Wk., 7/15/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, spoke to the 1963 Annual Conference of the Atomic Industrial Forum in New York on the relationship between Congress and science. Sen. Anderson offered four main reasons for the new level of Congressional concern over the Federal investment in science and technology: (1) cost consciousness; (2) “the belief among some Members that Congress has lost the ability to oversee effectively the vast diffusion of r&d activities for which it appropriates funds”; (3) “concern that the procedures of Congress, in some respects, may not measure up to the demands of ‘big science’ ”; and (4) “criticism of the space program as ‘moon madness’ and ‘lunacy’ gets lumped in with the criticism of heavy spending for research and development.” Sen. Anderson agreed with the aims of those who were cost conscious, although he noted that many r&d programs that had been canceled as “failures” had in fact left a valuable technological legacy to subsequent programs. He agreed that Congress needed more advice on technical matters, but doubted that the need would be solved by Congress hiring its own technical staff; rather it needed more help from specially convened panels; more engineering advice—since the bulk of the Nation’s $15 billion annual investment in science and technology is in the engineering of hardware rather than in science; improved presentations by the Executive Department, including more briefing by the Office of Science and Technology; expansion of channels of information such as Library of Congress, nas, nsf; reports by the scientific and engineering communities to Congress on the state of science and of engineering; and more long-term planning, (iOR, 12/3/63, 21997-22000)	_
A change in the political climate in the last few months had nasa in trouble on its fifth anniversary, according to John Finney of the New York Times: The trouble really began when scientists began to question the validity of the manned lunar landing. “The approach being urged by the scientific critics is a step-by-step program calling first for lunar investigation by instruments and then a manned program that would not divert resources from other fields of scientific research.” It was this apnroach that was being followed until May 1961, when President Kennedy declared the high priority goal of a manned lunar landing in this decade. “Increasingly, the attack on the space budget is taking on a partisan tinge, and the Administration in turn is reacting m a partisan manner. It is significant, for example, that in the House Appropriations subcommittee the votes to cut the space budget were strictly along partisan lines with the exception of Clarence Cannon . . . .” (Finney, NYT, 10/6/63)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics held its organizational meeting, with Chairman George P. Miller of California announcing names and ranking of committee members. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/6/63)
16th annual McGraw-Hill Survey of Business Plans for New Plaids and Equipment—1963-66 was cited in Congressional Record by Senator Carl T. Curtis (R.-Neb.). Survey showed that 25% of manufacturers’ 1962 sales were in new products not made 10 years ago; manufacturers expect that by 196613% of their sales wiil be in new products not now known. {CR, 5/8/63, 7630)
Six Republican members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended establishment of a special Congressional committee, composed of members of Armed Services Committee and Science and Astronautics Committee, to re-evaluate the national goals in space. The Congressmen said U.S. was ignoring “the main thrust of the Soviet space aim, which is to dominate inner space through the ability to exercise control over the surface of the earth.” Statement was included in a Committee report on nasa FY 1964 authorization bill. (AP, NYT, 7/29/63,12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics met in executive session and ordered nasa FY 1964 authorization bill (H.R. 7500) favorably reported to the House, (nasa Leg. Act. Rept. 11/107)
Senator Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.), asked in televison interview about the pace of the U.S. manned lunar effort, said: “I think we might move forward a little more slowly, but I do believe that those who control space, in the years to come, will control the world.” (“Meet the Press,” nbo—TV, 4/28/63)
nasa budget recommendation for FY 1964 indicated that nasa Electronics Center would bo established in the Greater Boston (Mass.) area. (Boston Globe, 1/18/63)
Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R.-Wis.) introduced resolution (H. Res. 473) to create select committee for investigating expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by Government departments and agencies; proposal was referred to House Committee on Rules, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/119)
nasa Director of Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before Space Sciences subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described one laboratory-tested theory picturing the lunar surface as made of finely powdered sand forming “fairy castles” full of caverns and empty spaces, unable to support a weight. Dr. Newell said an equally plausible theory directly opposed this theory. “. . . This means we have to go there and find out.” (AP, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
National Science Foundation appropriations of $323 million were voted by the House Appropriations Committee, a cut of $265 million from the $589 million requested by the Administration. No funds were approved for new programs. Specifically eliminated were two new programs to improve the Nation’s scientific manpower by (1) encouraging new “centers of scientific excellence” in universities that had unrealized potential, and (2) encouraging more students to go into engineering, mathematics, and physical science. {NYT, 10/8/63, 26)
Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) announced he had asked Senate Committe on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to investigate complaint from three scientists that nasa was using “coercion” to recruit scientists. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reviewed Centaur development in speech on the House floor: “. . . Centaur began as a low-priority, financially austere feasibility study, in competition with high-priority defense programs. As its importance to the national space effort became more apparent, its terms of reference were changed; and, as time passed, its inherent technical difficulties came to the surface; technical difficulties, I might add, that we have learned to expect in most new programs. “Certainly, the original flight schedule of Centaur was overly optimistic. Hindsight also tells us that the complexity of the program was greatly underestimated . . . .” Referring to press articles charging $100 million was wasted in Centaur program, based on gao investigative report, Rep. Miller pointed out: “That report was misinterpreted by the press, and a closer look at it will reveal that no such conclusion was drawn by the Comptroller General. The alleged $100 million waste included $76 million reportedly lost in Hie Advent project, the military communications satellite project .... “While there can be no doubt that certain programs incurred losses because of the unavailability of Centaur on schedule, it is incorrect and unfair to attribute the entire unrecoverable loss associated with the Advent program to Centaur, as the press apparently did. Suffice it to say that the Advent project had its own severe management and technical difficulties which led to its cancellation in June 1962.” He called the Nov. 27 flight test of AC-2 “a significant advance in the development of a new technology upon which much of America’s future space effort depends . . . .”	(67?, 12/2/63, 21906 ff.)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby announced at news conference that Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner hall joined interagency committee studying supersonic transport development. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A2)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported H.R. 7500, nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, to House. Committee’s authorization recommendation was $5.2 billion, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/113)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Rural Electric Cooperatives Association's annual meeting in Las Vegas, said: “In less than 5 years, our country has assumed a solid and secure place of leadership in developing the peaceful and practical uses of outer space. Where once we were, in the judgment of some, lagging behind, today we are, on the basis of clear evidence, forging ahead. Our efforts in space are in no way dictated by a policy of duplicating the activities of the Soviet. We are not engaged in a race with the Communist scientists—we are engaged in a race to extend the horizons of man’s knowledge and to increase the benefits which will better the lives of all men who live on this earth ....’' {CR. 2/18/63,2299)
U.S. Senate paid tributes to the late Senator Robert S. Kerr (D.Okla.) who had been Chairman of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (C7?, 3/1/63,3156-79)
Editorializing on cuts made by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics in the nasa FY 64 appropriations, New York Times said: “Now for the first time it is taking a closer look at nasa’s activities and is making a belated attempt to reduce the waste and duplication uncovered there. “This approach should have been utilized all along. Instead, the committee’s largesse and laxity encouraged nasa to act as if there were no limit to what could be spent in the skies.” (NYT, 6/28/63, 28)
Senator Russell Long (D.-La.) introduced bill (S. 1436) “to prescribe with greater particularity the conditions under which proprietary interests of the United States in inventions may be waived pursuant to section 305 of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.” Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/64)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson quoted in article in Washing4- s\/,n T~i /ii 7/» < ojima ao	f Vi a m atitia/1 Irninv* lotirlm Of TMVyfltlTM • l/(/ / v IVM/y if OU/O UO Ijttj All^ \JX. 1/11V lilUiUllV/U. iUllUA KAllVAUlg	Will • “To default would be as catastrophic as if we had defaulted exploration of the atom.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut $95.5 million from nasa proposed FY 1964 budget, based upon recommendation of Committee’s Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. Today’s reduction brought Committee’s total reduction to $488.88 million, cutting requested $5,712 billion authorization to $5,223 billion. (NYT, 7/10/63, 12; upi, Wash. Post, 7/10/63)
Reported that Senator Strom Thurmond (D.-S.C.) told closed session of Senate that U.S.S.R. was deploying antimissile missiles capable of intercepting Polaris missiles and possibly even Minute-man missiles. Senator Thurmond spoke in favor of speeding up U.S. Nike-Zeus antimissile missile development, but Senate roll call vote (58-to-16) cut a proposed $196 million authorization for Nike-Zeus from the military spending authorization bill for FY 1964. Senate Armed Services Committee had added the Nike-Zeus funds to the Administration’s proposed bill. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/13/63)
Senator Clifford Case (R.-N.J.), in interview taped for radio and television, urged public spotlight on awards of multi-million-dollar defense and space contracts to prevent “political payoffs” and other improprieties. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/63)
James A. Van Allen, speaking at science hearing of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “The spectacular nature of many space achievements, especially those involving human passengers, is such that the space race stirs the enthusiasm of all but the most obtuse or superstitious persons, and makes possible widespread support by the tax-paying public.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/23/63)
Sen. A. S. Monronev (D.-Okla.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Aviation of the Senate Commerce Committee, speaking at the Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Washington, said that the Government’s plan of cost sharing for the development of the supersonic transport aircraft ($1 billion, the U.S. putting up %, the aviation industry the other y4) was “a firm figure that must be considered final .... “I am afraid that many of our finest businessmen still hope to consider this project in the nature of a defense contract. This effort must stand alone as a civil aviation need . . . .” The Senator did concede that if the market turned out to be for 100 aircraft instead of 200, the Government “might be able to give the companies some bail-out on this.” (NYT, 10/81/63, 58)
President Kennedy transmitted to Congress the 1962 report on UJS. Aeronautics and Space Activities, stating in Preface: “The year 1962 was a period of acceleration, accomplishment, and relative progress for the United States in its space leadership drive. In both numbers and complexity of space projects, the past year was the most successful in our brief but active space history.” In accompanying message, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson told Congress that, during 1962, U.S. “generated a greater rate of progress in space than did the U.S.S.R. [However] . . . the records of the two countries were closely similar in regard to the ratio of space successes to space failures.” (Annual Report for 1962; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, A2)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,-nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined status of current nasa activities, described proposed nasa program for FY 1964, and presented nasa budget estimates for FY 1964. (Testimony)
Ford Foundation announced a grant of $300,000 to take young engineering professors from the university campus into industry for one year to give them experience in “manufacturing, marketing, financing, and other considerations that influence engineering decisions in practice.” The program would cover three years and would involve some 60 faculty members. Program would be directed by Clarence E. Watson, former vice president of Columbia Broadcasting System Laboratories. Another $200,000 grant was made to the Univ. of Tenn. to take outstanding scientists and engineers into parttime teaching. (NYT, 11/7/63, 41)
Boston Globe carried article which cited leading electronic industrialists who endorsed nasa’s placement of an Electronics Center in the Boston area. .Public discussion had been triggered by Wall Street Journal article which said that “electronic and other scientific Yankee businessmen are looking critically at a proffered Federal gift [nasa proposed electronics center].” Ephron Catlin, executive vice president of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, commented: “The story completely misrepresents the true feeling of the vast majority of the business and academic community in this area. “Almost the entire area is in favor of the center, and in fact, working for it . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A663)
Raytheon Co. announced appointment of D. Brainerd Holmes as senior vice president, effective Oct. 1. (NYT, 8/6/63,8)
House Resolution 504 to create a select committee to investigate expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by departments and agencies of the Federal Government was reported to House floor from House Committee on Rules. (CR, 8/28/63, 15297-98)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director of nasa Procurement and Supply said in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “ . . . nasa is trying a new contract system which we hope will accomplish the incentive objectives. The base fee in the contract will be lower than the usual fee. Criteria will be set up in the contract for evaluation of the contractor’s performance. These criteria may include reduction and control of costs, excellence of performance, delivery on schedule, and other points. Periodically a nasa board, also specified in the contract, will evaluate the contractor’s performance and may award some higher fee, up to a set maximum, if the facts justify an increase . . . .” (Testimony)
House Appropriations Committee voted $5.1 billion appropriation for nasa in FY 1964, $612 million less than the Administration request and $250 million less than previously authorized by Congress, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the 1970 target date for landing a man on the moon could not be met unless Congress restored the $250 million cut, either by putting it back now or by approving a supplemental request in Jan. 1964. Furthermore, Webb said, the FY 1965 budget would have to make up the “shortfall” from the original Administration request for $5.7 billion. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D.-Mo.), Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said he had wanted the nasa budget cut further to $4.9 billion, tbat the Subcommittee on Independent Offices had wanted $5.3 billion, and that the $5.1 billion represented a compromise. He predicted House approval, said: “Although it’s only a token cut, it shows the attitude of the Committee and the House towards the space budget.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.), Chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, said the cut had nothing to do with President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar landing program. “There was simply one big thing. Everybody wants a tax cut, and many people want a reduction in spending. Of all the spots, this was a good one to cut.” (NYT, 10/8/63,1)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said in commencement address at Univ. of Maryland: “We are not reaching for prestige in space—we are reaching for peace. And this is considerably more urgent than many realize or others will yet admit .... “In exploring space, we are exploring the environment of the earth itself. We are finding paths through a new dimension—and historically civilizations have stood or fallen according to their ability to move through a dimension. “We seek to make space an instrument for peace and the development of mankind. But if we abandon the field, space can be preempted by others as an instrument for aggression. “And in a world of competing social systems, we would be naive indeed if we failed to recognize how bleak the future would be if this new dimension became the realm of tyranny. For your children, and your children’s children, an iron curtain would be drawn across the pathway to the- stars . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/18/63, A3867)
Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity (usaf), dcs Systems and Logistics, Hq. usaf, testifying before the Subcommittee on dod Appropriations of the House Appropriations Committee, stated that usaf was going to modify as space boosters at least 15 of the 64 Thor irbm’s being withdrawn from the U.K. but was dismantling the 45 Jupiter missiles that were withdrawn from Turkey and Italy. Rep. Daniel J. Flood (D.-Penn.) recalled that this Subcommittee had been in the thick of the original Thor-Jupiter controversy, asked “what is the peculiar, special, and significant and distinct thing about the Thor missile which would argue that 15 at least be modified” while Jupiter missiles were being discarded as “garbage.” Gen. Gerrity replied that the reason was quantity rather than quality, that usaf had had more experience with Thor, and “We have launch facilities for the Thor but do not have launch facilities for the Jupiter.” Rep. Flood pressed Gen. Gerrity on “the marked physical distinction [between Thor and Jupiter] which would rush you into this conclusion?” The General did not recall a marked distinction. Rep. Flood asked “did nasa twist your arm and insist they get Thor instead of Jupiter ?” Gen. Gerrity said he knew “of no such circumstances.” (DOD Appro-riations Hearings, House, 88th Congress, 1st Session, Pt. 5, 973- •
Testimony of Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara before House Committee on Armed Services Feb. 2 was released, in which Secretary McNamara said: “A substantial amount of funds [for FY 1964] is requested for dyna-soar. I mention this only to say . . . that technology as it applies to space advances so rapidly that we must expect many changes in programs before they are completed. I personally believe that rather substantial changes lie ahead of us in this dyna-soar. “I say this, in part, because of the gemini development, gemini is a satellite project carried on up to the present time by nasa, on which has been spent to date about $300 million, and for which they will request $300 million in 1964, toward a total program cost of $800 million; it will provide a capsule capable of carrying two men into earth orbit . . . . “gemini is a competitive development with dyna-soar in the sense that each of them are [sic] designed to provide low earth orbit manned flight with controlled re-entry, dyna-soar does it one way, and with flexibility, and gemini another .... “[The nasa-dod Project Gemini joint planning committee] . . . will insure that the military requirement for near-earth orbit is properly taken account of in the gemini project. “We don’t have any clear military requirement, or any known military requirement, per se. But 1 think we do have a requirement for environmental testing and experimentation in nearearth orbit. “We are very much interested, therefore, in the Gemini project. When we become more familiar with it and understand its potential I suspect it will have a great influence on the future of DYNA-SOAR .... “I guess that we will find that gemini has a greater military potential for us, even though a rather ill-defined military potential, than does dyna-soar, and, moreover, that it will be available much sooner than dyna-soar ....	' “I think the dyna-soar project can work out satisfactorily. The real question is, what do we have when we finish it. It will cost to complete, in total, including funds spent to date, something on the order of $800 million to a billion dollars. The question is, do we meet a rather ill-defined military requirement better by proceeding down that track, or do we meet it better bv modifying gemini in some joint project with nasa . . . .” (Hearings on H.R. 2440, pp. 465-67) During March: Space Orientation Center, designed for briefing Marshall Space Flight Center visitors and new employees and operated by the Historical Office, was opened at msfc. (Marshall Historian; Huntsville Times,3/6/63)
At nasa Budget Briefing Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans commented on rumor that nasa planned another Mercury flight after the Cooper flight scheduled for April: “You will note that the Mercury and one-day [manned orbital] effort is presumed to be completed in fiscal ’64. We have a flight scheduled for this April. ... In planning flights of that importance we always have a back-up possibility. We do have two back-up capsules as well as the two back-up Atlas boosters that could be used in the event that we don’t obtain all the information that we anticipate obtaining in the Cooper flight. . . .” (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript, 1/17/63)
President Kennedy visited San Antonio and Houston. In San Antonio, he participated in the dedication of the new $6-million Aerospace Medical Health Center at Brooks afb. “Too many Americans make the mistake of assuming that space research has no value here on earth. Nothing could be further from the truth,” the President said, and then went on to enumerate some of the advances in medical science and technique that had come from space research. Referring to the reduced nasa budget passed by the Senate the previous day, the President said: “There will be pressures for our country to do less and temptations to do something else. But this research must and will go ahead. That much we know. That much we can say with confidence and conviction .... “Our effort in space is not, as some have suggested, a competitor for the national resources needed to improve our living standards. It is instead a working partner and coproducer of those resources.” (Wicker, NTT, 11/22/63; Kiker, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 11/22/63)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) spoke on the Senate floor about the results of the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ five-year fight for more comprehensive, integrated technical information programs in Government. The Senator said that useful programs were now at last underway in all major Federal agencies; he particularly cited the Science Information Exchange, which as of June 30, 1963, had a roster of 75,000 research proposals and projects in the life sciences and physical sciences. {CR, 10/9/63,18128)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking at the Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, said the space age was “one of the great movements in human history . . . . Our ability to maintain the peace and deter aggression depends on keeping ahead—or at least abreast—of any other nation in space technology.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/22/63)
Senator Howard Cannon, speaking on Senate floor, said: “. . . It is my personal belief—and a belief held by many other people knowledgeable in the field—that our entire scientific effort in the decades ahead might well run aground because of an insufficient supply of trained technical personnel. “. . . I again ask this body to consider the shortage of engineers and scientists to be a matter of most vital national urgency; and I reiterate my resolve to see that the legislative branch does not default in its obligation to take action in this area.” {CR, 2/7/63, 1949-50)
Senate Appropriations Committee completed action on nasa’s FY 1964 appropriation by approving a $5.19 billion nasa budget. This was only $90 million more than approved by the House of Representatives. It had been thought that the Senate would raise the House figure to about $5.3 billion. The Senate Committee also retained its version of the Pelly amendment, forbidding a joint lunar program without consent of Congress. (Finney, NYT, 11/14/63,21)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.), minority member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, asked that the Committee investigate alleged waste in the space program to determine how much money has been wasted, by whom, and whether some projects have fallen so far behind that money earmarked for them m the FY 1964 budget can be cut out because it cannot be spent within the fiscal year. He requested that the investigation be undertaken immediately so that it can be finished before Congress takes final action on the nasa budget. (Troan, Wash. Danly News, 10/5/63)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testified on nasa facility planning before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology. “There are several basic agency guidelines under which the Program Directors establish tlieir facility requirements. In addition to money constraints, always present, every effort is made to meet requirements through modifications to existing facilities and the use of government owned facilities and sites in lieu of new construction and land purchase. As a result, facilities and sites which otherwise might be obsolete or unused become effective tools for the conduct of our program. I think nasa has an unusually fine record in this respect . . . .” (Testimony)
Charles H. Zimmerman, nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “Our goals are to provide the research and advanced technology which will: “1. Enable our aircraft industry to produce aircraft which will, to the greatest practicable extent, make the convenience and speed of air transportation available, and economically feasible, to the people of this country; “2. Enable our armed services, working with our industry, to develop military aircraft superior in performance, in utility, and in requirements for logistics and manpower support to those of any other country. “In working toward these goals, we coordinate our efforts closely with the Federal Aviation Agency, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies . . . and with the aircraft manufacturers and their customers .... “Aviation no longer offers the glamor and excitement which so strongly influenced its growth in its early years. We are not striving for speed and altitude records. Men have circled the earth at orbital speeds. The X-15 has flown practically out of the atmosphere. Our objective now is transportation, economically feasible transportation for commercial purposes, militarily superior transportation for military purposes. I would like for you to consider our program as directed toward maintenance and enhancement of our leadership in air transportation . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa Director of Procurement Ernest W. Brackett, testifying before Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Date Acquisition of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “During fiscal year 1962, approximately 90% of funds appropriated by the Congress were spent by contracts as compared to 64% in fiscal year 1960. In fiscal year 1964, the percentage of funds going to contractors may increase further . . . .” (Testimony)
W. C. Mentzer, United Air Lines Vice President, told Wings Club in New York that projected British-French supersonic airliner was a challenge to U.S. If this country accepts challenge, it must be prepared to accept “two specific obligations . . . : First, to develop an intelligent long-term program of subsidy, and second, to encourage an economic environment in which the supersonic transport eventually may thrive.” (NYT, 5/14/63)
In letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.), ranking minority member, recommended the committee carefully re-examine U.S. space activities and resource allocations “because I think the priority given the manned lunar program is inure of an issue now than it was 2 years ago .... “It is interesting to note that criticisms expressed concerning the allocation of funds within the space budget, and the amount of the total budget, are coming from members of both political parties as well as from some scientists and engineers who are not identified with either party. “I do not, therefore, regard nasa’s budget for fiscal 1964 as a partisan matter . . . .” (Letter, 5/10/63, m CR, 5/13/63, 7803)
Addressing meeting of Aviation and Space Writers Association, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Co. Aerospace Div., Lysle A. Wood, proposed: (1) orjttting weather control station that could provide a “better foreign aid program than any of our efforts to date”; (2) orbiting industrial laboratories to supplement Government space laboratories; (3) orbiting cardiovascular laboratory for studying and treating selected patients in space environment; (4) research by chemists and others for substances, compounds, and organisms “for which we do not recognize a need or desire because we cannot imagine the possibility of their existence”; and (5) orbiting vehicles as new medium of advertising. He suggested that U.S. would benefit from commercial ventures into space, and such benefits could help pay for scientific and military programs. (NYT, 4/19/63, 86)
Urging a “breakthrough” by cab and faa “toward more economical AnowitiAno in IQ rtncvanmu* tn OA naoOQmrm*^ r*Qr»rro rtf rtrtTTlTTlOnmQ 1 opoi UiHOliO AAA XU p««MVllgVi	UA ptMAJOUgVA A	va waaaaaava vawa aircraft, Sen. Thomas J. McIntyre (D.-N.H.) pointed out that in 1958 “the passage of the Federal Aviation Act provided the basis for such [design] studies. . . . Originally, of course, such studies were the province of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, set up as early as 1915. Senator Ralph Flanders said, in 1955:
George Friedl, Jr., was appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D. Hilbum, who was recently named Deputy Associate Administrator. Since 1962 a management consultant in Santa Ana, Calif., Friedl served from 1960 to 1962 as Chairman of the Board and President of Matthews Corp. and from 1956 to 1960 as Corporate Vice President of Litton Industries, Inc., and General Manager of its Electronic Equipment Div. (NASA Announcement 64-140; nasa Release 64-157)
House Appropriations Committee cut off developmental funds for the aec’s Pluto low-flying, nuclear-powered missile, proposing the missile be mothballed until dod decided whether it needed the weapon. Having gone through nearly 10 years of development costing $196 million, Pluto was nearing the flight stage. The committee provided $1 million to mothball it. aec had requested $8 million additional funds to get the missile to operating stage. (Finney, NYT, 6/12/64, 1, 23)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Assistant Director for Flight Operations of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, was appointed flight operations director for the second Gemini-Titan flight (GT—2), an unmanned suborbited flight scheduled for autumn. Kraft had been responsible for flight direction in Project Mercury and in the first Gemini-Titan flight. For the GT—2 mission he would replace Dr. Walter C. Williams, who resigned from NASA last March to become Vice President and General Manager, Manned Systems Div., Aerospace Corp. (nasa Release 64-185)
Vice president of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail A. Lavrentev’s disclosure that U.S.S.R. had been forced to abandon attempt to drill through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington Post. Soviet drillers reached depth of about 20,000 ft. near Caspian Sea when economic and technical difficulties forced them to give up the project. Lavrentev said Soviet scientists now were “seeking more effective methods of drilling and shoring up the hole.” Project was akin to U.S. Project Mohole, directed by National Science Foundation, which would attempt to drill through sea floor to penetrate earth’s crust and sample the mantle beneath. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
The Federal Aviation Agency (faa), following up Defense Secretary Mc; Namara’s announced deactivation of 19 airfields, called attention to the procedures by which surplus military airfields could be transferred to state or local public agencies for development as civil airports. The procedures were established by the Surplus Property Act of 1944 and its amendments. More than 600 airports had been transferred to state and local agencies under this statute since the end of World War II. (faa Release 64-108)
Senator Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in interview that aircraft manufacturers must bear the 25% share of supersonic transport development cost, rejecting the 10% formula advocated by Eugene R. Black in recently reported study. Senator Monroney said usaf should be assigned task of developing sst’s engine and the airframe manufacturers should join together to build the sst body. He said the builder of the aircraft would “have the greatest property ever owned in aviation, a superplane good for at least 20 years. They’ve got to take some risk.” (Steif, Wash. Daily News, 2/27/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that Scout space vehicle had not been performing with desired reliability. Ground tests and modifications were conducted, and when a test vehicle was fired the fixes were shown to be “adequate.” Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), replied that “if NASA spent half as much money on solids as it did on liquid vehicles, the solid rocket program would have 100 per cent reliability.” Discussing Surveyor lunar probe, Dr. Newell said first nine Surveyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs. to 2,100 lbs., and it was hoped flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaur space vehicles would be available to launch the subsequent Surveyors. (SBD, 2/20/64,279)
Senator Wayne L. Morse (D.-Ore.) said on Senate floor that “the most recent developments in the strike of the Florida East Coast Railway by the 11 nonoperating railroad unions, which is now in its second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shutdown of the vital construction work at Cape Kennedy by tomorrow night. . . . “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has just announced that, contrary to the recommendations of the President’s Board of Inquiry last October, it will permit the Florida East Coast, operating its trains with strikebreakers, to use the 18-mile spur newly constructed by the Federal Government to move freight into Cape Kennedy. . . . “This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will, I fear, lead to new labor trouble in the Cape Kennedy area, for the FEC strike still continues. . . .” (CR, 2/5/64,2035-36)	,
In Warsaw at the luncheon of the International Academy of Astronautics (iaa), Rep. George P. Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, expressed the intent of the U.S. to engage in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes as instituted in National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and implemented by NASA. Prof. C. Stark Draper of mit was re-elected as president of iaa for the coming year. In Missiles and Rockets interview while in Warsaw, Rep. Miller said that “the U.S. would be happy to open up negotiations with Poland on space projects.” A possible means of such cooperation, he said, might be incorporation of Polish scientific experiments on U.S. satellites and sharing of data they would acquire, a program such as U.S. already conducts with U.K., France, and Italy, (nasa Hist.; M&R, 9/14/64,
HF—24 fighter-bombers designed by a team of 18 German aeronautical engineers and manufactured in Bangalore at the Hindustan Aircraft Co. were reportedly being delivered to the Indian government. The chief of the team designing the HF—24 was reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank, principal designer for Germany’s World War II Luftwaffe, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/64)
Plans for formation of National Academy of Engineering were drawn up by committee of 25 leading engineers appointed by nas president Dr. Frederick Seitz. The committee, which would seek Congressional charter for the proposed academy, elected Dr. Augustus B. KinzeL, Union Carbide Corp.’s Vice President for Research, as chairman, (nas-nrc Release)
Following Senator Goldwater’s charge that U.S. missiles are undependable, unnamed official sources at Cape Kennedy pointed out that newest U.S. ICBm’s—Minutemen and Titan II’s—can be fired in less than a minute’s notice, have been successful in nearly 7 out of 10 test firings, partially successful in 2 out of 10, and completely unsuccessful in only 1 out of 10 firings, (upi, NYT, 1/10/64,14)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, amplified his concern for solar radiation danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70, saying it would be a “sound” decision to delay the Apollo flight into the 1970’s to increase safety. “We don’t know all there is to know about these flares.” He repeated that adding shielding to Apollo spacecraft could impose weight penalty, added that NASA was “intensifying” its study of solar radiation. (SBD, 1/21/64, 104)
Senate-House Conference Committee on H.R. 11296 filed its Conference Report on the Independent Offices Appropriation Bill for FY 1965. Committee recommended 85,250,000,000 NASA appropriation, which was 850,000,000 less than Senate-passed bill had provided and 850,000,000 more than House Committee had recommended. One amendment, regarding use of funds for a manned lunar landing by U.S. and another country, was reported in disagreement. (House Rpt. 1781)
Bill to authorize appropriations to NASA for FY 1965 (S. 2446) was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, (nasa lar III/9)
CAB Chairman Alan S. Boyd told House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce’s Public Health and Safety Subcommittee hearings on recent jet airliner crashes that investigation showed air turbulence no more hazardous for jets than for other airliners. (Witkin, NYT, 1/9/64, 52)
NASA’s equal opportunity employment activities were commended on Senate floor by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R.—N.Y.). Senator Javits introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA indicating specific measures taken in broad-based equal opportunity program, especially in Huntsville, Ala., and Wallops Station, Va. (CR, 1/30/64, 1328-29)
Sen. Kenneth B. Keating (R.—N.Y.) discussed in the Senate NASA’s program of research in aircraft noise abatement. Senator Keating introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA on its past and present noise research and said: “NASA spending on aircraft noise abatement research has increased by 628 percent since 1962, rising from $148,000 in that year to $247,000 in 1963, to $931,000 in 1964. The Space Committee . . . has tentatively approved a sum of $1.4 million for this program next year, a decision which I strongly support. . . .” (CR, 5/22/64, 11344-46)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that DOD would establish a Contract Audit Agency whose principal function would be to consolidate the activities and the 3,600 personnel of various units formerly engaged separately in auditing defense and space contracts. He estimated that this would result in a “manpower” saving of $1.8 million. (NYT, 12/13/64)
House Appropriations Committee reported $46,785,867,000 military appropriations bill for FY 1965. Report said: “The committee explored in detail the question of missile dependability. . . . [The committee] is inclined to conclude with the Secretary [of Defense] that the missile force we have programmed can be depended upon to carry out its military mission under all of the conditions we can foresee.” The committee also proposed appropriation of $47 million for initiating development of a new manned bomber. (Raymond, NYT, 4/18/64,1)
House Appropriations Committee voted to approve $5.2 billion in funds for NASA in FY 1965, $245 million less than the requested $5,445 hillion ($5,304 billion for FY 1965 and $141 million FY 1964 supplemental combined by the Committee). The appropriation was contained in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill. (Finney, NYT, 5/19/64,1)
Journal of the Armed Forces noted that Philip Bono, with Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co., had redeveloped Itha-cus (formerly Icarus), his study concept of a spacecraft which could move 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 troops anywhere in the world in 30 or 40 min. Ithacus was formerly conceived for launch from fixed land site, but under the new concept, there would be seaborne launch from nuclear aircraft carrier of Enterprise class. This would reduce vulnerability of the system. (Haggerty, JjArmed Forces, 7/11/64, 2) *	Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations (codsia) formed under sponsorship of Aerospace Industries Association, National Security Industrial Association, and Electronic Industries Association. Council would operate solely as coordinating and communicating vehicle between Government and industry, not as master association. (// Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R. 10456, NASA’s FY 1965 authorization bill, for $5,193,810,500, which was $110 million less than the $5,304 billion NASA had requested. Of this amount, $4,327,950,000 was for r&d; $248,335,000 was for CofF; and $617,525,500 was for Administrative Operations. (H.R. 10456; NASA lar III/48 and III/49)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara testified in military posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasizing that U.S. missile and bomber force was neither too large nor too small for today’s “damage limiting” military strategy. He pointed out that missiles are more reliable than bombers, being mechanically reliable, capable of surviving enemy attack, and able to penetrate enemy defenses in war-time, while the bombers are vulnerable to enemy attack and less likely to reach target enemy defenses. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/64)
House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued a report on its hearings on the repeated failures in the Ranger spacecraft program. The committee concluded that NASA provided too little direction on Ranger, while jpl was too resistant to following NASA orders when they were issued. To strengthen management over JPL, the committee recommended: (1) JPL should be restricted to doing the work of a center rather than that of an industrial contractor; (2) a general manager with industrial experience should be appointed as deputy to jpl director to be in charge of complex projects such as Ranger; (3) NASA should streamline its relationship to jpl to achieve jpl responsiveness to NASA direction. (Text; Finney, NYT, 6/17/64; Wash. Post, 6/17/64)
Patent for system of space communications using x-rays has been granted to Henry R. Chope, executive vice president of Industrial Nucleonics Corp., Columbus, Ohio. The l^-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope as source of energy, (nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64)
Welcoming Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II as eighth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Senator Claiborne Pell (D.-R.I.) quoted Dr. Ripley in the Senate:
NASA submitted report to Congress on patent legislation: to House Committee on the Judiciary on H.R. 4482, to provide administration in the public interest of property rights to inventions resulting from R&D financed wholly or partially by public funds; to Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 1290, to establish uniform national policy for proprietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of public funds; and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on S. 1444, to amend National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to waive proprietary interests of the U.S. in inventions, (nasa LAR III/19)
At request of Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) and by unanimous consent to motion of Senator Mike Mansfield (D.—Mont.), Senate requested House to return H.R. 10456, NASA authorization bill for FY 1965. Senator Morse was requesting record vote on the bill; action of the previous day was taken without quorum call and with only voice vote. (NASA LARIII/126; CR, 6/23/64,14234-35 and 6/24/64, 14392)
In interview with Space Business Daily, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) cited two factors he believed would improve NASA’s relations with House Committee on Science and Astronautics this session. First, committee members now have more knowledge of NASA’s problems and needs, having visited NASA installations and learned first-hand about NASA’s activities. Last session, he pointed out, 10 of committee’s 31 members were new to space legislation. Second, NASA was perfecting its procedures of informing Congress, improving the information flow and clarifying its justifications. (SBD, 1/16/64,80)
Four-man panel of former dod r&d directors, under auspices of Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and Humphrey, responded to Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and stifled innovation. . . .” Panel said: “We favor maintaining a substantial base of defense research and development which is essential if we are to maintain the flow of new ideas and new devices. But support of R&D does not mean the innovation of a large number of operational systems without regard for military requirements or without ample attention to technical and operational feasibility. Senator Goldwater and his advisors have ignored the fact that many of the projects cancelled during previous administrations had proved unfeasible or too expensive in relation to the military benefits they would yield. . . .” (SBD, 11/2/64,5)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Independent Offices, paid tribute to NASA on the floor of the House: “. . . too much credit cannot be given the top management of the Space Agency . . . “To this group of distinguished gentlemen, must go the credit of spending some $17 billion without the slightest breath of scandal attached to the many thousands of transactions.” (CR, 6/11/65, 12829)
Department of Defense should, without further delay, commence full-scale development of a manned orbital laboratory (Mol) project, recommended a report by the Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations. The report also suggested that DOD “pursue a more realistic security policy in its program,” and that “careful and intensive consideration be given to achieving future economies in space operations with greater standardization of systems and subsystems and through such techniques as recoverable and reusable boosters and spacecraft.” Moreover, “NASA and DOD [should] use each other’s facilities and resources to the greatest possible extent.” (Text)
The National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress, established by law in 1964 to find out what technological change was doing to the economic and social fabric of the country and how to obtain its maximum benefits with the least possible harm, met for the first time with Vice President Hubert Humphrey. The Commission would meet again Feb. 18-19 to determine the areas to be explored intensively and possibly to select outside personnel to help with basic research in these studies. (NYT, 1/30/65, 6)
Dr. Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, appeared before the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations, in testimony supporting DOD’s request for $6,709 billion new obligational authority for FY 1966 research, development, testing, and evaluation. He discussed the Vela nuclear detection satellites, orbiting in nearly circular orbits. “All four satellites remain in operation, providing data on the radiation background and the operation of detectors in space.” He outlined the aacb’s 1964 launch vehicle study, which “was intended to identify overall effects and provide a data base for, rather than to resolve, individual user program booster selections or nearterm booster improvement questions.” The study “confirmed earlier estimates” of launch vehicle needs for the near future. [See Jan. 26, Jan. 27] (DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 1—30)
Writing about the visit of President Johnson and Vice President Humphrey to NASA Hq. for a briefing on NASA programs on Feb. 25, Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in an article for the San Diego Union: “1 was particularly pleased at the deserved tribute the President paid Jim Webb and Hugh Dryden. I have known them both since 1937. They are extremely modest men. They avoid personal publicity. They are not jealous of subordinates, but prefer that the publicity and credit for NASA successes carry the pictures and headline the names of those members of the NASA team most directly responsible. For this reason they can attract and hold able people. . . . “While we are giving out the space medals, it is only fair to say that without the vision and tenacity of Lyndon Johnson, the first man on the moon could not be an American. “To have man’s most dramatic and significant adventure become the achievement of a slave state instead of a free society would be intolerable.” (Eaker, cns, San Diego Union, 3/14/65)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries of America, Inc., addressed the Economic Club of Detroit: “. . . the aerospace industry of today does indeed represent a truly unique phenomenon in industrial history in almost all of its aspects. ... it is that industry which places at the disposal of the nation—both its public and its private sectors—the capacity to manage the research, development and production of the most technologically advanced product that is possible—for whatever purpose desired. . . it is essential that we all understand the principal factors—■ historical, present and future—that have produced and will continue to produce this uniqueness. “First, the genesis and evolution of what is today’s aerospace industry is a direct product of the nation’s post-World War II history and is inextricably linked thereto. . . . World War II unleashed for the world, but particularly for the United States, two revolutions which have been gaining momentum ever since. The first of these was a form of economic revolution which saw the economy of the United States surge into new dimensions. The second was a scientific/ technological revolution which saw all that had gone before in man’s scientific history fade into a pale background. . . . “World War II itself provided an extreme example of the explosive expansibility of the industrial base of the United States. This expanded industrial base remained after the war to serve as a foundation for a general economic upsurge. “. . . the aerospace industry has become and remains, in a very real sense, an instrument of national policy, not only in terms of the hardware directly provided the government, but also as it underpins the economic/technological advances in the private sector of our economy. ...” Discussing the future of the industry, Harr noted that “the size and viability of this industry is not tied to defense and space programs, important as these have been and will continue to be in shaping its destiny. It is tied, rather, to the total technological progress of the nation, meaning the application of advanced technology to whatever purposes may be desired. Programs now well underway in such diverse fields as air freight, urban transportation, desalination, oceanography, 2000-mph aircraft and hundreds of others serve to illustrate this fact. . . .” (Text)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of nasa Space Vehicle Research and Technical Div., told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that lightweight, flexible plastic baffles had proved more efficient for controlling fuel “sloshing” in launch vehicle’s propellant tanks than heavy metal baffles. He said plastic baffles could also serve to prevent leakage of propellant gas used in fuel-pumping during weightlessness. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings, 133-50)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee that about $1.2 billion—80 per cent of the allocated money—had been wasted on the abortive b-70 bomber project, Howard Margolis reported in the Washington Post. The question of how much of the money spent was wasted arose when McNamara was asked whether knowledge from the b-70 work would be valuable to other military and civilian projects. McNamara suggested that at least 80 per cent of the money had been wasted, Margolis said. McNamara’s general view had been that substantial “waste” of this sort was unavoidable in the defense program since it was rarely possible to know how valuable a development project would be before large sums had been spent. Margolis added that McNamara suggested minimizing such waste by insisting on good evidence of probable value before allocating large expenditures and, even then, by limiting spending as much as possible until the value of a project was proven. (Margolis, Wash. Post, 5/15/65)
In a Christian Science Monitor editorial, Leonard Schwartz posed the problem of “how the capability represented by manned orbiting space stations can be used to enhance national security and promote peaceful-scientific uses of outer space.” Schwartz suggested formation of an inspection agency—International Space Patrol—to neutralize military potential represented by manned space stations and to ensure usage of outer space for peaceful purposes only. He pointed out that Vice President Humphrey, one of the first proponents of an arms control agency and an international space agency, was now Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, on which sat the Secretaries of Defense and State and administrators of AEC and NASA. This position provided him with “an appropriate vantage to supervise their arms control capabilities in order to reach a national decision which would reconcile control with security and scientific use of outer space.” (CSM, 3/2/65, 4)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey wrote to Cape Kennedy technician Richard Tennis: “I understand that you are the gentleman who corrected the problem of the oxidizer leak on the Gemini-Titan [GT-3]. “I simply wanted to express to you the thanks of all of us here in Washington who have watched so carefully the success of this program. It is the excellent and quick efforts of people like yourself that have made this program so successful.” ( ksc Spaceport News, 4/15/65, 2)
Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.) introduced a bill (S. 1899) in the Senate “to prescribe a national policy with respect to the acquisition, disposition, and use of proprietary rights in inventions made, and in scientific and technical information obtained, through the expenditure of public funds.” Senator Long said in introducing the bill: “New discoveries derived from research supported by public funds belong to the people and constitute a part of the public domain to which all citizens should have access on terms of equality.” (CR, 5/4/65, 9023-9027)
In an address at Duke University, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said: “How fortunate we are to live in this dramatic and creative period of change, of challenge, of opportunity. How great is our responsibility to achieve excellence of mind and spirit to do the tasks that must be done. “I appeal, therefore, to you the generation of 1965. “Make no little plans. “Have not little dreams. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of your mother and father. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of this time. “Challenge the impossible. Do what cannot be done. “Thirty years ago it was ‘Brother, can you spare a dime.’ “Today we reach the stars.” (Text, CR, 4/26/65, 8179-80)
House Rules Committee deferred bill to study conversion to the metric system, proposed by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 41)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey urged establishment of research and experimental institutions in underdeveloped nations that would enable young scientists and technologists there to develop their own countries. “To train people without giving them the opportunity to put their training to full use can only result in frustration at home or migration abroad,” he said. The Vice President, speaking at a dinner given in New York by the American Committee for the Weizman Institute of Science, emphasized that measures must be taken “to make these talented people actually want to work in their own countries, by opening up to them careers which are genuinely and deeply rewarding in professional advancement and service to their people.” (ATT, 12/7/65, 10)
Eighty per cent of the $4 million needed to construct new bridges, modernizing the access road complex to Cape Kennedy, would be contributed by the Federal Government. The announcement was made jointly by Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Florida Governor Haydon Burns, and Florida Senators George Smathers and Spessard Holland. NASA and USAF would divide the $3.2 million Federal share and the state of Florida would provide $.8 million. (Cocoa Tribune, 8/24/65; KSC Spaceport News, 8/26/65, 1)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight issued a report on investigation of Project Surveyor
Civil Aeronautics Board request for $2.1 million in subsidies for commercial helicopter lines in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, to be paid during July-December period, was denied by House Appropriations Committee. {WSJ, 5/7/65, 2)
In summary of activities of the NASA Office of Lunar and Planetary Programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “The Ranger pictures represent our major scientific achievement in 1964. In addition to their direct value as new information, the subtle significance of these pictures toward increasing the value of other astronomical data is perhaps worthy of mention, as it may not be recognized generally. It is interesting to note how the information presented in the high resolution Ranger pictures has sent scientists scurrying back to the files of photographic plates taken years before to discover features which have remained unnoticed throughout the years. Some new interpretations of long recognized features have also been made possible by the close-up look obtained by Ranger.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 56-111)
President Johnson named Dr. Finn J. Larsen, Honeywell vice president, as Principal Director of Defense Research and Engineering for DOD, succeeding Dr. E. G. Fubini, who left the job July 15. (ap, NYT, 12/3/65, 22; Pres. Doc., 12/6/65, 546)
Vice President Humphrey announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council, of which he is chairman, would meet July 1 to consider a proposed USAF manned orbiting laboratory. Meeting was later postponed to July 9. (NYT, 6/26/65, 5; eph)
Machinist union members at Boeing Co. installations throughout the country voted to accept a new contract and end their 19-day-old strike against Boeing Co., announced Charles F. West, the union’s general vice president. Under the contract, IAM would be free to strike again after six months if agreement were not reached on performance analysis—system by which the company graded employees for promotion, demotion, or discharge, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 10/5/65; Wash. Post, 10/5/65)
Expansion of the role of the National Science Foundation and expenditure by Federal mission-oriented research agencies of more money on basic research were two major recommendations of a special panel of the National Academy of Sciences to Congress. Recommendations were in a report, Basic Research and National Goals, submitted to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The panel, headed by Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky of Harvard Univ., former science adviser to the President, was comprised of 15 scientists, engineers, and economists. The panel held that the National Science Foundation, as the sole agency of Government whose purpose was support of science across the board without regard for immediate practical gains, should be expanded to serve as a “balance wheel” to soften the impact of variable research policies of mission-oriented agencies on “little science.” The recommendation that agencies should devote greater portions of their budgets to basic research was based on the view that in many cases these budgets were becoming stationary while the capacity for scientific growth was expanding. The panel also recommended that in some cases the Congress should extend the mission of the agency to include the pursuit of certain branches of basic research. Three general opinions were widely held by the panel regarding the balance of science support today: first, Federal funds should be allocated with some consideration to the geographical-social effects of their expenditure; second, biological sciences had been under-supported and should receive support to expand them faster than the physical sciences; third, there was an impending crisis in the physical sciences because mission-oriented agencies, faced with stationary budgets, would probably not expand their support of basic physical research as fast as capacity to do basic research expanded. (Clark, NYT, 4/26/65, 55; SBD, 4/30/65, 330)
Speaking before the Senate Commerce Committee in support of his bill calling for a three-year feasibility study of this country’s adopting the metric system, Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) said: “Should Canada follow Great Britain’s example and convert, the United States would be virtually the only remaining country that uses a system of weights and measures based on other than the metric system. Actually, 90 percent of the people in the world use metric measures right now.” The proposed three-year Dept, of Commerce study, Senator Pell said, would include not only a detailed estimate of the cost of conversion, but also a statement of the possible side benefits in foreign trade, (ap, NYT, 7/15/65, 35)
Rep. Adam Clayton Powell (D-N.Y.), Chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor, personally wrote the presidents of the Nation’s 116 predominantly Negro colleges and universities urging them to apply for NASA grants and research contracts. In his letter he noted that of 187 colleges and universities receiving NASA grants, only one—Howard Univ.—was predominantly Negro and that 20 universities (10%) received $61,451,000 (50%) of the $121,115,000 total expenditure. (House Comm, on Education and Labor Release)
Aerospace and defense planning concepts could be applied to many of the Nation’s major social problems, Dr. Ruben F. Mettler, executive vice president of TRW, Inc., told a luncheon meeting of aiaa in New York. Dr. Mettler listed transportation, medical services, and housing as areas where the systems approach to problems would prove beneficial. He said that he thought the application of aerospace systems concepts had a bright and profitable future in civilian endeavors. (NYT, 10/27/65, 74M)
The National Science Foundation’s past activities were reviewed in a report by the Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. No judgments were made, but the 286-page report called attention to broad areas of concern: (1) Could the Foundation meaningfully promote the progress of American science on a very limited budget? (2) What was its relationship to the Office of Science and Technology which was developing national science policy? (3) What was its relationship to American universities conducting research? (4) Had it effectively gathered data and made statistical analyses essential to research planning and administration? (5) Should the Foundation continue to manage large-scale research projects? (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 10329, which would authorize the Secretary of Commerce to conduct a feasibility study on adoption of the metric system. {CR, 8/24/ 65, 19007)
Members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting to consider H.J. Res. 597 providing for a monument to Dr. Robert H. Goddard at Clark Univ., agreed to limit cost of the memorial to $150,000.	(CR, 9/7/65, 23315)
The British Defense Ministry announced that its fleet of Valiant bombers would be scrapped because of weakened structure caused by metal fatigue. Valiant was the first of the three “V” types of jet bombers built by U.K. following World War II. They had been in service nine years and only about half the original force remained in service as reconnaissance or tankers. This would not affect Britain’s contribution to nato or its proposal for an Atlantic nuclear force. {NYT, 1/27/65)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, addressing 4,000 employees and officials of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., warned Grumman to reduce contract proposals sharply if it expected to gain a share of future defense contracts. McNamara said Grumman’s proposals for construction of a portion of the f-111 fighter’s tail assembly were “higher than other competitive sources. “There is no question in my mind that you can reduce costs on this $1 billion contract. They’ve got to come down,” he said. The contract he was referring to had not yet been awarded. McNamara, accompanied by Senator Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) and Asst. Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester, was making a brief tour of defense plants on Long Island. (Maiorana, NYT, 10/14/65, 41)
In NASA fy 1966 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb testified: “Among the hard decisions and difficult choices which had to be made in the preparation of this budget was the decision to terminate the programs to develop the m—1 large liquid hydrogen fueled engine, the large 260-inch solid propellant motor, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power supply. The reduction in the requests for space technology activities amounting to about $18 million when compared with fiscal year 1965, results mostly from these terminations. However, as this Committee knows, there is pending before it notification of a plan to reprogram $16,950,000 of 1965 funds so that these projects can be carried forward into 1966 to appropriate developmental points at which important segments of the engineering data for which the projects were originally planned can be obtained for incorporation in our total bank of technological and engineering knowledge.” Mr. Webb was questioned by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D—Minn.) on when the first U.S. extravehicular activity was planned, and he replied: “Within the next year. We are not sure on which Gemini flight we will do it as yet.” Senator Mondale asked: “When do we plan our first rendezvous maneuver?” and Mr. Webb replied: “Within the next year, maybe the latter part of this year.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 623, 663)
Curtiss-Wright Corp. could participate in future naval weapons procurement, including the procurement of weapon system trainers, DOD announced. Last March when R/Adm. Allan M. Shinn, Chief of the Bureau of Weapons, testified before a closed session of the House Appropriations Committee he disclosed “inadequate performance” on the part of Curtiss-Wright in connection with the p3-a trainer program. (Text; NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed its report on H.R. 1441, the $4.986-billion nasa budget authorization, (nasa lar V/65-66)
In letter to Congress transmitting report on the Nation’s oceanographic work, President Johnson urged that funds be voted to continue work on Project Mohole. House Appropriations Committee had denied (May 5) $19.7-million Presidential request for nsf work on Mohole in FY 1967. Total cost was estimated as $110 million; about $25 million had already been spent. President Johnson wrote: "The Mohole Project will provide the answer to many basic questions about the earth’s crust and the origin of ocean basins. It will teach us how to drill in the ocean depths— the prelude to the future exploitation of resources at the bottom of the sea.” (Pres. Doc., 5/23/66, 661; AP, NYT, 5/19/66, 23; Wash. Post, 5/19/66, A6)
More than 70 tethered balloon ascensions to 1,500-ft. altitude for vehicle drop tests had been conducted by afcrl at Holloman afb over past three years to test Surveyor spacecraft’s retrofire descent and impact capabilities, oar Research Review reported, (oar Res. Rev., 6/66, 17) During June: Dr. Dorothy Martin Simon, Avco Corp. vice president and director of Corporate Research, received 1966 Achievement Award of Society of Women Engineers. She was cited for "significant contributions to engineering administration and space engineering, especially in the fields of combustion and ablative coatings.” (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 46)
Rebutting Aug. 14 Washington Sunday Star editorial which called the U.S. Sst program "a dubious venture moved by extraordinary pressures,” Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) told Senate that program was "moving forward on a logical basis” to make Sst available for commercial use in 1974 at total cost of about $4.5 billion-—25% of which would be paid by manufacturers. Senator Magnuson said that planners were "well aware” of potential hazards of excess radiation, internal heat, lack of maneuverability, and structural stress suggested by Star and assured the Senate that aircraft had been designed "to preclude catastrophic conditions. . .	(CR, 9/6/66, 20909-10; Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 17)
Aerospace rather than shipbuilding companies were competing for $l-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) program because of USn’s new contract policy, Robert Wright reported in the New York Times. Under new policy, firms were required to bid for total package— concept, design, and construction—instead of construction only. Vernon A. Johnson, a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president, believed Lockheed, General Dynamics Corp., and Litton Industries, Inc., were competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked resources and experience for total-package systems design. Goal of Fdl program was fleet of 30-40 ships capable of remaining at sea for indefinite periods and making fast delivery of heavy supplies to fight small wars. (Wright, ATT, 12/11/66, 12)
Vice president of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Boris Konstantinov discussed mission of Proton spacecraft series in Tass interview: "Research already carried out with the help of the Proton stations gives reason to expect that the growing weight of such laboratories will allow scientists to delve deeper into the processes occurring within the universe.” He revealed that proton in, launched July 6, would attempt to experimentally detect "quarks,” fundamental particles believed to appear during collision of cosmic ray particles with atoms of interstellar environment. Spacecraft carried "new, complicated instrumentation which is more sensitive than the old equipment.” (Tass, 6/8/66)
Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane fighter used in World War II, the Hunter fighter, the P-1127 Vtol aircraft, and other combat aircraft, died in London. Sir Sydney, honorary fellow and member of council of Royal Aeronautical Society, had received the Society’s Gold Medal in 1958 and had been selected to receive the Guggenheim Medal, highest U.S. aeronautical award, in the spring. (NYT, 3/14/66, 31)
President Johnson signed into law Marine Resources and Engineering Development Act of 1966, establishing national goals for an expanding national oceanographic effort. Legislation, sponsored by Sen. Warren G.	Magnuson (D-Wash.), provided for Cabinet-level National Council of Marine Resources and Engineering Development—and administrative and coordinating organization similar to nasc. Chairman would be Vice President. Bill also provided for 15-member Marine Science, Engineering and Resources Commission to conduct 18-mo. study of U.S. oceanographic capabilities and recommend Government organizational plan for oceanography. (CR, 6/2/66, 11490-92; Wash. Post, 6/19/66, A17)
U.S. Sst program had been assigned "Dx” priority—highest manufacturing priority usually reserved for key defense and space programs—by President Johnson in April without public announcement, the press reported. The New York Times questioned secrecy and priority implied by President’s decision: "It was an error to keep the decision secret.” (Clark, NYT, 8/7/66, 1; WSJ, 8/9/66, 1; NYT, 8/8/66, C26)
Tonnage of U.S. bombs dropped on Vietnam in 1966 would surpass that dropped by U.S. in the entire Pacific during World War II or during three years of the Korean War, Ted Sell reported in the World Journal Tribune. U.S. planned to drop 638,000 tons of bombs in 1966 compared to 502,781 tons dropped by usaf in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945. (Sell, WJT, 10/3/66, 4)
nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Breene M. Kerr, reviewing nasa technology utilization program for 1965 in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, stated that the total number of NASA Tech Briefs now published was more than 600. He continued: "We anticipate publication of approximately 700 Tech Briefs during calendar year 1966. ... we estimate the average Tech Brief is seen by more than 10,000 persons. . . . Industry interest in our program is . . . indicated by the fact that approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field Center Technology Utilization Offices during calendar 1965. . . . Two additional Regional Dissemination Programs have been started in the last year, one at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and the other at Southeastern State College in Durant, Okla. One hundred and thirty-one companies are now paying annual membership fees at our established computer-based centers. ... Of real significance ... is the fact that approximately 3,000 companies have received some degree of service from these centers. . . . We have also recently concluded an interagency agreement with the Small Business Administration whereby several of that organization’s field offices, under an experimental program, will be providing NASA technology to selected small business concerns.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634-9)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Appropriations’ Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of cancer. A member of the House for almost 30 yrs., Thomas had heen deeply interested in Congressional funding for naca, nsf, and NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/66, B8)
Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (usaf), special consultant to President Johnson, was appointed president of Institute for Defense Analysis replacing Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would return to mit. ida also named Dr. Gordon J. F.	MacDonald, of ucla’s Dept, of Planetary and Space Sciences, vice president for research. Both appointments would take effect in September. (ida Release)
ucla dedicated new center for space sciences, Schlichter Hall, made possible by $2-million NASA grant. Six-story building, named for Dr. Louis Byrne Schlichter, Prof. Emeritus of Geophysics and Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics from 1947 to 1962, would contain 30 large laboratories and 50 research and administrative offices. Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator, said in a dedication speech: "nasa thinks that this is a singularly important type of activity as many of the problems confronting NASA in the space program reach across disciplinary lines and require the combined efforts of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, biologists, psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists and economists.” Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cornell Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics; ucla Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Schlichter; Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald; and Nobel Laureate Willard F. Libby, director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, (ucla Release, 4/3/66; Text)
North American Aviation, Inc. (naa) , NASA’s prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, announced major management changes: (1) William B. Bergen, former President of Martin Marietta Co., who joined naa April 7, replaced Harrison A. Storms, Jr., as President of Space Div.—formerly Space and Information Systems Div.; (2) Ralph H. Ruud, corporate vice president in charge of manufacturing, replaced William Snelling as executive vice president of Space Div. Snelling assumed new post of assistant vice president; (3) Bastian Hello, former Martin Marietta Co. executive, assumed new post of vice president in charge of Space Div.’s launch operations at ksc; and (4) Paul R. Vogt, former vice president of engineering at naa’s Rocketdyne Div., assumed new post of assistant to President of Space Div. in charge of quality control. (Clark, NYT, 5/2/67,1,53; upi, W Star, 5/2/67, A13; O’Toole, W Post, 5/2/67, A4; Wilford, NYT, 5/4/67, 9)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, and his Deputy Dr. Alfred J. Eggers testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. U.S. space program was entering a period when NASA would . utilize existing capabilities, Dr. Adams said, and it was therefore particularly important for oart to “emphasize new technology so that new systems will be available for the next major thrust in aeronautics and space.” He mentioned highlights of the program to develop new technology: (1) Nerva nuclear rocket engine; (2) experimental research related to hypersonic propulsion; (3) advanced cryogenic engine; (4) improved life-support systems; and (5) increased effort in electronics problems because “electronics systems may well be the limiting factor in our future exploration.” Dr. Eggers noted that r&d budget request in aeronautics for FY 1968 nearly doubled that for 1967 and said the expansion reflected “recognition of the rapidly growing importance of air transportation and the need for increased r&d to provide required advances in the associated technology. Aeronautics is already the order of a $24 billion a year industry and it is netting the nation better than $1 billion per annum in favorable balance of payments. Accordingly, our proposed major strengthening of aeronautics r&d will be to the great commercial as well as military benefit of the nation in the future.” (Transcript, 8, 13; Testimony)
Report on spaceflight emergencies and spaceflight safety, released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, made several specific recommendations: (1) NASA and USAF continue to devote intensive study effort to spaceflight safety and report periodically to the committee; (2) NASA and usaf establish joint working-level committee to eliminate duplication of effort, assure compatibility in equipment features, conduct joint accident reviews, and achieve a coordinated effort; (3) each agency establish a separate flight safety group to monitor system designs for specific missions to ensure close attention to the problem of flight safety; (4) development of possible space rescue or escape capabilities be considered in the design and development of all future manned spacecraft; and (5) NASA prepare a long-range “plan for meeting future spaceflight emergencies”—including program identification and long-range funding requirements—by the end of 1967. (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed $>4.9-billion nasa authorization bill (H.R. 10340) with the House and recommended that it he passed without amendment [see May 16]. (NASA lar VI/64)
As of .Nov. 15, U.S. had dropped 1,630,500 bombs on North and South Vietnam since July 1965—twice the tonnage dropped during the Korean War, and three times that dropped in the Pacific Theater during World War II. (Wilson, W Post, 1/5/68, 4)
Manned expeditions to every part of the solar system would be achieved by the end of the 20th century, Vice President Humphrey predicted in his opening statement to a student panel at North Dakota State Univ. in Fargo. He envisioned “the development of a whole family of earth orbiting stations, manned and supplied by regular ferry services; the launching of unmanned probes to every part of our solar system, and probably manned expeditions as well.” (upi, NYT, 5/14/67)
House Appropriations Committee reported $ 1.53-billion dot authorization bill (H.R. 11456) which included $142.3 million for development of two sst prototypes. Bill was approved by House July 18. (AP, NYT, 7/14/67,5)
Senate and House adopted conference report on amended NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) totaling $4.6 billion, and legislation was cleared for President’s signature. Report approved $3,925 billion for R&D, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization and decrease of $356.5 million from budget; report approved $35.9 million for Construction of Facilities, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget; report approved $628.0 million for Administrative Operations, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of House, said that “Voyager and nerva II programs should be funded this fiscal year. Voyager is the only major planetary exploration program this Nation will have in the 1970’s. If this program is abandoned, we will be abdicating our responsibilities. . . . This is particularly significant following the recent Russian Venus IV soft landing on the planet Venus.” Sen. Gordon L. Allott (R-Col.), ranking minority member of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Space Appropriations Subcommittee, was forced to accept no specific funding for Voyager and Nerva programs (in final version) but said in statement read by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) on floor of Senate that “agreement was reached to add $15.5 million to [r&d] over the House figure.” He added that the agreement would provide that NASA’s Administrator “may reprogram funds . . . with approval of the appropriate committees of the Congress.” He added: “. . . conferees share this belief, that this country must move ahead now in [r&d] leading to interplanetary exploration.” (CR, 10/26/67, H14036-8, S15405-8)
Congressional cuts in the nasa budget had forced an agency-wide hiring freeze, Aerospace Technology reported. No job vacancies might be filled or new positions created unless there were exceptionally mitigating circumstances, jpl expected to lose about 200 engineers during the freeze, but no estimates had been released by NASA field centers. There was no indication of how long the freeze would last. (Aero Tech, 9/25/67,3)
Current attacks on the SST project appeared to stem from ignorance of the plan and a failure to appreciate what it would contribute to the economy and security of this country, reported columnist l/g Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.). He had presented estimates of the sales volume and financial aspect of the SST programs which had been developed, checked, and rechecked by civil advisory groups, the airlines, and individual experts in transportation, industry, and finance. He said no Federal program since World War II had had the thorough analysis, careful examination, and close scrutiny accorded the present sst plan. He emphasized that the sst was not competitive in any way with social reform programs. On the other hand, it would stimulate continued growth of the economy, create employment, and provide a higher standard of living for thousands. (Eaker, Detroit News, 9/4/67)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA did not know whether U.S.S.R. was adequately sterilizing its interplanetary spacecraft. “If we find . . . that . . . [Soviet] sterilization procedure is many orders of magnitude less good than ours, then we will be able to relax in our standards simply because there will be no value in our going through an expensive process only to find that they have already contaminated the planet. “However, we do not know at the present time, and there is reason to believe that their procedures may well turn out to be adequate.” (Transcript, 446)
The number of scientists, engineers, and physicians immigrating to the U.S. had increased 77% between 1956 and 1966, according to report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee. Report said this influx from poor nations was an “involuntary gift of valuable resources. “Such a loss by the developing countries is. of direct concern to the United States. To the extent that it undermines development, it also defeats a major United States foreign policy objective for the sake of which this country is currently spending about $3.7 billion per year. . . .” Reduction of this influx would probably have to be the joint responsibility of the U.S. and the nations that were losing their skilled professionals, report said. (Text; Science, 8/18/67, 783; NYT, 8/3/67, 13)
House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill—$516.6 million less than NASA had requested and $282 million less than NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). Committee said the bill was “less than would be recommended under less stringent fiscal circumstances,” but it would support “a viable space program, and one that is consistent with available resources. “The reductions . . . should in no respect be interpreted as an expression of a lack of confidence in our space endeavors. . . .” Cuts included: (1) $50.5 million from Apollo program; (2) $154.7 million from aa program; (3) $27.5 million from Nuclear Rocket Program; (4)	$37.7 million from Tracking and Data Acquisition; and (5) $71.5 million from Voyager (funding eliminated), (nasa lar VI/91; WSJ, 8/21/67,4; O’Toole, W Post, 8/19/67, A4)
National Academy of Sciences had concurred in House Committee on Government Operations recommendation that outside experts as well as those in Government be used to advise decisionmakers of R&D deficiencies and remedies. Committee released report of NAS and Bureau of the Budget comments on recommendations to improve Federal r&d decisionmaking process, which also showed nas had concurred that Executive Office should examine program-level recommendations but had warned of danger of attempting to determine gaps or establish levels of support on too centralized a basis. NAS also had voiced strong reservations on a cost-benefit approach to R&D evaluation. (Text)
Vice President Humphrey commissioned into service usn’s $130-million Atlantic undersea test center, which he predicted might become the Cape Kennedy of oceanography. Speaking at West Palm Beach, the Vice President said: “This center has been established primarily for purposes of national security. But the knowledge we gain here will help us in other ways.” It would contribute to man’s knowledge of tides and provide information on untapped mineral resources and unutilized food sources. “We may learn how to divert and even prevent hurricanes,” Mr. Humphrey said. “But perhaps the greatest promise of all lies in food from the sea.” (AP, NYT, 2/27/67, 46)
Ronnie J. Lagoe, 17-yr-old high school senior whose %-scale model , of NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft had made five successful soft-landings on earth from varying heights, was introduced at a New York news conference by Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President of Hughes Aircraft Co., manufacturer of Surveyor spacecraft. Lagoe built his 2-lb model—designated Surveyor-R (“for revised”)—with wood strips, foam rubber, bathtub calk, glue, ping-pong balls, cork fishing floats, a battery, and four tiny rockets. Total cost: $28.95. He described the 85-ft flight sequence following Surveyor-R’s launch from the top of a water tower: “After retro-fire, a marked decrease in spacecraft velocity was noted until retro-burnout occurred at 20 feet and the verniers burned alone. Complete counteraction of gravity was achieved at two feet, after which vernier shut-off occurred and the craft dropped to the surface.” Hughes presented Lagoe with a summer job at ksc, a free trip to its Culver City, Calif., plant, and a $5,000 college scholarship. (Wilford, NYT, 5/25/67, 43)
nasa should prepare a list of priorities for its future programs to guide Congress in making any budget cuts required by the Vietnam war, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson (D—N. Mex.) told Baltimore Sun reporter Albert Sehlstedt, Jr. Senator Anderson insisted he was not necessarily predicting cuts in the FY 1968 budget, but observed that “something might have to give a little” while so much was being spent on the war. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 1/21/67)
President Johnson presented National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Trophy to Rep. George P. Miller (EX—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, in special White House ceremony. The Trophy, founded in 1958 to recognize outstanding national space leadership, was presented to President Johnson in 1966. (Off of Rep. Miller; CR, 3/9/67, H2408-9)
1967 Robert J. Collier Trophy was presented to James S. McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., by Vice President Humphrey in ceremony at Smithsonian Institution. Making the award on behalf of President Johnson, Mr. Humphrey said McDonnell had been selected because of his leadership in aeronautics and astronautics as demonstrated by the performance of the McDonnell Gemini spacecraft and the F-4 Phantom II jet fighter. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, “for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” ( naa News; AP, NYT, 5/25/67,81)
sst design refinements reflecting 1966 recommendations made by 240-man Government and airline evaluation team were announced by Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington. Prototype refinements were still to be reviewed by FAA and described in detail to the 26 airlines which had reserved sst deliveries. Changes included addition of canard surfaces, incorporation of direct-lift control, -lengthening fuselage by 12 ft, and provision of more convenience in passenger boarding and deplaning. Withington cited progress in component and subsystem testing and in wind-tunnel investigations. The first metal (titanium alloy billets) for airliner prototypes was under production. Major contractors were preparing for work on assemblies and Boeing was making ready facilities for construction of the two prototypes. A titanium fabrication facility would be completed as part of the Boeing Development Center and would include a furnace large enough for heat-treating sheets of titanium 70 ft long and 10 ft wide. The full-scale demonstration mockup, constructed in 1966, had recently been dismantled to make room for a dimensionally accurate engineering mockup to be constructed at Boeing Co. (Boeing Release)
F-111B was “a very easy plane to fly” with outstanding low-speed qualities, V/Adm. T. F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Air), said in April 18 testimony released by the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Defense. Admiral Connolly’s description of the F—111 (formerly tfx), subject of increasing criticism since April 21 crash of usn test model, was described by Rep. George Andrews (D-Ala.) as “the most complimentary statement [about the F-lll] . . . which has been made before this committee.” Basing his views on his personal inflight observations, Admiral Connolly conceded that there was “a lot of work to do on the airplane,” including making configuration changes to improve pilot visibility. He asserted that when difficulties involving engine stall were overcome there should be no major problems and said that aircraft’s anticipated weight satisfied usn requirements. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 6/2/67, 23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences staff report released by Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) disputed theory that any nation would have a military advantage with orbiting nuclear weapons. Report, prepared “to provide information for . . . legislative evaluation” on the space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] submitted for Senate approval Feb. 7, noted: “Majority military opinion holds that orbital bombardment is not an effective strategic weapon as compared to land-based ballistic missiles. An effort to use space-based nuclear weapons would have the effect of a strategic warning, thus placing an aggressor in the position of being open to retaliation by strategic weapons.” (Text)
President Johnson signed $4.86-billion NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) into law. Noting that on Aug. 18 House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill, $516.6 million less than NASA had requested, the President said: “Under other circumstances I would have opposed such a cut. However, conditions have greatly changed since I submitted my January budget request. . . . “I recognize—as also must the Congress—that the reduction in funds recommended by the House Appropriations Committee will require the deferral and reduction of some desirable space projects. Yet, in the face of present circumstances, I join with the Congress and accept this reduction.” (PD, 8/28/67, 1192-3)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, an ibm vice president, told ieee meeting in New York that too many scientists and engineers—as prime movers of change—were not sufficiently attentive to the results of their discoveries and inventions. “Historically, scientists and engineers have underestimated or ignored the social and moral consequences of their work. Don’t continue to make that mistake,” he warned. Dr. Charles H. Townes, mit provost, received ieee’s 1967 Medal of Honor for his “significant contributions in the fields of quantum electronics which have led to the maser and the laser.” (Lieberman, NYT, 3/26/67, FI; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 97)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams outlined nasa’s supporting role in sst development at hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1965 NASA provided the faa with the services of 50 technical people for six weeks for the evaluation of industry-proposed airframe and engine designs. During final evaluations last fall, 75 professionals were provided for two months and two major facilities at Langley and Ames were operated 10 hours a day and 6 days a week during September. We are assisting FAA contractors by making available to them facilities such as wind tunnels and simulators and have helped solve specific problems growing out of detail design. The contractors used about 4100 hours of NASA wind tunnel time for each of the past two years.” NASA was carrying a major research responsibility as a member of a Federal team on the SST sonic boom program—including definition of sonic boom signatures and effects of sonic boom on structures, Dr. Adams said, and was also continuing its own study of materials suitable for sst structures. “In addition to supporting the faa on the present SST, we are continuing our general research program aimed at an improved second-generation supersonic transport.” (Testimony)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s decision to go ahead with “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm) system [see Sept. 18] was praised by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on floor of Senate: “I indicate my support of this decision [and] under present world circumstances, we have no choice but to go ahead with [abm] system.” (CR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
U.S. patent No. 3,402,295 was issued to Robert W. Astheimer, Vice President of Barnes Engineering Co., for process by which aircraft pilot could spot clear air turbulence (cat) far enough ahead to avoid danger. To discover rise in temperature which marked cat, pilot would scan ahead with radiometer to detect significant heat radiation from carbon dioxide uniformly distributed through air. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 9/21/68,45)	' nonproliferation treaty by vote of 13 to 3 after three previous meetings failed to attract majority of members. Senate Democratic leaders expressed hope treaty could be brought to vote on Senate floor before mid-October Congressional adjournment. In formal statement after Committee approval, Vice President Humphrey, Democratic Presidential candidate, called upon Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon to support ratification. U.S.S.R.’s occupation of Czechoslovakia, Humphrey said, should not deter Senate approval of “crucial” treaty. It was not agreement between Washington and Moscow, but a treaty already signed by 81 nations and developed among many signers as well as the United Nations. (Sherman, W. Star, 9/17/68, A5; Unna, W. Post, 9/18/68, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/18/68,1; Furgurson, B Sun, 9/19/68, 1)
nas in The Mathematical Sciences: A Report said that before World War II U.S. was consumer of mathematical talent but now was “universally recognized as the leading producer.” Graduate education in mathematical sciences at major U.S. centers was “far superior to that in all but two or three centers in the rest of the world,” but shortage of college teachers was likely to worsen. Report recommended increased Federal support for basic research, including NASA programs, computer science, applied mathematics, graduate apprenticeships, and faculty improvement. (Text; Schwartz, NYT, 11/24/68, 74)
Dr. Finn J. Larsen, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “If our civil aviation is to continue its dramatic progress, the greatest single requirement is to accomplish . . . complete system engineering. The . . . planning must consider not only the aircraft in flight as a system, but also the entire problem of moving people from destination to destination,” requiring “planning and resources on a considerably larger scale than are now available.” NASA’s responsibility for U.S. aeronautical research “should continue.” DOD had used NASA research, augmenting it for defense as necessary, with “excellent coordination for many years.” Military R&D was specialized, but much was transferable to civil aviation. Long-term goals of smokeless combustors and silent aircraft would be of mutual benefit, sage air defense computer system had contributed to faa radar beacon system and new national standards. Much improved altimetry reporting came from dod development for high-performance jet aircraft. Common digitizer was joint dod—faa project, as was TPX—42 airport traffic control facility. Eleven aircraft carriers had pilot “hands-off” capability for blind landing. Microwave scanning-beam landing systems were in testing. Collision avoidance, v/sTOL, and cargo-handling R&D had civil application. (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut of $48.3 million from request for FY 1969 nerva program “would essentially wipe out the entire program. With the $11.7 million authorized by the House Committee [see March 1]—it is not clear that would even cover termination of the contracts. ... We would immediately have to start termination of not only the engine development, but also termination of the technology work. I feel that we would waste a very valuable investment.” Dr. Adams described “substantial progress” in OART programs in 1967: initial acoustic absorber tests showed reduction in jet transport noise; parawing (steerable parachute) showed promise for spacecraft and precise military landings; static firing of 260-in-dia solid rocket motor had reached 5.9-million-lb thrust in 80-sec test; NERVA had been successfully tested at full power 60 min; all major components of SNAP—8 nuclear turbo-generator system had completed 1,800 hr of endurance tests, one exceeding 13,000 hr; and new Beta cloth for astronaut clothing had passed wear and flammability tests. In “beneficial crossflow between engineering and life sciences,” he named development of garment to give physicians three-dimensional data on heart activity, new blood velocity meter, and sensor to measure blood pressure in heart—small enough to be threaded through hypodermic needle and derived from instruments developed for small flight models for wind-tunnel tests. (Transcript)
Testimony on NASA’s FY 1969 Budget request was presented to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by three NASA Associate Administrators. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented ossa’s budget for “an austere program for the immediate future,” yet one that would make “effective use in the years ahead of the capabilities we have developed in the past decade” and that would advance scientific knowledge and useful applications. “New starts are at a minimum,” he said, “but if this budget request is approved, we can continue the most useful of our on-going programs, we can avoid abandoning the field of planetary exploration, and we can hold together teams and capabilities to meet future national needs. ...” Authorization request for ossa for 1969 was for $538.2 million, $14.7 million below FY 1968 operating plan, with “the decrease . . . primarily in the Lunar and Planetary Programs budget, reflecting the completion of the initial automated phase of lunar exploration and cancellation of Voyager.” Space applications budget request had increased for FY 1969 (to $112.2 million) because of “demonstrated value of communications and meteorological programs and the potential value of applying space technology on a global basis.” NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, described oart program as “the key to tomorrow’s leadership in aeronautics and space.” He explained: “. . . our FY 69 budget request for the R&D line items ... is $336,800,000, up 5.7 percent over FY 68. The increase is primarily due to increases in effort on aircraft technology [up to $10.1 million] and nuclear rockets [up $6 million], . . . Major changes also included more v/stol research, noise research for subsonic jets, and development of NERVA I nuclear rocket engine at thrust level of 75,000 lb. nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski presented FY 1969 budget request of $304.8 million for R&D and $21.8 million for construction of facilities and reported that “50 satellites by the end of 1968” would be supported by network while “some 16 new missions” would be launched in FY 1969. For FY 1969, “the great majority of funds requested will be directed toward operating and maintaining present network capability. Much of the existing equipment has been operated almost continuously for at least eight years and must be refurbished or replaced.” Construction of facilities budget would fund: two 210-ft-dia antennas for Spain and Australia; power generating plant for Fairbanks, Alaska, tracking station; and Sunblazer antenna. (Testimony)
House Appropriations Committee cut $550.5 million from dod FY 1969 appropriations, including $85 million from usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. (CR, 7/18/68; SBD, 7/19/68, 71)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski, testifying on FY 1969 budget before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee, cautioned: “The many actions we have taken to reduce operating costs have, however, lowered the level of support we provide to the flight projects. In our judgment, further reductions are not possible without reducing network reliability to the point of jeopardizing the success of flight missions.” (Testimony)
Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wis.), Chairman of House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee, released Scientific Brain Drain from the Developing Countries (dated March 28). Immigration to U.S. of scientific manpower from developing countries had more than quadrupled in past 12 yr. Report, based on Subcommittee hearings held Jan. 23, said, “the long-sustained U.S. foreign aid program has devoted substantial sums and given high priority” to educating and training professional manpower. When these countries “suffer an emigration drain of the very skills and talents they are attempting to increase, an important part of the foreign aid program is undermined.” (Text; NYT, 3/28/68, 33)
Resignation of Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, announced May 21, became effective. He rejoined Avco Corp., where he had worked from 1955 to 1965, as Corporate Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Government Products and Services Group. (NYT, 7/2/68, 63)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford asked House Committee on Armed Services to restore funds cut by Senate for compromise development program for Navy F— 111B aircraft. According to compromise plan, USN would continue tests on F—11 IB experimental models and exploratory work on alternate aircraft, VFX—1, until March 1969 and then decide whether to proceed with F—11 IB or to cancel program after first eight models and develop alternate. If VFX—1 were chosen, F—11 IBs already produced would provide sophisticated air defense until alternate aircraft became operational in 1973. dod had requested $425 million for 8 F—11 IBs and 60 Phoenix missiles and $30 million for R&D. on VFX—1. Senate instead had approved $170 million for VFX—31. (Testimony; Sheehan, NYT, 5/1/68, 4; upi, W Star, 5/1/68, A12) '
NASA management officials continued to testify on their programs, within NASA’s FY 1969 budget request, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said omsf’s $2.815-billion FY 1969 request was lowest request since FY 1963, $332.8 million below FY 1968, and “almost $700 million below the peak Manned Space Flight budget year, Fiscal Year 1966.” Dr. Mueller included $2,483 billion for R&D, $18.7 million for construction of facilities, and $313 million for administrative operations. Over 80% of total r&d report was committed to Apollo. “The program of Apollo and Apollo Applications Flights, with the development of the Saturn V Workshop and the Advanced Missions studies leading to a space station of longer duration and greater earth orbital capabilities, constitute a minimum effort to continue manned space flight into the early 1970s.” Dr. Mueller warned against failing “to capitalize on the investment in the Apollo Program” and said it was “economically prudent to proceed now with the Apollo Program and the definition study of the . . . long duration space station . . . keystone in the future of manned space flight.” NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Harold B. Finger, citing 27% decrease in procurement for first three months of FY 1968 below same period in 1967, predicted 94% of procurement dollars going to industry would decrease to less than 90% by end of FY 1969 as industry-developed systems came into NASA for testing and launch. Presenting $ 10-million Sustaining University program budget—equal to 1968 budget but one-third 1967’s $30 million—Finger stressed need for university contributions and combining universities’ “demonstrated competence in physical sciences with their social science strengths to deal with the total impact of the nation’s aerospace effort.” Finger submitted statement of Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, describing programs “to experimentally test and develop methods for bringing about the multiple use of the new knowledge gained as a result of NASA activities.” nasa Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly charged $7.8-million increase in FY 1969 administrative operations budget request (from $640.4-million budget for FY 1968) to cost of 1967 Pay Act and conversion to civil service of certain gsfc support services. He cited personnel reduction of 1,704 positions since freeze on hiring new employees on Aug. 24, 1967. (Testimony)
Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) wrote in Data he believed sonic boom problem would be eliminated, permitting transcontinental flight and realization of estimated 1,200 ssts in service by 1990. “No federal program since World War II had ever had the thorough analysis, careful examination and close scrutiny accorded the present SST plan.” (Data, 5/68, 8)
Lawrence A. Hyland (right), Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., looks at Surveyor model with Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey at Smithsonian Institution. Vice President presented Hyland 1967 Robert /. Coffier Trophy (background) in Smithsonian ceremonies honoring Hughes Surveyor team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and General Dynamics Corp. for program which “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the moonP the frontiers of the unknown—is the test of a vital society, a nation that intends to meet the challenge of tomorrow.” (Text; AP, W Star, 5/8/68, A4; Aero Tech, 5/20/68,19)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, described progressive decline of LeRC funding from peak $389.2 million in FY 1965 to $242.4 million in FY 1967, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Dollar value of procurement had decreased, from $324.5 million in FY 1964 to $211.6 million in FY 1967, while workload was maintained and lead time reduced. Power usage had increased “but costs had declined significantly.” However in last several years, “funds available for maintenance had been less than those believed necessary for proper upkeep and repair.” In long run, Dr. Silverstein said, delays “may prove more costly to the Government.” (Testimony)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of House Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate: “Ten years from now nasa will be celebrating its 20th anniversary. I hope that the chairman of the Committee ... at that time will be able to stand here and congratulate the agency and its people for 20 years of accomplishment and say that the United States is still first in space and in aeronautics. But unless we are vigilant and supply the agency with the needed authorizations and appropriations, that statement will not be made.” (CR, 10/2/68, SI1844)
National Academy of Engineering announced award of its third Founders Medal to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin, Honorary Vice President of Radio Corporation of America and technical consultant to RCA Laboratories, in recognition of his many contributions to engineering and to betterment of human society. Dr. Zworykin, known as “Father of Television” for invention of iconoscope, first practical picture transmission tube, was cited also for “his role in developing the first commercial electron microscope in the western hemisphere . . . promoting the cause of traffic safety through the imaginative concept of an automated ‘electronic highway,’ and . . . working ... to bring about a union of electronics and medicine.” Medal would be presented April 24 during nae’s 4th Annual Meeting, (nae Release, 2/20/68)
House Appropriations Committee struck all funds for sst development from Administration’s FY 1969 budget and asked return of $30-million carryover to Treasury. President Johnson had requested authorization of $223 million. Cut was unlikely to postpone development of project, which would be continued during FY 1969 entirely with carryover funds. First flight had been scheduled for first quarter, 1972. (CR, 6/27/68, H5766-7; Hoffman, W Post, 6/28/68, A3)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 15086, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee, (nasa LAR VII/9)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member, introduced S. 2918, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee. Total authorization of $4.37 billion would provide r&d, $3,677 billion; construction of facilities, $45 million; and administrative operations, $648.2 million, (nasa LAR VII/8)
Bernhardt L. Dorman had resigned as nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs to return to Aerojet-General Corp., NASA announced. He would be succeeded Aug. 5 by Philip N. Whittaker, Vice President of IBM Federal Systems Div. (nasa Release 68—137)
Research on concepts for high lift capability for stol aircraft and special hover and speed requirements for VTOL aircraft would continue in FY 1969, nasa Director of Aeronautical Vehicles, oart, Albert J. Evans reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Aircraft noise program would pursue efforts to suppress noise by acoustic treatment of engine nacelles (with results expected from McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Aircraft Co. investigations by October 1969 and January 1970), by engine redesign (with construction of engine components in Quiet Research Engine Program initiated in FY 1969), and by operational techniques. Major NASA program in flight dynamics and propulsion in support of sst program would be continued. Phase III of Hypersonic Research Engine (hre) program, test of hre on X—15 in flight as well as on ground, would not be conducted because of X—15 program termination. Major emphasis in general-aviation technology would be on flight safety, with flight tests of “typical twin-engine vehicle” at frc in FY 1969. (Testimony)
aiaa announced Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of arc’s Space Science Div., would receive Space Science Award, including $500 honorarium, “for his personal contribution as planner, leader and individual experimenter in maj or space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” He had worked’ in magnetospheric physics and nuclear physics and was currently concentrating on interplanetary physics. He had been principal investigator on several NASA experiments and ALSEP. Award would be presented at ALVA 7th Aerospace Science Meeting in New York Jan. 20—22, 1969. Dr. Stanley G. Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol Engine Div., Rolls-Royce Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., had been selected to share $10,000 Goddard Award for their separate work in developing gas turbine engines. Goddard Award, named for late rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard, was awarded annually to “a person who has made a brilliant discovery or a series of outstanding contributions over a period of time, in the engineering science of propulsion or energy conversion.” Prof. Rene H. Miller, head of mit Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, would receive Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for “outstanding contributions” to rotary-wing aircraft. Dr. Robert D. Fletcher, usaf Air Weather Service’s Deputy Chief of Staff for Aerospace Sciences, would receive Robert M. Losey Award for “outstanding and dedicated leadership and service” for 30 yr to aeronautical meteorology, (aiaa Release; NASA Biog, 11/29/68; NYT, 12/31/68, 52)
Response from U.S.S.R. and other nations to proposal for international decade of ocean exploration in 1970s had been “quite favorable,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, said in report released by council. “I welcome the enthusiasm with which the Decade is being received. . . . We look forward to a continuation of this spirit of close collaboration, for the seas can, and must serve the interest of mankind.” (Text; ncmred Rpt, 5/68; Madden, NYT, 6/18/68,16)
House Committee on Government Operations issued report urging immediate curtailment of Federal grants to foreign scientists, especially in developed countries, to conduct nonessential research. Committee said, despite balance of payments deficit, Government grants for foreign research projects amounted to $20 million yearly, more than $15 million in developed countries. Committee recommended limiting funds to projects urgently needed by U.S. until end of emergency. (H.R. 1578; AP, W Star, 6/24/68)
House Appropriations Committee released hearings on dod appropriations for FY 1969 which helped explain why Vietnam war had produced strain on President Johnson’s budget, usaf was now paying $2.4 million for single rescue helicopter; during World War II, each B—17 aircraft that had bombed Germany had cost $190,000 and each B—29 used over Japan had cost $635,000. Government had bought 200 World War II fighters for the $1.1 million it cost USAF for technical manuals for single type of aircraft in 1968. usn was spending $30,000 for single torpedo and $20.3 million for ammunition for battleship U.S.S. New Jersey to fire at Vietnam shore targets. It was requesting $51.8 million for one-year supply of aerial targets. Super Jolly helicopter which USAF was introducing in Vietnam was twice as expensive as predecessor, Jolly Green Giant, and could carry 60 passengers or 18,500-lb cargo at 195 knots. F—111 was being produced at $8 million each; C—5A, world’s largest aircraft, had a unit cost of $25 million, with USAF requesting 120 aircraft. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 6/30/68, 2)
NASA had asked its contractors to cut ksc personnel 10% in effort to save $40 million by July 1. Boeing Co. had already announced plans to reduce 4,400-man force to 4,000. Chrysler Corp. would keep 1,000 of its 1,200. Cutbacks were due to nasa budget cuts and affected only 2% of work force, (nasa pao; W Star, 10/11/68, A3)
House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce approved bill to control aircraft noise levels and sonic boom. Committee, by voice vote, agreed on provisions empowering FAA to set standards for measurement and regulations for control (H.R. 1463; W Post, 5/17/68, 5)
Role of ekc in electronics-related aeronautical R&D was described by ERC Director James C. Elms in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Center had continued research on electronic components and devices, especially application of microelectronics and large-scale integrated circuits to advanced avionics systems; on application of advanced technology to instrumentation for sensing and controlling aircraft motion and attitude; on optics and microwaves; on psychological instrumentations; on data processing; and on electrical power systems. erc had 14 programs in aeronautical R&D, including air traffic control, v/stol guidance, navigation and flight control, collision avoidance, use of navigational and communications satellites in aviation, support technology, remote detection of clear air turbulence, physiological monitoring, and NASA intercenter research in high-speed flight using YF—12 aircraft. (Testimony)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 11271, NASA FY 1970 authorization bill introduced May 14. (House Rpt 91—255)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 4046, FY 1970 nasa authorization bill, totaling $3,760 billion, in House. {CR, 1/17/69, H403)
NAS report to Congress, Technology: Processes of Assessment and Choice, was published by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Panel headed by Harvey Brooks of Harvard Univ. strongly urged creation of “constellation of organizations, with components located strategically within both political branches, that can create a focus and a forum for responsible technology-assessment activities throughout government and the private sector.” Such organizations “must be separated scrupulously from any responsibility for promoting or regulating technological applications.” (Text)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 12307, Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which provided $3,696 billion for NASA—$63,544 million below original budget, $18,544 million below revised budget, $298,290 million below 1969 appropriation, and $269,394 million below total authorizations approved by House. Bill provided $3 billion for NASA r&d, $53,233 million for construction of facilities, and $643,750 million for research and program management. With unobligated carryover from 1969 of $117,473 million, total $3,117 billion would be available for obligation in 1970. H.R. 12307 also provided $418 million for nsf—$79 million below amount originally budgeted but $18 million above FY 1969 appropriation. It provided $500,000 for nasc, $24,000 below budget estimate. (Text; Committee Rpt 91—316)
U.K.’s Institute for Strategic Studies predicted U.S.S.R. would overtake U.S. in ICBM production by mid-1969 but U.S. would retain overall lead in nuclear weapons because of greater submarine and air forces. U.S. international role in 1970s could become smallest since pre-World War II. (upi, W Star, 4/11/69, A12)
President Nixon announced Ruben F. Mettler, Executive Vice President of trw Inc., would be Chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Science Policy [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1376)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology voted increase of $11.8 million over $818.8-million NASA request for research. {CR, 3/26/69, D233)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), introduced S. 1941, NASA authorization bill, similar to H.R. 10251 [see April 17]. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (Text; CR, 4/25/69, S4118)
In interview published by New York Times, Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington said sst cost, quoted at $40 million, would climb to $50 million or $60 million if inflation continued at current rate. He did not expect increase to cut heavily into sales. Under current forecast, Boeing would have to raise “about $2-billion to go into production, and that’s assuming we get 50 per cent progress payments [half of the purchase price] in the 1973—74 period. I’m not so sure we’ll be able to do this.” (Lindsey, NYT, 10/17/69)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics accepted subcommittee reports on H.R. 10251, FY 1970 NASA authorization [see April 17] and added $258 million to amounts requested by President Nixon. Committee would meet again April 29. (CR, 4/23/69, D302; Lannan, W Star, 4/24/69)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was among persons inside mit Instrumentation Laboratory when students from mit and other Boston, Mass., campuses demonstrated against laboratory’s defense work and were confronted by police. Later Dr. Bisplinghoff said: “The university has set as policy a deliberate movement from Department of Defense and space research to a different mix: more and more research relevant to societal problems. It’s going to take a considerable time to make the transition, however, and if we are going to continue on the same scale of operations . . . we’re going to need lots of time and new money.” It would be up to Congress to change emphasis, not mit. Instrumentation Laboratory, meanwhile, would honor commitments to dod, including work on Poseidon missile. (Nordheimer, NYT, 11/9/69, 61)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published A Study of Technology Assessment: Report of the Committee on Public Engineering Policy, National Academy of Engineering. Report recommended establishment of technology assessment task force of members of public and private organizations with knowledge of subject under assessment, including behavioral and political scientists. (Text)
Spencer M. Beresford, former special counsel of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was appointed NASA General Counsel succeeding Paul G. Dembling, new NASA Deputy Associate Administrator [see Sept. 10]. (nasa Release 69—173)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, introduced S. 539, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,760 billion. (CR, 1/22/69, S659—60)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.R. 10251, new NASA FY 1970 authorization bill totaling $3,716 billion in line with President Nixon’s April 15 amended budget request. Bill was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (Text; CR, 4/17/69, H2806)
Pentagon sources estimated U.S.S.R. was spending equivalent of $60 billion in 1969 on national defense and space efforts, while U.S. was spending $85.2 billion, of which $29 billion was for Vietnam war. Figures left U.S.S.R. $4 billion ahead of U.S. in spending on weapon and space technology. Between 1965 and 1969, Soviet spending on offensive and defensive strategic forces increased by 40% but amount spent on intercontinental missiles and surface-to-air missile defense systems rose by 75%. (Kelly, W Star, 2/12/69, D4)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,630 billion, as introduced March 17. (CR, 3/19/70, D262; H Rpt 91-929)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President F. A. Cleveland received $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for 1970 aiaa Wright Brothers Lecture at aiaa Aircraft Design and Operations Meeting in Los Angeles. He delivered lecture, “Size Effects in Conventional Aircraft Design,” during meeting, (aiaa Release; aiaa PIO)
Boeing Co. would lay off some 18 000 persons in Puget Sound area during 1970, company Vice President Lowell P. Michelwait said in Seattle. Company employed 101 500 in peak year 1968. Nationwide force declined by 25 500 during 1969. Boeing employment in Seattle area was 80 000 and would drop to 62 000. Figures indicated 40% drop in work force in 2 1/2 yrs. Decline was attributed to slower commercial aircraft sales, failure to win new Government contracts, reduced Government spending, completion of current Government contracts, and increased productivity in 747 jet airliner assembly lines. (AP, NYT, 1/14/70)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 3374, $3.333billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. [See Feb. 2.] (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 16595, NSF FY 1971 authorization bill, after adding $27.6 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $500 million. (CR, 3/24/70, D283; Boffey, Science, 4/3/70,95-7)
Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to fill seat on House Committee on Ways and Means. (CR, 4/30/70, H3719-20)
Dr. Theodore P. Wright, Civil Aeronautics Administrator from 1944 to 1948 and former Vice President and Director of Engineering with Curtiss-WrightCorp., died in Ithaca, N.Y., at age 75. (Bachinski, W Post, 8/24/70, C4)
Rep. Bertram L. Podell (D-N.Y.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He would take seat on House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (NASA LAR IX/\ 30)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviation and Space Trophy for 1969 to Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) for “extraordinary and brilliant piloting feat” while testing NASA HL-10
L/G Leslie R. Groves (USA, Ret.), former member of Army Corps of Engineers and head of Manhattan Project that developed atomic bomb, died of heart attack at age 73. Gen. Groves, who had described first atomic test in his 1962 book Now It Can Be Told, had been awarded USA’s Distinguished Service medal for his contributions to the project and to shortening World War II. He had also supervised construction of numerous dod facilities—including Pentagon and laboratories at Oak Ridge, Tenn.; Hanford, Wash.; and Los Alamos, N. Mex.—before his retirement from USA in 1948. (Ward, WPost, 7/15/70, C8)
House Appropriations Committee favorably reported H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. Bill provided $2,565 billion for r&d, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $679 million for research and program management. It replaced H.R. 17548, vetoed by President Nixon Aug. 11. NASA appropriation was unchanged. (CR, 11/19/70, D1194; H Rpt 91-1616)
Shrinking profits and widespread attacks on military programs were making 1970s “age of uncertainty” for U.S. defense industry, Max Lehrer, Vice President of rca Defense Electronics Products Div., said in speech before Philadelphia Chapter of Federal Government Accountants Assn. Logistic Management Institute study had shown tax profits for defense firms had dropped from 5.1% average in 1959 to 3.9% in 1968, while profits for comparable nondefense companies over same period rose from 8.9% to 9.4%. (Text)
Charles W. Harper, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics), discussed NASA’s role in development of anticollision systems for aircraft before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Government Activities. It appeared “impractical” to force small general-aviation aircraft “to avoid controlled airspace or to carry the expensive equipment and undergo the intensive training necessary to place them under positive control of the atc [air traffic control] system. For these reasons, faa has asked NASA to investigate the possibility of developing inexpensive, lightweight equipment for small aircraft which would augment significantly the collision avoidance probability when the pilot is flying on the see-and-be-seen principle. .. NASA program was guided by FAA’s Collision Prevention Advisory Group, of which NASA was member, and by NASA Research and Technology Advisory Committee’s Subcommittee on Aircraft Operating Problems, of which faa was member. Both groups included representatives of industry and other Government agencies. (Testimony)
Selection of Harrison A. Storms, NR Aerospace Div. Vice President, as recipient of 1970 Aircraft Design Award was announced by aiaa. He would receive $500 honorarium sponsored by Northrop Corp. for “direction of the engineering effort that led to the design and development of the XB-70 aircraft” at July 21 AIAA meeting in Los Angeles, (aiaa Release)
Examination of Federal science policy was essential, Dr. Philip Handler, nas President, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. “Substantial changes are being made in the organization of some arms of the executive branch of government that deal with science; the Mansfield Amendment which limits the manner in which research-supporting funds may be utilized by the Department of Defense has begun to influence. , .behavior of other agencies of the government as well; federal funding for fundamental studies has remained essentially plateaued in absolute dollars for four consecutive fiscal years while, in constant dollars, such funding has declined by perhaps 25%.”. NASA appropriation “has been reduced significantly and one frequently hears that federal military and space expenditures for R&D are to be reduced for some years to come; the nation seems determined to mitigate the damage which has been done to our natural environment, but flounders in the attempt; our nation is engaged in the painful exercise of assessing and reassembling our priorities; and our country now seems uncertain in what light, and with what resolution, it should view the pace of future scientific progress. Our national apparatus for the conduct of research and scholarship is not yet dismantled, but it is falling into shambles. Morale of the scientific community is lower than at any time since World War II. Yet, new fields of scientific exploration and application clamor for attention and funding.” U.S. lead in science ‘‘is in jeopardy.” Loss of lead “bodes ill for our future national security and for the vigor of our economy.” (Testimony)
NSF published Unemployment Rates for Scientists, Spring 1971. Rate was 2.6% in 1971, jumping from 1.5% in 1970. National unemployment rate for all workers for first quarter 1971 averaged 6.5%. Doctorates experienced 1.4% unemployment rate in 1971 and 0.9% in 1970, while nondoctorate scientists were reported at 3.5% rate in 1971 and 2.9% in 1970. Defense and space constituted largest areas of activity, with 11% and 4% of unemployed. Approximately 45% of 1971 unemployed scientists reported last science-related job had been supported to some degree by Government funds, (nsf Highlights, 7/2/71, 1)	_	_	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
nasa announced resignation of Ronald J. Philips, Director of Office of Technology Utilization, effective July 3. He would become Senior Vice President of technology application program sponsored jointly by International City Management Assn., National League of Cities, U.S. Conference of Mayors, and Ford Foundation, (nasa Release 71—117)
Subcommittee on nasa Oversight transmitted report Review of Recent Launch Failures to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee had held hearings June 15-17 on failure of Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to place Ats 4 in planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968, and failure to orbit oao-b Nov. 30, 1970, and Mariner 8 May 8, Subcommittee concluded that NASA’s decision not to attempt recovery program for unsuccessful Mariner 8 mission using proof-test model “seems justified” on grounds Mariner 9 (launched May 30) had been conceived as backup mission for Mariner 8 from beginning; to alter Atlas-Centaur for different project would have been “challenging;” and proof-test model could better be used as Mariner 9 backup, if necessary, or in 1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking projects. While NASA’s backup mission and recovery policies after failures “seem to have been sound in the past,” decision not to have OAO-B recovery program “appears ... to have been an unwise exception.” To forego oao-b goals “which have occupied the talents and efforts of many scientists and engineers for more than a decade in order to initiate new astronomical experiments [heao Project] in different portions of the magnetic spectrum strikes the Committee as a decision of questionable merit.” Committee recommended future use of prototype spacecraft that could be reengineered and launched as part of flight program to extract full value from expensive hardware. Manufacturing and quality control procedures in Centaur program could be improved. “It is quite clear that a great deal can and should be done short of ‘man-rating’ Centaur, which would significantly improve its reliability.” Centaur stage problems “seem serious enough to justify . . . broad scale, independent examination by disinterested experts” so that Centaur, “which figures so importantly in the space program of the next decade, can be utilized with renewed confidence.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns From Space Investment. Report updated and expanded study of tangible benefits and practical returns from space investment based on material from Government, industry, and press—including extensive NASA research in technology utilization at Committee’s request. Committee concluded that illustrations in report were “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, science, government, the medical profession and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (H Rpt 92-748)
Development of lift-distribution system to alleviate stress problems in C—5A aircraft by spreading aerodynamic loads through wings rather than concentrating stress on small areas was announced by Lockheed-Georgia Co. Vice President Robert B. Ormsby. Modification could be installed during regular modification and inspection periods and would not affect aircraft’s handling. (AP, W Post, 12/12/71, A3)
Dr. Clarence L. Johnson, Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., received NAE’s sixth Founders Medal for designing advanced aircraft and for experimental and theoretical investigations in aerospace sciences. Dr. Johnson was best known for his work in designing Hudson bomber, Constellation and Superconstellation transports, P-38, T-33 trainer, F-90, JetStar, U-2, Warning Star, YF-12A, and SR-71. (nae Release, 7/13/71; nae Bridge, 7/71,1)
U.S. faced no dire threat from current “numbers or accuracy” of Soviet SS—9 missiles, but must extend its own antimissile system as “bargaining chip” with U.S.S.R. at salt, Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard said in testimony before House Committee on Foreign Relations’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. {NYT, 7/14/71, 7)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 3981, $3.271-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill authorized appropriations of $2,518 billion for r&d, $56.3 million for construction of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. (CR, 2/9/71, H588; NASA LAR X/ll)
D. J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of Space Div., told Ninth International Symposium on Space Technology and Science in Tokyo that U.S. did not have monopoly on earth resources programs. “All of us heed the ingenuity of the entire world on how to utilize this technology, so I encourage your expanding participation and cooperation.” (GE Reprint)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had announced “voluntary” early retirement of Lockheed-California Div. President Charles S. Wagner, Senior Vice President Dudley E. Browne, and Corporate Vice President for Manufacturing W. A. Pulver, Wall Street Journal reported. Browne would remain a director and member of board’s executive and finance committees. (WSJ, 11/2/71, 16)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, introduced S. 720, $3.271-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill, identical to House bill introduced Feb. 9 (CR, 2/10/71, S1193)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-biIlion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
House agreed to H.R. 461 electing Rep. Mendel J. Davis (D-S.C.) to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 6/3/71, H4628)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Albert C. Hall, Vice President for Engineering and Research with Martin Marietta Corp., to be Assistant Secretary of Defense (Administration). Hall would succeed Robert F. Froehlke, who had become Secretary of the Armv July 1. (PD, 10/25/71, 1430, 1441; usa pio)
Boeing Co. Vice President for Industrial Relations Lowell P. Mickelwait said company would lay off about 7000 workers and disband sst program as result of Senate’s rejection of SST financing. Plans were in anticipation of notice of sst program termination from dot. Of workers to be laid off within seven weeks of notice, 4500 were force working directly on sst production. Others were clerical and office workers. Mickelwait said Seattle-area work force could drop to 26 500 or remain as high as 31 000 after sst program cancellation. Estimate of 29 000 workers was “reasonable.” (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71, Al)
NASA announced appointment of Harry W. Johnson, Vice President for Engineering in Gates Learjet Corp.’s Aircraft Div., as Director of oart’s Aeronautical Propulsion Div. (nasa Release 71-19)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972	HUD-space-science appropriations bill which contained $3,272 billion NASA appropriation. Committee recommended reduction in Apollo program funding from $612.2 million requested to $610.2 million; increase in Skylab funding from $535.4 million to $550.4 million to provide rescue capability; additional $5 million over estimate for stol development, to total $115 million; deferment of $20 million proposed for space shuttle facilities; and reduction of $6.6 million in $726.6 million requested for research and program management. (H Rpt 92-305)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences published Statements by Presidents of the United States on International Cooperation in Space—A Chronology: October 1957—August 1971 (Sen. Doc. 92-40). Statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon had been compiled by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian. In letter of transmittal to Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Committee Staff Director James J. Gehrig said statements revealed “unanimous agreement that space research and exploration should be an international undertaking.” (Text)
NASA oart officials testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on FY 1972 NASA authorization. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said aeronautics was largest part of OART program for first time. In military aviation, “work is under way at the Centers in support of the F-14 for the Navy. . . . Over a dozen wind tunnels and simulators . . . are used in this support. We are helping the usaf with . . . the F—15, their new B—1 bomber and we plan to assist” with the A—X. One ARC facility was on indefinite loan to USA. “In all, we use over a third of our available facility time to support military needs. Research on transonic aerodynamics, the NASA supercritical airfoil, fly-by-wire flight controls, spin stabilization, and advanced structures using beryllium or composites are some of the areas where NASA is making research contributions to meet military requirements in the future.” In civil aviation effort, OART was providing DOT with assistance on sst. arc was assisting faa in certification studies of Concorde and sst. arc flight simulator for advanced aircraft was “proving to be the most useful facility available in the free world for studying airworthiness standards for supersonic transports.” NASA and DOT were completing joint study of “relationships between the benefits that accrue to the Nation from aviation and the level of R&D effort. The study displays the ways in which civil aviation can affect regional development, population distribution, [and] land use, and contribute to many other social and economic goals of the Nation.” Problems under study included aircraft noise, air pollution from aircraft engine emissions, and aeronautical operating problems “such as approach and landing safety, delays, congestion, and community noise caused by operation of aircraft.” oart Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. had established joint stol operating problems experiments program with dot and faa, and Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. “to study man’s role in advanced aeronautical systems ... as an operator, as a passenger, and as a member of the community exposed to air operations.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), described improvements in aircraft materials and structural design: “I have been particularly impressed with the progress of the composite materials. The potential of boron and carbon fibers imbedded in an epoxy resin matrix to provide high strength, low weight structures has been discussed with you for several years. This year the testing of special glass fibers has revealed the possibility that low cost, stiff composites may be fabricated with much greater strengths than previously thought possible. Composites are finding application both as a replacement for metallic components and by augmenting metal strengths using selective reinforcement. In the forthcoming year we propose to construct several airplane components of primary structure for installation and flight demonstration. We believe that these new materials will find widespread use in the industry when the technical risk has been demonstrated to be acceptable.” Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Systems Office, reported on progress of nerva program: “Through the systematic engineering design process . . . design concepts to be incorporated in nerva were formulated, requirements were specified, and a baseline engine design has been established. The design provides a thrust level of 75 000 lbs [ 334 000 newtons], and a specific impulse of 825 seconds. High reliability and safety in operation are provided through the use of redundancy in critical areas and conservative design approaches. The endurance goal for the reusable system is 10 hours, coupled with the ability to undergo 60 start-and-stop cycles, and the key fuel element technology continued to make good progress toward that goal.” (Transcript)
Bruce N. Torell was elected President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. at regular meeting of board of directors. Torell would succeed Bernard A. Schmickrath, who was elected a vice president. Changes would be effective July 1. (p&w Eagle, 7/71, 2)
House Committee on Appropriations by vote of 26 to 15 approved full $290 million requested by DOT for continued SST development. (CR, 3/15/71, D164; AP, NYT, 3/16/71, 62)
Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) criticized Sept. 13 action of Office of Management and Budget in impounding $44.9 million of $50.5-million FY 1973 NASA appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program. As Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, he signed telegram to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, protesting action. (CR, 10/14/72, H10111)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill [see March 23]. (H Rpt 92-976)
v/a Charles E. Weakley (usn, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 66. He had retired in 1967 as commander of Atlantic Fleet’s antisubmarine warfare force and had held NASA post since 1968. Adm. Weakley had received Legion of Merit and Bronze Star. During World War II he had devised random-screen method of protecting merchant convoys in experiment with early sonar. (W Star & News, 12/26/72, A6)
Annual Dept, of Defense report to Congress, National Security Strategy of Realistic Deterrence, was presented by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird to House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations during hearings on FY 1973 dod budget and FY 1973—1977 program. U.S.S.R. had reached position “where—unless we take appropriate action—there could be new surprises and new ‘sputniks.’ But they are less likely to be in areas such as the peaceful exploration of space; rather they are more likely to be a part of a major new Soviet military capability.” (Text)
Atomic Energy Commission named its Los Alamos, N. Mex., Meson Physics Facility for Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), member of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, and celebrated “Clinton P. Anderson Day” with ceremonies in Los Alamos. History of space and nuclear rocket programs was recounted by AEC Commissioner James T. Ramey in welcoming speech: “Senator Anderson with some help from the Chairman of the aec almost had the Joint Committee and AEC responsible for the emerging space program after Sputnik.” Joint Committee “held one of the first series of hearings on the development of rocket technology for outer space. These hearings represented one of the times . . . that Senator Anderson . . . and Admiral [Lewis L.] Strauss of the aec were in entire public agreement on a project. Senator Anderson was thinking of putting space under the Joint Committee and Admiral Strauss was interested in the space development program being under aec. Their mutual interest was short-lived, however, since the then Senate Majority Leader Lyndon [B.] Johnson apparently had different ideas on this subject!” (aec Release P—95; Text) April 9:	Americans were wondering why U.S. spent “$40 billion” to land on moon rather than on programs for social action, Jeffrey St. John commented in Los Angeles Times article. “The fact remains, however, that long before the landing of Apollo 11 public funds for social problems on earth had risen far beyond the annual space budgets. In 1972, the federal government has earmarked $100 billion for social action programs, as opposed to $3.2 billion for space. The ratio of expenditures for space and social action programs during the 15 years of the space effort has been roughly 11 to 1 in favor of social action.” Lunar landing had been “triumph of 400,000 scientists, engineers, and technologists and the sophisticated expertise of 20,000 private companies, large and small.” Apollo had been “clear-cut example of a successful government venture” but on earth Government had “made a mess of the social landscape.” Compounding irrationality was refusal of liberals to understand why “space program succeeded, largely as a private endeavor coordinated by government, and why social problems grow worse under government’s guidance.” To accomplish lunar mission, space program participants had needed two crucial elements: “intellectual freedom” to analyze a problem correctly and “strict observance of natural laws.” In social problemsolving, intellectual freedom was abandoned for political expediency that played one pressure group against another and “there is a continual violation of certain immutable natural laws. Namely, the refusal of the social planners to believe the slums and poverty can be the products of an absence of individual initiative and enterprise.” (LA Times, 4/9/72)
Rep. Bob S. Bergland (D-Minn.) was elected member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 1/27/72, H367)
Effect of 1972 elections on congressional committees dealing with science and environment was discussed in Science article. Chairmen of both House and Senate space committees had been replaced. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, was retiring at age 77 after 31-year career in Congress. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had been defeated in Democratic primary and would leave Congress at age 81 after serving in House since 1945. Rep. Earle Cabell (D-Tex.), member of Science and Astronautics Committee, was defeated in the general election. He was to have been one of six House members of congressional board to oversee new Office of Technology Assessment. Board also lost prospective member with defeat of Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). (Walsh, Science, 11/17/72, 25-6) November 18:	NASA and Boston Univ. Dept, of Astronomy sponsored symposium “Life Beyond Earth and the Human Mind” at Boston Univ. Panel Chairman Richard Berendzen, Boston Univ. astronomer, had said symposium was being held because recent findings in astronomy, biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics had indicated high probability of existence of extraterrestrial life. Many scientists believed that “within the next few decades some form of communication will be achieved with intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe.” Panelists were anthropologist Dr. Ashley Montagu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology physicist Dr. Philip Morrison, Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Dean Krister Stendahl of Harvard Divinity School, and Dr. George Wald of Harvard Univ., winner of 1967 Nobel Prize for medicine and researcher in biochemical evolution. Dr. Sagan said human technology had reached stage where man could detect another civilization as advanced as his. “Most optimistic estimate of civilizations in our galaxy is one million, which means one per many hundred thousand stars.” Searching stars one by one could take hundreds of years. Dr. Montagu said that “some other forms of life are probably more intelligent than we, which can explain why they haven’t contacted us.” Dean Stendahl said discovery of life elsewhere would teach mem that God’s domain is larger and would give man better idea of his place in it. Contacting other beings might help man to stop viewing God in his own image. Dr. Wald said he was convinced that life existed elsewhere in galaxy but he doubted man would ever contact it. Dr. Morrison predicted man would receive and verify message from another civilization. Message would be technical, scientifically coded communication received over many months or years. NASA filmed symposium to produce educational film. (NASA Release 72-213; Leary, W Post, 11/24/72, CIO)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. Johnson reported that in 1971 Thor-Delta launch vehicle had had five launches with four successes. One failure, on itos-b mission Oct. 21, had been caused by leak in 2nd-stage oxidizer system. Review board recommendations had been carried out and Jan. 31 launch of Heos 2 had been successful. Thorough design review and certification was in process for launch by new-configuration Thor-Delta of itos-c in April. All critical components of old and new configurations had been completely and intensively reviewed by independent group and most previous qualifications had been verified. Estimated cost of responding to review board recommendations was $2 million for FY 1972, $3 million for FY 1973, and $5 million per year thereafter. (Transcript)
Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, during hearings hy House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology on FY 1973 NASA authorization, testified that recently developed NASA technology could have increased supersonic transport’s investment return rate. Calculations had been made showing that “incorporation of now emerging technology for static stability augmentation and active flutter control could have allowed a weight savings, and thus a payload increase, of better than 16,000 pounds, or an additional return on investment of about 7.5 NASA research and technology in aerodynamics, configurations, materials, structures, propulsion, and avionics applicable to advanced long-haul transport aircraft design showed “real promise.” Application of automated active control concepts “could result in considerable weight savings by eliminating the need for inherent aerodynamic stability and thereby reducing the size of control surfaces. It could also result in reduced structural fatigue for longer life, lower structural loads for lighter structures, and ride quality control and active damping of aircraft flutter for a more comfortable ride.” (Transcript)
H.R. 12824, $3.379-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, was introduced by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/1/72, H556)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics since 1961, was defeated as candidate for reelection to Congress during Democratic primary in California. (Dem Natl Com; Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Office of Senate Republican Leader Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said Sen. Scott would nominate President Nixon for Nobel Peace Prize to be awarded in winter 1972. Scott aide said Senator was preparing documentation citing President’s initiatives in People’s Republic of China visit and Soviet summit meetings, (upi, NYT, 7/19/72, 15)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at closing session of term, elected to defer action on S.R. 193, bill passed by Senate July 21 to return Cape Kennedy to original name of Cape Canaveral, and on similar House bill originated by Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-FIa.), in 1971. (O Sen, 10/1/72)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space announced it would hold hearings in July on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for cooperation in space, medicine, science, and environment. (Reuters, W Post, 5/27/72, A23)
NASA applications program was reviewed by Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Objectives of program were “to establish useful applications of space and space know-how through the development of user relationships, through the development of requisite technology, and through the conduct of appropriate ground, airborne and space flight investigations.” Space was “a magnificent vantage point to survey the surface of the earth and to expedite and enhance the flow of information around the globe.” Core of program was new applications of earth observations and communications, but “other areas associated with the unique environment of space, particularly weightlessness, show promises which must be explored, developed and exploited.” Space manufacturing processes offered good example. “Space applications, however, should not be envisioned just as activities that lead to satellites or laboratories in space, for . . . applications relate to contributions to men and women who . . . reside right here on the ground. Know-how provided by experience with the development of space systems can be applied to . . . areas involving housing, transportation, health care and many others.” NASA participation in Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would increase significantly in FY 1973 as transition occurred from planning to carrying out Tropical Experiment and Data Systems Test, both planned for CY 1974. Planning would be accelerated for Global Experiment during 1976-1977. garp was being conducted by World Meteorological Organization and International Council of Scientific Unions to increase understanding of circulation of atmosphere and provide mathematical and physical basis for long-range weather prediction, determination of feasibility of large-scale climatic modification, and assessment of consequences of man’s pollution of atmosphere. (Transcript)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), Committee member, introduced H. Con. Res. 223 requesting the President to proclaim July 16—22 of each year as “U.S. Space Week.” The resolution was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. (CR, 5/23/73, H3976)
Resignation of NASA Associate Administrator for Astronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, effective Oct. 26, was announced. Jackson would rejoin Northrop Corp. as Corporate Vice President, Program Management. He had joined Northrop in 1953 and left to become NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Nov. 2, 1970. (nasa Release 73-221)
Office of Technology Assessment: Background and Status, a report to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was published by the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, Science Policy Div. No appropriations had been approved as yet for the OTA, which had been established “as an aid in the identification and consideration of existing and probable impacts of technological application” under Public Law 92-484 Oct. 13, 1972. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had requested $289 000 for OTA salaries and expenses under H.R. 7447, an FY 1973 supplemental appropriations bill. No funds had been requested by the House, and the requested appropriation had been deleted in conference. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had recommended a $3 980 000 FY 1974 ota appropriation. The FY 1974 legislative branch appropriations bill (H.R. 6691) had been passed July 19, but the conference committee had not yet met to resolve differences between the House and Senate versions, ota funding would not be allotted until the appropriation was available. (Text)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing on H.R. 8348 [see June 4] and H.R. 9133, duplicate bills to authorize the National Science Foundation to designate certain institutions of higher learning national energy research centers. Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NSF Deputy Director, described the NSF program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) devoted to energy: “It includes research on analytic techniques and potential conservation measures directed at meeting U.S. energy requirements while satisfying environmental quality restraints; energy conversion research directed at developing technologies that allow more efficient use of our energy resources; research on superconducting transmission lines and other aspects of energy and fuel transportation; and research on advanced coal technology, geothermal energy, and perhaps most importantly, on solar energy.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Armed Services voted in closed session to appropriate $172.7 million to continue production of F-llls at a one-a-month rate through 1975 [see June 6]. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/21/73)
U.S.S. Wasp, World War II aircraft carrier and NASA prime recovery vessel, made her last voyage—to the ship breakers’ yards at Kearny, N.J. The 30-yr-old ship had been purchased for scrap metal by Union Mineral Alloys Corp. for $505 250. She had served as the prime recovery vessel for NASA Gemini-Titan manned space flights: Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965), Gemini 6 (Dec. 15-16, 1965), Gemini 7 (Dec. 4-18, 1965), Gemini 9 (June 3-6, 1966), and Gemini 12 (Nov. 11-15, 1966). (Phalon, NYT, 6/19/73, 39; nasa Hist Off)
President Nixon addressed himself to the energy crisis in a speech over nationwide radio and TV: “We are heading toward the most acute shortages of energy since World War II. Our supply of petroleum this winter will be at least 10 percent short of our anticipated demands, and it could fall short by as much as 17 percent. Now, even before war broke out in the Middle East, these prospective shortages were the subject of intensive discussions among members of my Administration, leaders of the Congress, Governors, mayors, and other groups. From these discussions has emerged a broad agreement that we, as a Nation, must now set upon a new course. In the short run, this course means that we must use less energy—that means less heat, less electricity, less gasoline. In the long run, it means that we must develop new sources of energy which will give us the capacity to meet our needs without relying on any foreign nation.” The President announced steps to lower energy consumption. He asked the Atomic Energy Commission to speed licensing and construction of nuclear plants and would ask development of an emergency energy act. {PD, 11/12/73, 1312-8)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on short-term energy shortages. Acting Director Darrell M. Trent of the Office of Emergency Preparedness testified that the U.S. “economy’s demand for all types of energy continues to increase at an amazing rate. However, our ability to find and produce domestic supplies of energy is not keeping pace with rising demand.” The U.S. was becoming increasingly dependent on foreign supplies. “Except for Alaskan discoveries, additions to domestic petroleum reserves have fallen behind production since 1967. Gas is already in short supply. ... At current growth rates, demand could double within the next 12 years over what it was in 1970. Because of the growing imbalance between domestic supply and demand, we may have to import as much as 60 percent of all the oil and gas we need in 1985. Such reliance on foreign sources of supply could pose serious problems for our national security. . . . The cost of our petroleum products alone could rise from about $6 billion in 1972 to as high as $45 billion by 1985, with grim implications for our troubled balance of payments.” (Transcript)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) introduced H.R. 32, National Science and Policy Priorities Act of 1973. The bill differed from S. 32, passed by the Senate in 1972 but never reported out by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics [see Jan. 4]. The new bill sought to protect the National Science Foundation’s pure science functions by allocating at least 40% of the science budget to nsf. {CR, 1/3/73, H27; nasa LAR,
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1973, introduced Dec. 10 as a clean bill incorporating amendments to H.R. 10952 [see Oct. 16] and 17 similar bills. Language changes more explicitly delineated agency responsibilities and two distinct program , phases. NASA would have major responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling equipment in the first phase. In the second, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would be responsible for installation, testing, and evaluation. A major amendment would require HUD to establish a Solar Heating and Cooling Information Data Bank. If a law created a permanent Federal energy agency, responsibility assigned to NASA and the National Science Foundation would he transferred to that agency. (House Rpt 93-769, reprint in Com Print, 2/74)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified on NASA’s balloon program as the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications concluded FY 1974 authorization hearings: “Balloons are used for a variety of programs in both atmospheric science and astronomy. We, in many cases, launch with a balloon a prototype of an as-■ tronomical instrument which we may later fly on a sounding rocket or orbiting satellite.” Payloads ranged from test instruments to an infrared experiment; “as you get above the water vapor in the atmosphere you can do very good infrared experiments, and you can keep the instrument pointed precisely for quite long periods . . . and do very valuable scientific work at nominal cost.” Balloons were launched from Texas, South Dakota, Missouri, and Alabama in the U.S., and from Canada, Australia, and Argentina. “One of the beauties of the balloon program is that they can be launched from many areas, and we can recover the payloads. . . . We use the same payload many times for balloon observations, and it’s not at all unusual to use the same payload for half a dozen flights with sometimes slightly different instrumentation each time.” (Transcript)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA’s third Administrator, became a senior vice president and member of the corporate executive staff of General Electric Co. He had resigned from nasa Sept. 15, 1970, to join GE as Vice President and Group Executive, Power Generation Group. (Av Wk, 7/2/73; GE pio)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), new Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had promised an “in depth” inquiry into the FY 1974 Nasa budget request at early date, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The Committee staff was being expanded and Sen. Moss would visit Manned Spacecraft Center in February. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.), the Committee’s new ranking minority member, had urged that more attention be paid to aeronautics. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), minority member, had said the Committee should be more forceful in pushing aerospace programs “because nasa seems reticent at times to speak for itself.” (Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13)
nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during nasa FY 1974 authorization hearings: Support in 1972 had been provided to more than 40 ongoing missions as well as 18 new flight projects. New launches—which included Apollo 16 and 17 and the first probe to Jupiter, Pioneer 10—“placed increased demands on the capacity and reliability of the tracking systems.” During the two-year, 1 000 000 000-km (621 400 000-mi) journey of Pioneer 10 to Jupiter’s vicinity, the Deep Space Network would continuously monitor the spacecraft’s condition and acquire data from its 13 experiments. Major changes in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) had been the installation of a transportable station at St. John’s, Newfoundland, to provide Skylab launch support and the closing of the station at Fort Myers, Fla. The closing was “the first of the station closures planned to take place over the next few years as the spaceflight tracking and data network moves toward a single integrated network in the post-Apollo-Soyuz test project time.” (Transcript)
The Army announced award of a $1 969 269 firm-fixed-price contract to Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modification of the acoustic model engine test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, (dod Release 63-73) February 7:	The House passed and cleared for the President’s signature S.J.R. 37, to designate the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), for himself and Rep. Kenneth J. Gray (D-Ill.), introduced H.J.R. 328 for the same purpose. H.J.R. 328 was referred to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/7/73, H838.9, H877)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., released Monopsony: A Fundamental Problem in Government Procurement. The report, prepared by the Orkand Corp., said the problems of a monopsony—a market dominated by a single buyer—were no longer restricted to defense and space suppliers as Government agencies took increasingly active roles in mass transit, education, health, and environmental protection. Results of Government monopsony power were higher final costs and lowered or nonexistent profits that compounded industry’s difficulty in attracting capital. In the end, “what is in jeopardy is not one or two industries but rather our capability, as a nation, to undertake programs in which the resources of government and industry must be committed to the development and implementation of solutions to society’s problems. The study recommended: establishment of a Government Procurement Practices Board (gppb) to limit governmental monopsony power; a continuing review by gppb of procurement policies, regulations, and practices; a “free market test” criterion to govern the procurement process; and formulation by gppb of procurement principles that could be submitted to Congress and enacted into law. (Text)
Rep. Lawrence R. Coughlin (R-Pa.) resigned from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and was elected to the House Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa LAR XII/26)
Aircraft designer Clarence L. (Kelly) Johnson announced his retirement as Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., effective in mid-January 1975. During his 43 yrs with Lockheed, Johnson had contributed to the design of some 40 aircraft—about half of them his original designs—including the P-38 “Lightning” fighter of World War II, the P-80 jet fighter, the Constellation series of airliners, the F-104 mach 2 fighter, the U—2 reconnaissance plane and its successor SR—71, and the C-130 transport. In 1964 President Johnson awarded Johnson the National Medal of Science, citing his achievements and products “as both incomparable and virtually incredible.” (Getler, W Post, 8 Nov 74, A12)
The House passed the NASA authorization bill, H.R. 13998, by a vote of 341 to 37. The total authorization was $3,259 billion, $6 million over the $3,253 billion suggested by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 10 April and $12 million above the Administration request of $3,247 billion. On the floor, the House had approved an additional $3.9 million for research in coal extraction, coal energy conversion, and mine safety. An additional $2 million was authorized for research in hydrogen production and use. (CR, 25 April 74, H3201-31)
The House of Representatives by a 253-to-2 vote passed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. The bill would authorize $50 million over five years for the early commercial demonstration of solar heating technology by NASA and the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, in cooperation with the National Bureau of Standards, the National Science Foundation, the General Services Administration, and other Federal agencies, and early development and commercial demonstration of technology for combined solar heating and cooling. H.R. 11864 was the clean bill that resulted from the 19 Dec. 1973 recommendation -of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy to revise, amend, and combine H.R. 10952, introduced 16 Oct. 1973, and 18 similar bills. The bill was sent to the Senate. (CR, 13 Feb 74, H774; Background <& Legis Hist, Com Print, Feb 74)
General Aviation Programs, forwarded to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by the Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reported on an oversight review based on hearings 14 and 15 May and a visit to general-aviation manufacturers in Kansas 31 May and 1 June. Noting that general aviation made up about 97% of the civil aircraft fleet, flew 79% of the hours and 71% of the miles, and carried up to one third of all intercity passengers—the Subcommittee recommended: continued close NASA-industry cooperation, NASA assistance to Federal agencies to ensure realistic regulations, individual attention to special general-aviation needs, NASA noise and emission research, concerted industry effort to use new technology, NASA effort to increase public visibility of its program, NASA-industry measures toward better understanding of respective roles in research and development, and an annual General Aviation Manufacturers Assn, evaluation of the NASA program. (Com Print)
Elmer S. “Todd” Groo had been appointed Associate Administrator for Center Operations at nasa Hq., effective 4 Sept., NASA announced. Groo, the first to hold the position created in the reorganization announced 5 March, would be responsible for agency-wide planning and direction of institutional resources and operational activities at NASA field installations. Groo had retired in 1973 from ibm World Trade Corp., where he had served as vice president since 1959. (nasa Release 72—221; msfc Release 74-146)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs George W. Cherry testified in hearings on technology for subsonic aircraft before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. NASA aeronautical programs were structured to provide the airframe industry and its airline customers an efficient and environmentally benign technology base for a new-generation subsonic aircraft. The supercritical aerodynamics program included studies to improve structural efficiency without increasing drag, thrust, or fuel consumption. F-8 and F-lll aircraft flight tests with the supercritical wing had shown that using supercritical aerodynamics on passenger transports would increase profits 2.5% over those of conventional aircraft, or $78 million a year, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. Advanced transport technology studies showed that aircraft extensively employing composite materials would show a yearly profit of 2.7%, or $100 million, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. NASA propulsion technology had initiated an advanced multistage axial-flow experimental compressor weighing 60% less than conventional compressors. This, with technology advances in other components, could reduce gross aircraft weights and fuel consumption 10%. (Transcript) ■
Nelson A. Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President of the United States after the House confirmed his nomination. The Senate had confirmed the nomination 10 Dec. (CR, 10 Dec 74, D1343; 19 Dec 74, D1413, D1416)
President Ford nominated Nelson A. Rockefeller, former Governor of New York, as 41st Vice President of the United States. {PD, 26 Aug 74,1050-1; 1063,1064)
Alexander P. Vinogradov, leading geochemist of the U.S.S.R. and vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, had died at Moscow at the age of 80, according to Tass, the Soviet news agency. Vinogradov had identified 40 chemical elements in earth’s soil zones and had developed a new field of investigation called cosmochemistry—the chemical analysis of lunar and Venus composition. He had remained active as the head of Moscow’s Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry. (Tass, in FBIS, 17 Nov 75; NYT, 19 Nov 75, 38; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 112)
NASA marked the 60th anniversary of the first meeting of NASA’s predecessor institution, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) Established by a law signed by President Woodrow Wilson 3 March 1915, NACA had 12 presidentially appointed members from the military and scientific communities “to supervise and direct the scientific study of the problems of flight, with a view to their practical solution” and “to direct and conduct research and experiments in aeronautics.” During its nearly half-century of operation, NACA was responsible for the technical proficiency of U.S. aviation. Early NACA wind-tunnel research yielded the unique NACA cowling and wing shapes that would dominate aeronautics into the 1940s. NACA’s fundamental research and its direct application to industrial, military, and civil aviation helped create the world’s greatest commercial air transportation network before World War II and the world’s strongest air forces during that conflict. In 1947, it was the NACA-Air Force X—1 aircraft that broke the sound barrier. The agency had remained small in size and budget through 1939 when 523 persons worked with $4.5 million in funds. By the mid-1940s the staff had grown to 6800 and its budget to an annual $40 million. In 1958 the National Space Act dissolved NACA, transferring its 8000 workers and “all functions, powers, duties and obligations” to the new National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (NASA Release 75—86; Anderson, Orders of Magnitude, 1—3)
The; House of Representatives, by a vote of 318 to 72, passed H.R. 4700, the bill authorizing NASA $3 585 873 000 in funds for FY1976 and $922 450 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. The bill was passed as reported out of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 14 March, (CR, 9 April 75, H2549—75)
The U.S. Senate by unanimous vote of 88 ratified the multination convention on registration of objects launched into outer space. All 37 countries now members of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space—which drafted the convention—were expected to ratify it; France and Bulgaria had already ratified, and 24 nations including the USSR had signed it. Registration would be with the secretary general of the UN, reporting was mandatory, and the information to be provided “as soon as practicable” included the name of the launching state (or states), appropriate designator of the space object (or its registration number), date and territory or location of the launch, basic orbital parameters (apogee, perigee, orbital period, inclination), and general functions of the space object. The convention embraced objects launched into earth orbit or into space transit—lunar or deep-space probes—but did not require reporting on objects in brief transit through outer space, such as sounding rockets or ballistic-missile test vehicles. The convention would supersede the voluntary system that had been in operation since 1962; the U.S. State Department had told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that, although nearly all countries launching objects into outer space had respected the voluntary system, there had never been agreement on the kinds of information to be supplied and the information conveyed to the secretary general had never been uniform. The committee’s only question regarding cooperation was the People’s Republic of China, which had not reported on its outer space launchings; Senator Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) had asked Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger to find out if mainland China would register under the new convention. NASA had told the committee that the U.S. would not incur substantial costs from the convention’s requirement that participating states with space tracking facilities help in identifying a space object, when requested by another participant on the grounds that the object to be identified was “hazardous or deleterious.” NASA was already tracking nearly 5000 space objects, some as small as a dinner plate, and knew which nation owned most of them. (NASA Ofc Legis. Affairs, report for 21 June 76; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 63)
Rockwell International—prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle—announced that it had purchased more than $18 million of goods and services from minority businesses throughout the U.S. in 1976, a 58% increase over 1975. Rockwell had been cited by the Black Businessmen’s Assn, of Los Angeles for its participation in “Black Economic Development,” and by the Natl. Assn, of Black Manufacturers for its contributions to industry development. Kenneth B. Gay, Rockwell vice president for purchasing, said that “qualified minority businesses in the more technical areas” had been hard to find in the past, but there were “many highly skilled, competent small companies competing aggressively for our business” at present. The more than 500 minority firms supplying Rockwell received about $5 million for machining and specialty fabrication; more than $2 million for metal structures; another $2 million each for raw materials and supplies and for technical services; and more than $ 1 million each for electrical equipment and for maintenance and repair services. (Rockwell Release R-46)
Arnold Palmer, piloting the Learjet “200 Yankee” named in honor of the U.S. Bicentennial, landed at Arapahoe County airport near Denver after a record-setting flight around the world that took 57 hr 25 min 42 sec and covered 37 000 km. Palmer’s flight was 28 hr 43 min 19 sec faster than the longstanding record set by Arthur Godfrey and Dick Merrill in 1966. Accompanied by the official observer and timer for the National Aeronautic Assn., Robert J. Serling, and by copilots James E. Bir and L.L. Purkey, Palmer averaged better than 770 kph on the 2.5-day flight that made 9 stops in 7 countries. In meeting officials at each of the stops, Palmer presented Bicentennial flags and bronze replicas of the Declaration of Independence; at Wake Is., he left a silver plaque commemorating the U.S. Marine Corps defense of the island in World War II. In addition to the speed-around-the-world record, NAA planned to claim for the Palmer flight 18 additional records for speed over recognized course: e.g., Boston to Paris, Paris to Tehran, etc. Since he took up flying in the 1950s, champion golfer Palmer had logged about 4500 hr as a pilot. (NAA News, July 76, 1)
Louis Morton, one of the foremost U.S. military historians and chairman of NASA’S historical advisory committee from 1970 to 1973, died at the age of 63 in Burlington, Vt., after surgery. A member of the National Archives advisory council since 1968, he had worked strongly for separation of the National Archives and Records Service from the General Services Administration, and had advocated a coordinating office for the federal government’s entire historical program with a chief government historian. Based at Dartmouth College, where since 1960 he had been teacher, writer, and administrator, Morton was active in national organizations related to history and had served on history and biography juries for the Pulitzer prize. He had been with the Army’s office of military history from 1946 to 1959, serving as historian, then as deputy chief and chief of the Pacific branch; he was editor of an 11-vol. history of the U.S. Army in the Pacific during World War II, and general editor of the 17-vol. “Wars and Military Institutions of the U.S.” (W Post, 15 Feb 76, B 12)
The General Services Administration goofed in agreeing to an exchange of California property with Rockwell Inti. Corp., said Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Government Operations. GSA agreed 3 yr ago to accept a $ 19.5-million piece of property on the former Rockwell AFB at Canoga Park, Calif., in exchange for a surplus $ 16-million building. No other agency had been found willing to occupy the Rockwell AFB property, and the corporation had claimed $1.8 million worth of special installations at the former base. Rep. Rrooks urged GSA to fight the corporation’s attempt to get more out of the trade. (C Trib, 14 Sept 76, 4-7)
Global communications systems used by the Dept, of Defense were inadequate, inefficient, and incapable of surviving nuclear attack, according to the investigation subcommittee of the House Committee on Armed Services. A United Press report carried in the W Star quoted subcommittee criticism of the Pentagon’s top-secret command post which, “while located in the basement of the Pentagon, [showed] little possibility that the National Military Command Center would survive a nuclear attack directed against it.” The report cited “dismay over the department’s inability to deploy a satellite communications system after 16 years of effort,” “security deficiencies” in the computer software of the worldwide Military Command and Control System, weaknesses in the Tri-Service Tactical Communications program, and “urgent need for early deployment of improved voice security equipment throughout the military services.” The report commended the use of airborne command posts such as the converted Boeing 747 “doomsday plane” that had taken President Carter to Georgia the previous wk. (W Star, Feb 19/77, A-3)
INTELSAT announced it had elected Canadian Marcel Perras chairman of its board of governors and Randolph Payne of Australia vice chairman. Perras, vice president of Teleglobe Canada, had been a member of the INTELSAT board since 1975. Payne, director of marketing for the Overseas Telecommunications Commission of Australia, had represented Australia on the INTELSAT board at various times since its formation in 1973. The board had also reappointed C. J. Steffen of Switzerland and N. Tuckwell of Australia as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on planning; and O. Schmeller of the FRG and K. Nosaka of Japan as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on technical matters. (INTELSAT Release 78-17-1)
NASA announced personnel changes at Hq. —Herbert Rowe, acting deputy associate administrator for external relations, would leave to become vice president of the Electronic Industries Association. Rowe had joined NASA in 1975. —NASA had appointed Frank Penaranda director of the institutional Operations Division, Office of Management Operations, effective immediately. He would be responsible for managing the agency’s R&PM budget and institutional management system, including program support negotiations between centers and program offices, coordinating agencywide civil service and contractor manpower planning, and overseeing the center’s aircraft operations. —NASA had appointed C. Ronald Hovell director of the Resource Management/Administration Office, Office of Space Transportation Systems. He would be responsible for budget and control support of each STS program directorate having responsibility for STS funds. —Effective Jan. 1, Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool had become chief scientist in the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Rasool had maintained an active relationship with academic, industrial, and government organizations working on development and use of scientific and technological instrumentation, theory, and techniques for study earth and its nearby space environment. (NASA anno Jan 11, 16, 20, 30/78)
In its report on U.S. R&D spending for 1979, the National Science Foundation pointed out that doubling of the nation’s R&D expenditures since 1969 had been almost entirely attributable to inflation. However, the overall U.S. R&D effort had experienced real growth every year since 1975, mainly from increased emphasis on finding alternative energy sources; it had not provided major stimulus to economic growth or productivity in the short term. The federal government, currently supporting more than half the nation’s R&D effort, had over the last decade emphasized civilian programs rather than defense and space. Largest federal R&D spending increases for 1978 and 1979 were expected in the energy and health areas. During the 1970s, the U.S. had allocated proportionately less of the national R&D effort to basic research. Factors influencing this trend included the federal government’s deemphasizing basic research in defense and space programs during the early to mid-1970s; the industrial sector’s seeking quicker payoffs from R&D efforts aimed at a specific product or process, as opposed to projects with no specific commercial application; and universities’ increased emphasis on applied research over basic research since 1970. (NSF Highlights, May 1/78, 1)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the flight of Salyut 6, with Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin aboard for 12 weeks. The crew spent the first week of July unloading cargo ship Progress 10, which linked with the Salyut July 1. Unloading was completed, and the orbiting station was refueled by July 15. Experiments with Isparitel apparatus were performed, using a powerful beam of electrons to plate metal and glass surfaces with precious metals and alloys of aluminum and copper. Properties of plating done in weightlessness differed from those under Earth conditions, Tass noted. First tests of the apparatus were made last year when Lyakhov and Ryumin brought back 24 titanium plates with metal covering from Soyuz 32; the current tests should produce about 200 specimens covered with films of varied thicknesses. Progress 10 separated from the Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 complex at 1:21 Moscow time July 18 after a 17-day stay, during which its engine was used to adjust the station’s orbit. On July 19 the cargo ship engines were switched on by ground command; it reentered over the Pacific and “ceased to exist.” Soyuz 37, launched at midnight July 23 Moscow time, carried the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, and veteran cosmonaut Col. Viktor Gorbatko as the sixth Intercosmos crew to visit with Popov and Ryumin, fourth main crew on Salyut 6. At the launch, Boris Petrov, vice president of the Soviet academy of sciences, noted that “although space school in Vietnamese science was established later than in other Soviet countries,” experiments in space medicine and technology and i n mapping of land and ocean surfaces had been prepared for the Soviet-Vietnamese expedition. Soyuz 37 docked with Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 at 2302 Moscow time July 24; on July 25, the visitors began a study of head blood circulation during adaptation to weightlessness, with Pham Tuan as first subject. The visitors returned in Soyuz 36 at 1815 hours July 31 to the preset area; near Dzhezkazgan. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 4-31/80)
NASA announced that Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had signed a memorandum of understanding with Dr. David H. Jacobson, vice president of South Africa’s council for scientific and industrial research, for establishment of a Landsat ground station near Johannesburg. The pact would let the South African council, an early user of Landsat data, operate a ground station at Hartebeesthoek and receive, process, and disseminate data. The council would pay for a ground station and attending costs, plus an annual access fee of $200,000 after the first six months of data receipt, and would have to make Landsat data available on a nondiscriminatory basis. Landsat users in southern Africa would have access to regular coverage of the region, as a contribution to development efforts of southern African nations. Nine Landsat stations were operating outside the United States, two in Canada and one each in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. The People’s Republic of China and Thailand were buying ground-station equipment, and other ground stations were being planned. (NASA Release 80-147)
The Washington Post reported that Summa Corporation, holding company for the late billionaire Howard Hughes’s estate, would “immediately” disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s 140-ton flying boat, since a last-minute public appeal for $750,000 to preserve it had failed. The Port of Long Beach, Calif., had wanted the 220-foot boat, 80-feet high with a 320-foot wingspan, to display with another transportation mammoth, the ocean liner Queen Mary. Designed to be a World War II troop carrier, the eight-engine Spruce Goose (actually made mostly of birch) had flown only once in 1947. Parts of it would go to nine museums, including the Smithsonian. (W Post, May 23/80, F3)
The NAA newsletter paid tribute to former Senator A.S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), who died February 13 at the age of 77. Known as “Mr. Aviation” during his 30-year tenure in Congress, he was president of NAA 1970-1972. Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 1955 Federal Airport Act promoting civil aviation, which led to establishment of the FAA. He received in 1961 the Wright Brothers; memorial trophy for service to aviation, and the first Collier award for distinguished congressional service. (NAA newsletter Mar-Apr 80, 4)
INTELSAT announced election of Irving Goldstein, previously vice chairman of its board of directors, to be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne of Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in the organization, had been working with the board since its formation in 1973. He was vice president and general manager for international communications of ComSatCorp, responsible for activities including planning, installation, and operation of ground stations using the INTELSAT system. (INTELSAT Release 80-10-1)
NASA cleared today the Space Shuttle's main engines for launch, making possible an August 24 launch of Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Laboratory tests and a thorough examination of one of Challenger's engines, which prematurely shut down shortly after a July 29 launch, showed that it was not damaged during launch and that a pair of heat sensors, which mistakenly indicated the engine had overheated, caused the shutdown. NASA had fitted Discovery with new heat sensors that engineers believed were vastly superior to the ones that failed on Challenger. Dominick Sanchini, executive vice president of Rocketdyne, which built the hydrogen-fueled engines, said, "Our analysis has verified what we felt right along was the probable failure mechanism. We're convinced that the sensors we have now have resolved the problem we saw on the last flight." (W Post, Aug 15/85, A8)
A U.S. House Appropriations subcommittee approved a resolution to release $1.5 billion frozen in Congress the previous year for an additional 21 MX missiles, the Washington Post reported. The vote, expected in the defense subcommittee that had supported the MX in the past, was only the first in a series of votes required before funds could be released. But missile opponents acknowledged that the vote was indicative of the uphill battle they faced in trying to defeat the MX in the midst of renewed arms control talks with the Soviets. The Reagan Administration had lobbied hard for the previous two weeks to win release of the funds, contending that continued funding of the MX was crucial to the arms control talks that had opened in Geneva. MX missile supporters on the subcommittee argued that the administration should not be denied a weapon that could be a "bargaining chip" in the arms talks. On the other hand, opponents characterized the missile as "the glass jaw in our strategic forces" and "totally irrelevant" to the arms talks. The resolution would next come before the full committee, which had backed it in the past. Observers agreed the real fight over the missile would occur on the Senate and House floors. Under a complicated arrangement worked out the previous year, representatives of the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democratic-control led House had agreed that the MX legislation would be sent to the floor of both chambers regardless of what action was taken at the committee level. (W Post, Mar 13/85, A4)
NASA announced that June Gibbs Brown, appointed NASA's inspector general June 1981 by President Reagan, would leave March 10 to become vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer of System Development Corp. Prior to her NASA service, Brown served as inspector general for the Department of Interior and worked for the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, and had been director of the audit division of the U.S. Navy Finance Center. Brown held bachelor and master degrees in business administration and a Juris Doctor from the University of Denver School of Law. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/85)
NASA's Thomas DeCair, associate administrator for external relations, announced today the appointment of Shirley Green as NASA's director of public affairs. She replaced Frank Johnson Jr., who was appointed assistant associate administrator for external relations (special projects). In her new position, Green would be responsible for planning and directing all NASA activities that provided information to and responded to inquiries from the public and the media. Green came to NASA with 20 years' experience in communications and management. Since 1981, as deputy and acting press secretary to the Vice President of the United States, she was responsible for planning and coordinating media activities for the Vice President on matters of domestic policy, including the task forces on regulatory relief and drug interdiction. She had accompanied the Vice President to 61 foreign countries, coordinating all media activities. Green was a former chairman of public affairs for the Texas Federation of Republican Women, press assistant to Congressman Bob Price, and a recipient of the Ten Outstanding Republican Women award in Texas. She received a bachelor of business administration degree in 1956 from the University of Texas. (NASA Release 85-168)
Dr. Leonard A. Fisk, Vice President for Research and Financial Affairs at the University of New Hampshire, was named NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective April 6, 1987. He replaced Dr. Burton I. Edelson. (NASA Release 8718)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement in Buenos Aires by Vice President Dan Quayle and Argentine President Carlos Menem on cooperation in the civil uses of space. A framework for future cooperative space projects between NASA and the newly created Argentine National Commission on Space Activities was established. NASA Release 91-126)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check for $87,500 to the Challenger Center for Space Science Education to support a national educational teleconference to be aired in the fall of 1992 on Discovery Networks. (Business Wire, Dec 10/91; LA Times, Dec 12/91)
The National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, developed a policy directive intended to strengthen the nation's commercial space industry. The policy creates guidelines requiring the government to act more like a private business in dealing with space-related enterprises. It calls for increased efforts to negotiate trade agreements to reduce or eliminate subsidies provided by foreign governments, including the Soviet Union, China, and Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. The policy would also encourage government agencies, particularly NASA and the Defense Department, to support space activity by entering into cooperative research and development efforts with private industry and assuming some of the financial risk; basing contracts with rocket and satellite makers on "performance standards" rather than complex military specifications; and taking into account the government's overhead and development costs in assessing bids by private firms. (P Inq, Feb 12/91; UPI, Feb 13/91)
President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle received the crew of the Columbia Shuttle and their spouses. (UPI, Jan 10/91)
The press reported that the subcommittee on investigations and oversight of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on August 1 examined NASA's functioning at a hearing entitled "NASA's Midlife Crisis." The chairman of the subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, cited the need for NASA to be a "prudent steward" and expressed a lack of confidence in NASA's ability to carry out its mission. Various industry representatives testified about NASA's operations and its contracting. NASA inspector general Bill D. Colvin said NASA had failed to keep a sharp eye on its programs, operations, and contractors, resulting in the waste of millions of dollars. (W Post, Aug 2/91; B Sun, Aug 2/91; LA Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; AvWk, Aug 5/91)
TRW Inc. said it had named R. Gordon Williams to succeed Daniel S. Goldin, the new head of NASA, as vice president and general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group. Williams, 61, was formerly vice president and general manager of TRS's Federal Systems division, which manages TRW's major space systems and projects for NASA. (UPI, Apr 13/92)
Representative Richard J. Durbin, Illinois Democrat, and Senator Dale Bumpers, Arkansas Democrat, released a GAP analysis that said the space agency was committing itself to more projects than it could expect the country to pay for. "In short, it is chasing too much programs for too few dollars." (W Times, Feb 28/92: AP, Feb 27/92)
It was reported that Vice President Dan Quayle's National Space Council had tightened its control over space activities by dividing NASA's responsibility for the U.S. moon-Mars project among several government agencies. Quayle released a directive, approved by the president, that assigns "major roles" to the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy while establishing NASA as the principal agency. (Mercury News, Mar 14/92)
State Senator Gary K. Hart of California authored a bill which would require the Department of Commerce to create a special program for assisting commercial space ventures that originate in California. Under the proposal, the Commerce Department would boost California as the place to launch commercial space ventures. (LA Times, May 17/92)
President Clinton signed legislation on August 2 authorizing $8 million for planning and design of a $162 million National Air and Space Museum building near Dulles International Airport. (AP, Aug 4/93)
The press reported that the House Appropriations Sub-Committee on Energy and Water had appropriated $629 million for the Superconducting Super Collider for fiscal year 1994. The Clinton Administration had requested $640 million for the Collider. (UPI, June 10/93)
The Clinton Administration decided to increase funding and continue work on the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider under construction in Texas, according to Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and other sources. Krueger said that Clinton's Office of Management and Budget had budgeted the project at $640 million for fiscal 1994, a 24 percent increase over the current year's spending levels. However, just before he left office last month, outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said that the 1994 funding level would have to be $1.2 billion to keep the project on schedule for completion by the end of the decade. (W Post, Feb 17/93)
The New York Times reported that a dispute had broken out in the Clinton Administration over Vice President Al Gore's attempts to convince President Clinton to fulfill a campaign pledge to reduce the threat of global warming. Gore urged
NASA appeared to be receiving little attention from the Clinton Administration. Neither Administration representatives
The Clinton Administration announced that it had launched a complete review of U.S. policy toward cutting global-warming pollution, but had not yet abandoned the stance taken by the Bush Administration. (B Sun, Mar 16/93)
Daniel J. Jones, 80, a senior aeronautical engineer who retired in 1973 after 20 years with the Army Material Command, died January 23 after a heart attack. He served in the Navy from 1941 to 1953, and had tours of duty with the naval Aviation Engineering Division in the South Pacific during World War II and with the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington during the Korean War. (W Post, Jan 26/93)
Defense Secretary Les Aspin announced that the Clinton Administration would continue work on anti-missile weapons but that Reagan's "Star Wars" program was being reduced to small-scale research and renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. In California alone, the cutback threatened more than $1 billion in annual contracts and thousands of jobs, according to economists in the area. (NY Times, May 14/93; LA Times, May 14/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy advisory board released a report stating that "The U.S. government's organization of space activities is not appropriate for the post-Cold War era." The report noted that space bureaucracy must be simplified and centralized and that more technology must be shared between government and industry. It also called U.S. space launch capabilities inefficient and unsafe. (W Post, Jan 5/93; Space News, Jan 5/93)
The Senate approved legislation during the previous week requiring the Smithsonian Institution to build a proposed annex to the National Air and Space Museum near Dulles International Airport.  The bill already had passed the House, and President Clinton was expected to sign it. (W Post, Jul 26/93)
NASA was expanding its efforts to make procurement information readily accessible on the Internet. In the procurement reform act signed by President Clinton the previous week, NASA was granted authority to test soliciting bids for mid-range procurement (from $25,000 to $500,000 annually) on the Internet. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
Lockheed Space Operations Company in Titusville announced that 183 personnel would lose their jobs as a result of NASA budget cuts. Lockheed was the main contractor in a $607 million-a-year shuttle processing agreement with NASA. (Fla Today, May 10/94)
Space, Inc., a Clear Lake company, and its vice president Leonard N. Jackson, pleaded guilty in a federal undercover probe of fraud among NASA contractors and employees. (H Chron, Nov 16/94)
Vice President Al Gore's Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program was described. GLOBE was a joint effort among the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), NASA, the EPA, and private contributors. Funding was proposed in the budget at $13 million: $7 million from NOAA, $5 million from NASA, and $1 million from EPA. The goal was to promote technical education while collecting environmental data. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 13/94)
A press report said that President Clinton was expected to meet with about 20 former admirals and generals to seek their advice on national security issues.  Among those who were expected to attend was Vice Adm. Richard H. Truly, former Head of NASA. (AP Jan 8/95)
Advanced Communication Systems Inc. announced that the Naval Air Systems Command had awarded its Aerospace Division a five-year contract with option years. The Naval Air Systems Command intended the US$46 million Aircraft Structural Life Surveillance contract to assist the U.S. Navy in developing, verifying, executing, and enhancing methods and processes for monitoring aircraft structural fatigue. Advanced Communication’s Aerospace Division Vice President Thomas M. Brennan remarked that the contract covered air vehicle technology that would “have application across all military services, as well as NASA and the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].”(PR Newswire, “ACS Wins $46 Million Aircraft Structures Contract,” 5 April 1999.)
President William J. Clinton signed into law H. R. 1654, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, authorizing funding for “a robust space and aeronautics program for the Nation.” Clinton commended bipartisan efforts to pass an authorization bill funding NASA’s priorities, such as building the ISS, improving Space Shuttle safety, and using the Space Launch Initiative to reduce the cost of access to space. However, Clinton criticized the bill for limiting “NASA’s flexibility to pursue a promising commercial habitation module” for the ISS, saying that the bill included several “objectionable provisions” and only one of the 14 legislative provisions that his administration had proposed.(U.S. Newswire, “Clinton Statement on Signing of the ‘National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000’,” 30 October 2000.)
Federal investigators concluded that a series of avoidable mistakes had caused the fatal crash of the chartered King Air A100 carrying Senator Paul D. Wellstone (D-MN) on 25 October 2002. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that the two charter pilots had possessed inferior flying skills, they had twice failed to align the twin-engine turboprop on the proper course for an instrument landing, and they had subsequently permitted the airspeed to drop to dangerously low levels. The craft had stalled and plummeted into the woods, killing all eight on board. The NTSB recommended that the FAA improve inspections of on-demand charter companies in an effort to improve pilot training and in-flight procedures. The NTSB report also recommended that the FAA and NASA create a special technical panel to study the feasibility of “low airspeed alert systems,” which would automatically warn pilots, especially those of small aircraft, of conditions that could lead to a disastrous stall.(Ricardo Alonso-Zalvidar, “Pilots Are Blamed in Wellstone Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 2003. 173)
NASA announced that engineers from NASA’s JPL, working as part of an agency-wide team, had successfully tested the first deep space communications network modeled on the Internet. NASA, in partnership with Vinton G. Cerf, a Vice President at Google, had designed the software, called Disruption-Tolerant Networking (DTN). Unlike the Internet’s Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) communication suite, DTN did not assume end-to- to-end connection, enabling it to withstand delays and disconnections in space. Instead of discarding information that could not reach its destination, each of DTN’s network nodes could store information until it could safely communicate with the next node. Engineers had begun testing DTN in October 2008, transmitting dozens of space images. As a Mars data-relay orbiter, they had used NASA’s Epoxi spacecraft, which was approximately 20 million miles (32,186,880 kilometers) from Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests First Deep Space Internet,” news release 08-298, 18 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-298_Deep_space_internet.html (accessed 22 August 2011). 147 NASA, “NASA and DOE Collaborate on Dark Energy Research,” news release 08-300, 19 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08300_NASA_DOE.html (accessed 22 August 2008).)
