At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
NASA released “Evaluation of U.S.S.R. versus U.S. Output in Space Science,” a study prepared for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
President Kennedy requested Congress to approve legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Final report of House Committee on Science and Astronautics relating to their hearings on “Commercial Applications of Space Communications Systems” released, having among its conclusions: (1)	Because of worldwide interest and potential usefulness of a space communications system, the U.S. Government must “retain maximum flexibility regarding the central question of ownership and operation of the system.” (2)	NASA will not only evaluate the various commercial proposals but will “conduct all space launches and retain direct control over all launching equipment, facilities, and personnel.” (3)	Research and development of military space communications systems should continue to be conducted by DOD but all research and development in space communications “should be conducted under the general supervision of NASA in accordance with its statutory mandate to 'plan, direct, and conduct aeronautical and space activities’ ” as well as evaluate the technical merits of proposed systems.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson began tour of west coast missile and space installations.
Vice President Johnson announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council had reached unanimous agreement on the national communications satellite policy, and unspecified recommendation transmitted to President Kennedy.
Resolutions calling for the creation of an international space year program and an international space agency, both under the auspices of the United Nations, introduced in the Senate by Senator Hubert Humphrey.
Congressman Overton Brooks, of Louisiana, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics since its creation in January 1959, died at Betkesda Naval Hospital.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, a former aid to Senator Symington, was nominated by the President to be the Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council,
President Kennedy assigned Vice President Johnson the task of unifying the Nation’s communications satellite programs, in a letter which stressed urgency and “highest priority” for the public interest.
House and Senate approved bill to permit Vice President of the United States to serve as Chairman of the National Space Council.
Navy told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that Polaris could be used as a mobile satellite launch vehicle.
President Kennedy signed legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, Senator Hubert H. Humphrey as chairman, submitted report on “Coordination of Information on Current Research and Development Supported by the U.S. Government.” It recommended innovations be developed to aid the management and conduct of research.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before the House Appropriations Committee that getting the same information contained in the cloud structure photographs taken by the Tiros I weather satellite would have required thousands of weather ships over the Pacific. With Tiros I, he said, “for the first time man had a complete look at the weather over a large segment of the Earth’s surface.”
Senator Robert Kerr announced that he would introduce legislation to authorize private ownership of the U.S. portion of the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. His bill would create the “Satellite Communications Corp.” which the participating firms would buy.
In testimony before House Appropriations Committee, Hugh L. Dryden revealed that simulated free-flight speeds just under 30,000 miles per hour had been achieved at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Senator Robert S. Kerr, chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told a group at the National Radio and Television Convention that President Kennedy accepted the views of NASA and congressional leaders in approving the manned Mercury-Redstone flight of May 5.
In speech at the American Rocket Society, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
