House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended that Project Anna mapping satellite program be transferred from jurisdiction of dod to nasa. The satellite was designed to give extremely accurate measurements of the shape of the earth, its magnetic field, and distances from one point to another on earth.
Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke on the floor on the coordination of information between dod, nasa, and aec, and inserted in the record a memo of June 13, 1962, in which he criticized nasa’s information exchanges. He stated: “nasa has developed highly advanced blueprints, so to speak, for information exchange. . . . The blueprints are a long way from realization. . . . [nasa] possesses, moreover, in-house personnel and a principal information contractor with a very high degree of professional competence.”
Alexander V. Topchiev, vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died in Moscow. Winner of the 1949 Stalin Prize and twice winner of the Order of Lenin, Topchiev was believed to have played a major role in the development of new rocket fuels and had attended many important international conferences since 1960. He had recently declared that “war is no longer possible” and had advocated East-West collaboration on nuclear space propulsion.
In statement before the House Space Subcommittee, Grant L. Hansen, Vice President of the Astronautics Division of General Dynamics and Director of the Centaur program, stated that preliminary data on May 9 explosion indicated that structural failure was caused by the “design of the weather shield between the nose fairing and the Centaur itself” and the design of weather shield “was an engineering mistake.” Design of the weather shield was based, he said, upon assumptions that “turned out to be false . . ., very difficult to define by laboratory analysis and without full-scale wind-tunnel tests.” In spite of program delays, Hansen said that the Centaur program had been subjected to “unwarranted criticisms.”
The House of Representatives (342-0) approved the nasa authorization for FY 1963 of $3.67 billion. This was almost three times the nasa budget for FY 1962.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on $3.7-blliion nasa authorization request. Administrator Webb, Robert R. Gilruth (Director msc), and Astronauts Glenn, Grissom, and Shepard appeared as witnesses. Mr. Webb outlined nasa’s projected program to be covered in detail in subsequent testimony: (1) total ten year program ahead may cost over $35 blliion; (2) new astronaut training program to include scientists wlli be announced shortly; (3) future manned spacecraft wlli be capable of landing on land or water; (4) nasa is opposed to using astronauts as goodwlli ambassadors, as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of nasa’s budget wlli be spent through industry and universities. Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be prepared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as the three we have had so far ... I hope we wlli always have the confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact there wlli be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness and enthusiasm as we now are.”
The Senate passed nasa authorization for FY 1963 (H.R. 11737) of $3,820,515,520. Amendments submitted by Senator William Proxmire to require competitive bidding on space projects and to establish a presidential commission to study the impact of the space program upon the nation’s manpower were both defeated by lopsided votes. Senate authorization restored $116 million cut by the House.
Dr. Edward Teller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended a program for establishing a large and independent colony on the moon, as a means of having a working base in space and control of near space from a standpoint of national security. A nuclear reactor should be developed to operate on the moon, eventually to furnish the power to extract water from the moon’s rocks and soil, he said.
Subcommittee of House Committee on Science ana Astronautics issued report on solid-propellant rocket motors for Nova-class vehicles: “If the cancellation of this development program [solids for Nova] is based on the cost factor alone, then the committee feels that nasa should review the events of the past. For it was this approach in the development of our icbm that gave the U.S.S.R. their superbooster and the resultant lead in space exploration which the U.S. is still struggling to overcome. The United States cannot afford a second setback of this magnitude. . . . “The committee is struck by the large amount of manpower and time that both the dod and nasa have devoted to coordination in trying to reach an agreement and the extended delay in starting even the most basic development program.” Committee recommended giving nasa the funding responsibility for continuation of solid-propelled motor effort, since there exists no direct mllitary requirement for the large boosters.
Pioneer naval aviator, Vice Admiral Patrick N. L. Bellinger, died. In 1915, Bellinger became the second American flier to be launched by catapult, established flying boat distance record, established altitude record of 10,000 feet, and participated in aerial spotting for artillery fire. In 1916, he made naval tests of live bombing and practical tests of air-to-ground radio communication. In 1917, he made machine-gun firing tests from seaplane and first night seaplane flights using floodlights. In May 1919, he commanded the NC-1 in transatlantic flight to the Azores, damage to aircraft ended the flight there. During World War II, he was commander of the Atlantic Fleet Air Force.
Walter C. Scott, Chief of nasa’s Space Power Technology Program, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said one of the promising developments in solar cells was the possibility of producing thin strips of silicon solar cells on some kind of substrata. If this can be done, the “much lower cost, lower weight and improved mechanical properties wlli be attractive to the space industry and for that matter to the civilian economy. Thin films of cadmium sulfide have been produced in small areas with conversion efficiencies of 3%. It has been stated that if this efficiency collid be increased to 5% and produced in large areas, solar power wollid be economically competitive with conventional sources at rates of 3 to 4 mils per kilowatt hour.”
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
Rep. James G. Fulton, senior Republican on the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in an interview: “There’s no doubt our overall space program is slipping despite the high words and fine praise coming from the White House ... If it continues to slip, we’ll be lucky to get a man on the moon before 198°.” _ ...
U.S. patent (No. 3,008,154) was granted to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin for a rocket to be used in detecting strength and polarity of electric fields in clouds. Such data could then be used in control of cloud movements and in effecting weather changes. Patent was first applied for in 1948 but until now was kept secret at request of dod. Dr. Zworykin is a consultant to the Princeton Laboratories of rca and honorary vice president of rca.
Senator John L. McClellan recommended establishment of a Senate commission on science and technology to study Government’s growing scientific programs, including the desirability of a Cabinet post for science and technology.
nasa announced appointment of Robert H. Charles as procurement consllitant to the Administrator. Charles previously had served as executive vice president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp.
Speaking on the floor of the Senate, Senator Thomas Dodd supported statements by Senator Cannon on August 20, and added: “The primary goals of our foreign policy, as I see it, are first, the protection of our Nation; second, the maintenance and extension of freedom; and third, the preservation of peace. . . . Our ability to protect our freedoms and preserve the peace depends ... on our military power in-being—on land, on sea, in the air and, tomorrow, in space. ... “I earnestly hope that it will prove possible to maintain our scientific space program and our moon program intact while instituting an immediate program to bolster our flagging military effort in space. . . . “The reorganization of our space effort will require a number of changes. First, and preceding everything else, there must be a change in policy, which clearly and publicly assigns a greater emphasis to the military potentialities of space. . . . “Second, there must be a specific directive to the Defense Department to proceed as a matter of the utmost urgency with the development of military space systems, in particular of manned space vehicles . . . “Third, I believe that while proceeding with the development of specialized military spacecraft, our Military Establishment should be authorized to embark immediately on a launching program of its own for manned space vehicles, perhaps employing modified versions of the equipment now under development by NASA. . . . “Fourth, to support the establishment of military launching and vehicle development programs, our astronaut training program will have to be stepped up, and military personnel will have to be trained in the use of the complex monitoring and control systems that constitute the brain of our entire space vehicle effort. “Fifth, our defense program in space wlli have to be provided with whatever money may be necessary to achieve its objectives, and to overtake the Soviet lead in manned space vehicles. “Sixth, the machinery of cooperation between nasa and Defense wlli have to be overhauled in a manner which gives due consideration to the requirements of defense as well as to the requirements of science. . . .”
Soviet scientists claimed to have discovered the third radiation belt around the earth and published such findings two years before the findings of explorer xii were made public by nasa on January 19, 1962. Academician Blagonravov, Vice President of the International Committee on Space Research, said in an Izvestia interview that the existence of a dense belt with energies of 200 to 20,000 electron volts at a distance of 25.000	to 50,000 miles was recorded by Soviet space launchings in 1958. Such findings, he said, were published by Dr. K. Gringauz and associates in the February and April issues of the Soviet Academy oj Sciences Proceedings in 1960, and in later publications. Commenting on the view that the three radiation belts really formed a single large pulsating band that might be called a “magnetosphere,” Blagonravov agreed that the boundaries might be arbitrary but that the charged particles in each belt had distinctive characteristics and that it would be “inexpedient” to reject the theory of three belts.
nasa announced appointment of Walter L. Lingle, Jr., as Special Assistant to the Administrator and, temporarily, as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Formerly executive vice president of Proctor and Gamble, Mr. Lingle served three months as Deputy Administrator of aid just prior to nasa appointment.
House Appropriations Committee cut a $65 million nasa item for purchase of land at Cape Canaveral and in Mississippi from a supplemental appropriations bill for the balance of FY 1962. The action was taken because the House Science and Astronautics Committee had not authorized the expenditure. Approved was $80 million for development, $5 million less than nasa asked for.
John L. Sloop, nasa’s Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “. . . some of the new solid propellants promise an increase in performance of over 18 percent. ... If applied to our new Surveyor spacecraft designed to land instruments on the moon, this 18 percent increase in solid propellant specific impulse could make possible an increase in the weight of instruments aboard by more than 50 percent.”
In address at dedication of the nasa Space Exhibit at the Seattle World’s Fair, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said that “our entire space program now costs each American about 30 cents a week. During the next few years we plan to spend about 50 cents a week per person on space. “However, our space program and its by-products will stimulate a sharp increase in the nation’s productive output which in turn will increase our gross national product, our income, and the Federal Government’s intake . . . “. . . we are hopeful of achieving fruitful cooperation with the Soviet Union in such fields as communications, weather forecasting, mapping the earth’s magnetic fields and space medicine. “We feel that cooperation in outer space may establish a firm basis for greater mutual understanding—which in turn will help in our efforts to obtain disarmament . . . “The responsibility to cooperate also lies heavily on the other great space power—the Soviet Union. I am able to tell you in a spirit of cautious optimism that the Soviet Union appears to realize that—in outer space, at least—there may be something to be gained by cooperatingwith the rest of humanity.”
Senator Margaret Chase Smith, in a radio interview with Senator Kenneth B. Keating, expressed doubt on the value of space cooperation with the U.S.S.R. A member of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, Sen. Smith said the U.S. had “decided superiority over Russia on really important space development. Russia has the edge over us on thrust power but when it comes to finer scientific space developments and information, we have great superiority over Russia. Perhaps one of our greatest areas of superiority is in the development of miniaturization. I think we could learn something from Russia but there is a question as to just how far we can trust her and what we get in return.”
George C. Barnhart, pioneer airman and inventor, died in Pasadena. Barnhart held 70 aircraft patents, including one for wing tanks. In 1942, he had turned over his patent for split-edge wing flap, a landing brake used on conventional and jet aircraft, to the Army Air Forces for the duration of the war, thousands of planes being built 1946-51 using the Barnhart flap for which he received no royalties as World War II had (not been officially ended. He had intended to sue the Government for $10 million.
John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ordnance Association meeting that a great potential defense capability lay untapped in industry—particularly in heavy, mass-producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of developing and maintaining broad defense and space capability throughout industry had not been adequately realized or defined, Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to wartime production. Such preparedness would mean, at a minimum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of defense technology in areas of natural interest to it. Such preparedness could also involve a broader distribution of space and defense research and development effort, as well as of production, on a systematic basis. . . . “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous demands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and efficient use of them. ...”
Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in achieving manned space flight.
Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N. Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of his concept, design, and development work with the Echo satellite.
H.R. 12812, blli to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 regarding property rights in inventions by private companies under nasa contract, was reported from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
Senator Estes Kefauver (D-Tenn.) announced nasa proposed patent regulations would “flout the clear legislative intent underlying the nasa Act of 1958.” Urging nasa not to adopt the regulations he contended they would impede the space program, increase monopoly “in an already concentrated industry,” and give private industry the fruits of research financed publicly. Franz Olson, of Aerospace Industries Association, said at the nasa hearing that proposed patent waiver regulations would lead to an increase in inventions through “the proven incentives of the patent system.” Senator Russell B. Long (D-La.) charged the patent proposals would give “patent monopolies” to the industry on developments resulting from publicly financed research. Senator Long said Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee would conduct hearings on the proposed regulations in January.
First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first transatlantic TV transmission, when telstar experimental communications satellite of at&t demonstrated vast new capabilities. Pictures were telecast from at&t center near Andover, Me., to telstar, then received and placed on all three major TV networks in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover, Me., to telstar, and then relayed to French antenna at Pleu-meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station at Goonhilly, Cornwall. In American relay experiment via telstar, at*t Board Chairman Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in Washington. In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of waving American flag was transmitted via telstar to both France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV networks. First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from usaf Project Score satellite on December 18, 1960. echo i, passive communications satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also had been used as a reflector in communications experiments, the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army Signal Corps.
Congressman George Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on the House floor in acknowledgment of successflli Soviet space flights of vostok iii and iv. Senator Alexander Wiley acknowledged the event on the Senate floor and pointed to need for advancing the U.S. space program.
Satellite Communications Corporation” bills were introduced by Senator Robert Kerr (S. 2650) and by Rep. George Miller (H.R. 9696), which would amend the nasa Act by adding a new section which would declare that it is “the policy of the United States to provide leadership in the establishment of a worldwide communications system involving the use of space satellites.” The section would create a “Satellite Communication Corporation” which would be privately owned and managed, and which would develop and operate a communications satellite system.
Senator Wiley of Wisconsin urged that Congress before adjournment conduct hearings on the military implications of U.S.S.R. two-man orbital space flights.
nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, briefed the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (lor) procedure which nasa announced as the prime mission mode for the initial manned lunar landing.
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in press interview that the greatest accomplishment of Soviet vostok iii and iv flight was putting two men in orbit and bringing them close together. “They’re well ahead in that respect. But we can meet that in a couple of years. We’ll be ahead when Titan 3 is ready.”
Senate voted (63-27) to invoke cloture rule on communications satellite debate, cutting off the filibuster against the bill and limiting each Senator to an hour of speaking time.
Vice President Johnson sent a congratulatory telegram to members of the oscar amateur radio satellite team: “For me this project is symbolic of the type of freedom for which this country stands— freedom of enterprise and freedom of participation on the part of individuals throughout the world.” oscar i was launched with discoverer xxxvi on December 12, 1961.
Sharp rise in heating of re-entry vehicles returning from manned lunar missions at speeds of 25,000 mph was described to the subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa. Mr. Ames stated that a simulation study at nasa’s Ames Research Center had “demonstrated Eeat promise for pilot-controlled re-entries during orbital and nar missions, and we plan to extend our work in this area.”
National Academy of Sciences awarded the J. Lawrence Smith Medal for outstanding achievement in the investigation of meteoric bodies to Dr. Harold C. Urey of the University of California of San Diego. The award was based upon Dr. Urey’s many publications on the chemical composition of meteorites, only one of his most recent fields of interest. He received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1934. After World War II he launched into speculations concerning the origin of the solar system, the cosmic abundance of the elements, the composition and structure of the moon and the planets, the latter work depending upon his chemical analysis of meteorites.
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, summarized the year’s activities of the committee in speech on House floor: “It has been another busy year for the committee, highlighted by action on the fourth annual budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, now rapidly approaching the $4 billion mark. In addition to the intensive study the space budget underwent, the committee also conducted 26 investigations, issued 16 reports, held 124 days of hearings, and heard 236 witnesses. “Indicative of the committee’s activity is the more than 2,175,000	words of testimony taken this year incorporated into approximately 3,860 pages of printed hearings. . . .”
In joint letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Robert S. Kerr and Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “The world must of necessity admire the remarkable achievements of the Soviet Union in the field of space. A shadow is thrown over the entire space effort through their refusal to admit to failures. . . . “We feel it is important that if the U.S. Government possesses any information relative to unsuccessful attempts by the Soviet Union to launch a spacecraft to Venus, or other planetary probes, that this information should be made available to our committees and to the American people.”
In testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Gen. Bernard Schriever, Commander of afsc, discussed the “reciprocal support” between nasa and the usaf, and the national requirement for mllitary space weapons systems. He pointed out that: (1) 102 usaf officers were assigned full-time with nasa as well as 23 Navy and 33 Army; (2) $49 millions of nasa support was funded by the usaf through FY 61 and over $200 millions in FY 62; (3) $270 millions of nasa funds were processed under cognizance of afsc during FY 61; and (4) nasa use of usaf booster, launch, and tracking capabllities and the joint X-15 program further demonstrated “the work nasa and the Air Force are doing together as a team.” Gen. Schriever pointed to the fundamental capabilities of future space weapon systems and the assignment by the Secretary of Defense of major responsibility for mllitary space systems development to the Air Force.
Jessie G. Vincent, automotive and airplane engine designer and holder of over 400 patents, died in Detroit at age 82. Vice president of the Packard Motor Car Co. from 1915 to 1948, Mr. Vincent was codesigner of the Liberty Marine engine in World War I and as an Army major helped get the Liberty engine into production, at which time it was regarded as the world’s finest power plant of its kind.
Senator John L. McClellan addressed the Senate on S. 2631, designed to prevent strikes which would “obstruct our vital missile, space, and other programs, the success of which are indispensable to national prestige, security, and well-being.”
Senator Hubert Humphrey, in hearings of the Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, told Melvin S. Day, Director of nasa Office of Scientific and Technical Information: “Mr. Day, I want to commend you for blueprinting one of the finest intra-agency systems in the Federal government today in the information field and, of course, I speak of nasa. While the work is being done by private contractor, it is you who have set the high standards for performance. . . . We feel what has been done within the agency, from our limited examination, is an outstanding job, and we want to compliment you on it.” During October: Geophysical Institute of University of Alaska reported to nasa that specially instrumented sounding rockets would be desirable for measuring extent of solar cosmic rays associated with ionization of the upper atmosphere. Auroral-zone absorption disturbances make ground measurements difficult.
13-min. radio program relayed from New York via telstar satellite to Europe, where it was broadcast by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to audiences in U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries. Program featured message on U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear disarmament by Senator Hubert H. Humphrey.
Subcommittee on Patents of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics released its report following three years of study of the operation of the patent provisions of the Space Act of 1958. The report of the subcommittee headed by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario contended the patent provisions that gave the Government title to most inventions resulting from NASA-financed research were damaging to small business, cost the taxpayer money, diluted the national space effort, and made industry reluctant to market the products of such research. Recommended that patent ownership in most cases be turned over to industry, with Government retaining royalty-free use. A minority report by Rep. William F. Ryan pointed out that with almost 95% of Government research money “going to big business, retention of title by the contractors will inevitably bring about concentration of technology and economic power.”
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
dod announced selection of contractor for 22 test models of tfx aircraft (tactical fighter, experimental), the Convair Division of General Dynamics, with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation as an associate. Based upon much work at Langley Research Center, tfx fighter was designed in usaf and usn versions, h aving variable geometry wings for flight speeds up to 1,650 mph. Contract which would procure up to 1,500 aircraft was said to be bigger than “any fighter aircraft program since World War II in both numbers and dollars.”
Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Estes Kefauver reiterated Ms belief that the communications satellite blli (H.R. 11040) “proposed the most gigantic giveaway in the history of this country. It wollid turn over to a govemmentally created private monopoly the benefits of hundreds of mlliions of dollars of taxpayers’ money which have been invested in the development of space and satellite communications technology. ...”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved a bill to revise space research patent laws. Bill allowed private companies to retain title to patents earned under Government contract, with Government retaining a license to use such inventions without cost.
White House announced President Kennedy would visit military and civilian missile and rocket installations at Cape Canaveral, Fla.; Huntsville, Ala.; Houston, Tex.; and St. Louis, Mo., on September 11-12. President Kennedy would be accompanied by Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNamara, nasa Administrator Webb, bob director David E. Bell, and several Congressmen. Purpose of trip was “to study the work being done in this most important area and in connection with the preparation of the fiscal year 1964 budget. . . .”
Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, headed by Rep. Victor Anfuso, opened hearings on the role of women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb, representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space qualification tests at the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts. Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that “there is no doubt in the world that women will go into space.”
During hearings of the Joint Senate and House Economic Committee, Senator Paul H. Douglas stated that “the public has never really had a chance to consider” the space program and that one third of the members of the American Astronautical Society had indicated in a poll that “a man landing on the moon was not desirable.” Budget Director David E. Bell stoutly defended the space program. Senator Sparkman questioned Senator Douglas: “I wonder whether Congress felt the same way when it put up money for Samuel Morse” to develop the telegraph.
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (iam strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry appointed by the President began their investigation of the “union shop” conflict. During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in FY 1963 funds to begin construction of facllities at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr). Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support facilities. During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere.
Tracking network that operated during Glenn orbital flight would for the most part be sufficient to handle the 18-orbit flights to follow, according to Edmond C. Buckley, nasa’s Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. For the Glenn flight, the ground stations had to provide five minutes of contact and communication for every 15 minutes of flight during the 4K-hour mission. For 18 orbits the current requirement was one contact per orbit. This would require repositioning of the two ship stations and adding more telemetryreceiving equipment and command systems to some of the existing sites.
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told the press that “since the orbiting of the Soviet twin Cosmonauts, the agitation [among members of the Senate, professional military societies, and the trade press] borders on panic and constitutes a threat to a program which is not only very important but complex and carefully planned. ... I have been a consistent advocate of a mllitary capability in space for the United States second to none, but I see no reason why our military requirements cannot be met without hamstringing or jeopardizing the civil space program. . . . There has been so much misinformation and misimpression generated about our space program, both the civil and military aspects, that I can no longer remain silent. The record has to be set straight and I intend to do it.” He said he would deliver a major speech on the House floor later this week, when he would place the space program into “balanced perspective.”
In extended action on the floor of the Senate, Senators Russell B. Long, Albert Gore, Estes Kefauver, and Wayne Morse opposed the passage of the Administration’s amended communications satellite system bill (S. 2814) previously brought out of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Senator Long charged that the Senate had been subjected to lobbying “the like of which the Congress had never seen before” on the private ownership of the proposed communications satellite system, and he was questioned by Senator John O. Pastore, the bill’s floor manager.
Sir Frederick Handley Page, British aviation pioneer, and chairman and managing director of Handley Page Ltd., died in London at age 76. Inventor of the slotted wing, he provided England with its first bombers in 1915 and his Halifax bomber of World War II, of which more than 60,000 were produced, was a key weapon of raf Bomber Command.
The Air Force Space Plan, a ten-year blue-print for military space technology, was given to a House committee by Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, dcs/r&t. The Space Plan foresaw a mllitary need for rendezvous, docking, and transfer. The usaf expected to depend on a manned rendezvous vehicle, using the two-man Gemini, built by nasa, as an initial vehicle. The Space Plan was sent to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board for review.
Experimental new method of producing synthesis of chemicals with low-energy ions was reported by Rocket Power, Inc., a solid-propellant manufacturer. Milton Farber, vice president and director of laboratories, and Dr. Stanley Singer, chief chemist, indicated several new compounds had been produced. Mr. Farber said the ion-synthesis method could produce rocket propellants perhaps 10 per cent more efficient than any now available in U.S. “The key is the speed of the ions. If the beam of ions meets the target chemical at too high a rate, shattering occurs. By controlling the velocity of the ions, they can be made to merge with the chemical, creating a new compound.” Research project was sponsored by usaf oar.
Each of the series of weather satellites, Tiros, Nimbus, and Aeros, would not only provide an advance in capability but would extend observations into vital new areas, Morton J. Stoller, nasa’s Director of Applications, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Speaking of Nimbus and Aeros, he said: “With one Nimbus in orbit, about half a day passes before we again see the same area. This will be a reasonably satisfactory time for the observation of such systems as cyclonic storms and hurricanes whose normal life is considerably greater than 12 hours. But, if we attempt to observe thunderstorm cells or tornadoes, systems whose life is appreciably less than 12 hours and often less than 6 hours wlli usually form, move and die without ever being detected. It is for this reason that the Aeros satellite with its capability for focusing on small short-lived storm systems and tracking them continuously, is considered to be an integral component of the eventual operational system.”
North American Aviation expected to pass its peak World War II employment figure of 93,000 persons within the next 90 days, its current corporate employment now being at 90,000. Rocket-dyne Division has grown from 11,000 to 13,000 employees within the past year.
Agreement establishing U.S.-Italy cooperative space program, signed in May, was confirmed in Rome by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The Memorandum of Understanding between nasa and the Italian Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial orbit. Generally, nasa would provide the Scout rockets and personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued report based on nasa’s authorization hearings and two days of specific testimony on the Centaur program.
Escape-velocity payloads with the nuclear-engine Rift as the 3rd stage on an Advanced Saturn booster wollid be more than double that of a 3-stage, all-chemical Advanced Saturn and higher than that of the Nova 12-mlliion-pound-thrust vehicle, according to testimony given to a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Harold B. Finger, nasa’s Director of Nuclear Systems.
In speech to the National Rocket Club, Senator Barry Goldwater said: “I am convinced that the American people fully endorse space preeminence for the United States. This is our long-range goal as a nation. . . . Space superiority in all its scientific, technological, and military aspects is fundamental to the future well-being, security, and prosperity of the United States . . . “As a new agency, nasa has picked up a momentum, a direction and a purposefulness directed toward long-range research and development which is one of impressive merit . . . “From all I can observe, the relationship between nasa and the Air Force in the space program has proceeded fairly well to date. But I would point out that the Department of Defense is responsible for military affairs, not nasa. nasa is not a military service, and its broad-based program will undoubtedly contribute greatly to our own national military requirements. . . . The point I am trying to make is that the requirements of the United States for military programs in space should not be neglected in any vital aspect . . .”
According to the Washington Post, usaf second attempt to orbit belt of copper filaments in Project West Ford experiment was apparently inadvertently revealed by Eugene C. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The attempted orbiting was inferred to have been made sometime this summer, failed because of launch vehicle malfunction (first failure and only attempt publicized had been made on Oct. 21, 1961). Of this report, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Arthur Sylvester, said to the press: “The facts are that only one attempt has been made [to orbit tiny metal filaments] and the U.S. Air Force will coordinate with the National Academy of Sciences on any future attempt.” Confusion had arisen when the Washington Post had reported that the usaf had made an unsuccessful attempt to orbit such a payload during the summer.
Dr. Arthur E. Raymond was appointed a special consultant to the nasa Administrator. He would be concerned with organization and management of research and development programs, especially those involving advanced research and over-all systems planning. Dr. Raymond retired in 1960 as senior vice president of engineering for Douglas Aircraft Co., having spent 35 years with the company. He served as a member of naca from 19461956.
American Rocket Society gave Congressman George Miller of House Committee for Science and Astronautics a special award for his “outstanding leadership in space.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reportedly ordered an investigation of alleged government discrimination against women, naming in executive session Congressman Victor L. Anfuso as chairman of a special nine-man, two-woman investigation subcommittee.
nasa’s Director of Aeronautical Research, John Stack, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke of nasa support of dod missile programs: “Included in this work are such as Pershing, Atlas, Nike, Nike-Zeus, Eagle, gar-9 and Skybolt. The nasa contributions have been in two areas, one providing critical aerodynamic information for performance determination and control system characteristics and the other in suggesting configuration improvements to improve the over-all characteristics.”
John Rubel, Director of dod Office of Research and Development, testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that dod would undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and stated the military interest in weather satellite development was adequately protected by existing nasa and Weather Bureau programs.
Congressman John E. Moss, Chairman of the Government Information Subcommittee, wrote to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara asking why 1959 Army report “Project Horizon” was not yet declassified. Originally classified “Secret,” the study proposing manned lunar program culminating in 1965 lunar landing had 10 separate security reviews by 4 agencies, but it was still classified “official use only.” Congressman Moss observed that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics had requested declassified version of “Project Horizon” on Aug. 3, 1961, but had never received it.
Testimony of Feb. 27 by Prof. James A. Van Allen before the House Committee on Appropriations on the relative worth of instrumented unmanned satellites versus manned satellites was released. Van Allen was misquoted on the wire news services to the effect that manned space flight was of limited scientific value in the future.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that the revised usaf solid-propellant development program would cost considerably less than the $60 mlliion originally planned. He said that current program review ordered by Secretary of Defense and nasa Administrator had shown that solid-fuel program was larger than necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of the boosters. Once approved by the Secretary and the Administrator, the new master plan for solid-propellant boosters wollid limit the program to feasibility study, since neither dod nor nasa had specific mission requirements for their application.
Senator Howard W. Cannon of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences spoke on the floor on the short supply of scientists available to nasa and to its private industry contractors. He proposed a closer relationship between nasa and the universities: “We need to develop and develop from the beginning, space-oriented physicists, space engineers, space chemists, and space biologists.” He cited nasa’s cooperative program with universities established without the benefit of legislation, and said that he proposed to introduce legislation to amend the nasa Act for the purpose of: “(1) to increase the number of undergraduates who wlli make space science and space engineeringtheir primary field of work; (2) to provide nasa with clear directive and the necessary funds to establish an integrated and intimate program of research, fellowships, grants and curriculum specialization with universities . . .; and (3) to establish one or more university-operated space laboratories which wlli stimulate basic research and train professionals. . . .”
U.S.S.R. had shown a “change in attitude in recent weeks” on cooperating with the U.S. on development and use of a weather satellite system, Dr. Francis W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
nasa submitted to the Congress a draft nasa authorization for FY 1963 bill. It would provide legislative authority to support the nasa budget for FY 1963, and authorize nasa to spend $2,968,278,000 for research, development, and operations and $818,998,000 for construction of facilities.
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program. He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to man’s total knowledge that it wlli benefit and alter the course of his existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of the major benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new and uncharted areas. . . .”
Senator Albert Gore (D-Tenn.) told U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that U.S. was seeking following goals in space policy: “To be guided by the general principles already laid down by the United Nations for establishment of a regime of law in outer space, and to negotiate an extension of those principles by international agreement. “To conclude a treaty banning immediately the testing of any more nuclear weapons in outer space. “To preclude the placing in orbit of weapons of mass destruction. “To take all reasonable and practicable steps, including consultation with the world’s scientific community, to avoid space experiments with harmful effects. “To conduct a program which is as open as our security needs wlli permit and as cooperative as others are wlliing to make it. “To press forward with the establishment of an integrated global satellite communication system for commercial needs and a cooperative weather satellite system, both with broad international participation.”
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Dr. Howard S. Turner to the Industrial Applications Advisory Committee. Dr. Turner was vice president for r&d of Jones & Laugh-lin Steel Corp. and formerly president and a director of Industrial Research Institute.
Dr. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center, testifying before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed reports that Nimbus meteorological satellite system was 6 to 12 mo. behind schedule. Dr. Singer recommended the U.S. keep at least two Tiros satellites in orbit until Nimbus was ready.
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, told subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that he doubted the launch schedule for first Nimbus satellite could be accelerated and stated that the Nimbus program had never been considered “urgent.”
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, defended the U.S. space program in speech on floor of the House. Arguing that Soviet vostok in and iv manned orbital flights did not justify changes in the U.S. program, he said: “Certainly I will not stand here and say that more and better military space programs should not be undertaken. What I do say is that a considerable effort in this field has long been underway and that the Monday-morning quarterbacks whose teeth start chattering after every Russian ‘spectacular’ might exhibit a bit more faith in those who have the actual responsibility for the defense of the country. . . . “[We should not overlook] . . . the fact that the Soviets have now demonstrated two important capabilities: First, that they have sufficient launch facilities and rocket reliability to launch two manned spacecraft within a short time, and second, that they have the ability to time launches with great precision. These capabilities are an important step toward the development of the rendezvous and docking technique which will be of great value in achieving many advanced objectives in space exploration, some of which may have potential military value. “These, I think, are the formidable implications of their recent feat. But these implications are no reason for us to put our program in a constant state of flux, with projects starting, stopping, and shifting in response to each new Soviet development. Our undertaking is gigantic, immensely complex. It cannot be assembled and disassembled and redesigned and reassembled without losing its direction and momentum, and the space contest itself. . . . “There is a suggestion that the military services should duplicate work now in progress under the civilian agency. There is nothing particularly military about solutions to problems involved in the effects of long-term weightlessness, radiation, and isolation. The capabilities of both civilian and military research agencies should be brought to bear on these problems in a coordinated manner. “On the record, then, it appears that the critics of our space program are not asking that we do twice as much—but that we do everything twice. I do not think the economy will take that, but even if it would—it just does not make sense. “And how about the reciprocal use of the knowledge we are gaining? Science knows no exclusive applications technologically speaking, what is developed by civilians can be used militarily and vice versa. . . . “It seems farily well established that the real cause of all this squabble about the military-in-space stems from an inhouse difference of opinion within the military establishment. The problem is not that our civil space program is retarding the military. On the contrary, it is enhancing it and will continue to do so in the future. The problem is that the military space enthusiasts have not been able to obtain all the green lights they want from their bosses. ... I am confident the controversy will be resolved in time—and expeditiously, I hope.”
Representative Joseph E. Karth, chairman of a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced that hearings on four communications satellite systems would begin August 15, to determine whether duplication existed among the projects (Relay, Syncom, Advent, and Telstar).
Senator Howard W. Cannon spoke on the Senate floor on the need for an enlarged military space program. “. . . the major emphasis being placed by present U.S. space efforts has been on the purely scientific exploration of space and on its civilian applications, in priority above and indeed to the detriment of development of vitally needed military capabilities in space. If continued, this could prove to be a fatal mistake .... Unfortunately the present direction of our national efforts in space gives little or no assurance that attention is truly directed to the development of our military capabilities .... Clearly, we ought to have an energetic development program underway, adequately supported with funds, to find means to defend ourselves against attacks that could come from hostile orbiting space vehicles.” Senator Cannon listed several “minimum essential required space capabilities:” (1) near-space operations using manned maneuverable vehicles “capable of self-defense and having the capability of conducting offensive, defensive, and passive support missions;” (2) a standard military-civilian space launch system; (3) unmanned satellites for military communications missions; (4) improved tracking, control, and detection facilities (5) space-located facilities for r&d; (6) space-located bioastronautics research by means of a manned orbiting satellite.
President Kennedy released part of a report submitted earlier by Vice President Johnson, Chairman of the Space Council. The report stated that the U.S. had generated a greater rate of progress in space in 1961 than in any other year but that “it is too early to make definitive comparisons as between our newly developing competence and the capabilities of the U.S.S.R.”
Dr. Launor F. Carter was appointed Chief Scientist, usaf, to take office in July succeeding Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold. Dr. Carter, Vice President and Director of Research for System Development Corp. of Santa Monica, Calif., has been a member of the usaf Scientific Advisory Board since 1955. A psychologist, Dr. Carter has done much work on leadership, perception, and group behavior.
Senator Thomas Kuchel of California, speaking in the Senate, said that the bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (H.R. 12812) would provide nasa a needed flexibility in {>atent regulations, including authorization to secure royalty-free icense or complete title for Government-sponsored research, and he recommended that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hold hearings on the bill.
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
Special subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics conducted hearings on solid propellants. Chairman David King of Utah was quoted as saying he wanted the hearings to be detailed enough to commit dod and nasa to a definite plan for solid-propellant rockets. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator Thomas F. Dixon said that nasa was “giving solid rockets equal consideration with liquid rockets in decisions on future launch vehicle designs. . . . We have provided the Air Force with our requirements for an advanced technology or feasibility demonstration program on large solid rocket motors pertinent to the development of solid rocket-powered launch vehicles. “To make an informed choice of propulsion between liquid propellant engines (where the technology is fairly well in hand) and solid propellant motors (where it is not), it is necessary to advance the technology of large solid motors to the point of actual demonstration firings. The demonstration program we have proposed wlli allow us to make a wise choice between the two types of propulsions because a better understanding of costs and schedules as well as developmental problems wlli be available.”
Senator Hubert Humphrey announced public hearing on improvement of Government management of information and coordination of reporting would be conducted by Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations, September 20. Among officials testifying would be Melvin Day, Director of nasa Office of Technical Information. September 14: mariner ii, U.S. Venus probe, continued to transmit signals from interplanetary space to earth on its nineteenth day of flight, thus surpassing record of U.S.S.R. Venus probe which stopped transmitting on its eighteenth day of flight in February 1961. At 8:00 PM edt the spacecraft was estimated to be 3,067,471 mi. from earth and traveling at a speed of 6,463 mph relative to the earth, jpl scientists said the probe appeared to be continuing “right on course.”
In private audience with Pope John XXIII, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson presented the Pope with a small model of telstar communications satellite.
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
Announced that nasa had awarded contract to Rocketdyne Division of naa for two-year continuation of H-l engine research and development. Preliminary letter contract of $700,000 was signed toward estimated $9,000,000 total cost. H-l engine is used in clusters of eight to power S-I stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle. During mid-August: Chandler Ross, Aerojet-General Corp. Vice President, told House Committee on Sciences and Astronautics that two Aerojet concepts of recoverable/reusable boosters compared favorably to cost and capability of Saturn C-5. One concept was Sea Dragon two-stage unmanned vehicle with payload capability “well in excess” of a million pounds; and the other was Astroplane single-stage manned vehicle with payload capability of about 550,000 pounds. “In each case the incremental cost savings is of sufficient magnitude to warrant continued feasibility studies of these systems,” Ross said.
Congressman V. Anfuso and Senator H. Humphrey introduced similar bills (H.R. 10203 and S. 2849) to provide for research into and development of practical means for the utilization of solar energy.
Filibuster on communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) continued in Senate, with opponents filing between 75 and 100 amendments by noon. An amendment submitted by Senator Wayne Morse would permit “the enlargement of nasa so we can apply to the satellite system the contract, lease, and license system which has permitted the Department of Defense to do such a remarkable job with defense contracts. . . .”
