New York Times editorialized on the four-vote margin of the Senate defeat of Sen. Fulbright’s amendment to reduce FY 1965 Project Apollo funds by 10%.	“. . . The narrowness of the margin may be illustrated by the fact that if there had been abstentions by the Senators from even three of the states having direct economic interest in the most rapid prosecution of the moon race—say, California, Texas and Florida— Senator Fulbright’s amendment would have been adopted. . . [Senator Fulbright] lost his battle on the authorization bill, but he will have another chance when the bill actually appropriating the funds is considered. The new mood in Congress suggests that this battle may produce a decision to scrap the artificial 1970 deadline. . . {NYT, 6/30/64)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
In letter to chairmen of Senate and House space committees—Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) — NASA Administrator James E. Webb detailed findings of committees investigating failure of ranger vi lunar probe. Although the committees had not yet identified any specific cause for failure, Mr. Webb’s letter outlined five major faults in the spacecraft: 1.	The two onboard TV systems “were more complex than required and were not completely redundant. They included a number of common components in which a single failure would lead to disablement of both television systems.” 2.	“Possibilities of failure . . . increased as a. result of practices employed in the design and construction of the spacecraft. . . .” 3.	Preflight ground testing “may have obscured potentially dangerous situations which could have enhanced accidental triggering of critical control circuits.” 4.	The antenna for transmitting the lunar photographs had never been tested with the TV transmitters. 5.	“Because of reluctance to risk possible damage to the space vehicle, pre-launch systems verification was not complete. . . .” (Loory, htns, Wash. Post, 4/3/64, 8)
In keeping with NASA reorganization, subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were revised as follows: Manned Space Flight; Space Sciences and Applications; Advanced Research and Tracking; and Science, Research, and Development. (NASA lar
In an editorial, Robert Hotz, editor of Aviation Week and Space Technology, said: “There is a . . . good possibility that the national space program may get its most severe shellacking to date if some plans currently finding favor within Administration executive circles are, in fact, implemented. One of these proposals would slice the scientific programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the bone and concentrate the NASA budget on the Apollo manned lunar landing program. Some portions of the scientific community have been making this charge without much justification for several years. If NASA does virtually abandon its highly successful scientific exploration program now, the howl from scientists will rise in a swift crescendo. It would be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in what is now a pretty well-balanced NASA effort.” (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,11)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said Rift program should be reactivated because “mechanical difficulties which impeded early work on the nuclear propulsion reactor for space have largely been overcome.” He said success of recent nuclear reactor test for Nerva strengthened his view that NASA and AEC receive funds in the coming fiscal year “so that we can develop in a properly phased development program an operational nuclear propelled rocket.” He pointed out the need for “proper consideration to nuclear energy in planning new space missions. It is obvious that this is a necessary step and one that will require restoration of target dates for an actual flight test of a nuclear rocket system.” (SBD, 10/5/64, 179; M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
General B. A. Schriever (usaf) addressed an Air Force Association squadron in New York City on the subject of “The Air Force in the Years Ahead”: “A major consideration in long-range planning today is the rapid pace of technical progress. Since the early days of World War II we have been caught up in a massive technological explosion. One of the most important military products of this explosion is the intercontinental ballistic missile, which today forms an increasingly important part of our nation’s strategic forces. . . . “In addition to its direct contribution to our national security the Air Force icbm development program has created much of the technology, hardware and facilities that have been utilized in the nation’s space program. Most of the nation’s space shots to date have been launched by military boosters from Air Force facilities. The Titan III Standard Launch Vehicle, which is currently under development by the Air Force Systems Command, is based on the technology and experience gained in icbm development. “The Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program is the logical next step in military space development. The mol is required, to help us answer basic questions about man’s role in space, such as the length of a time a man can safely remain in orbit, his ability to make full use of his faculties in space, and his ability to perform a useful military function there. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 43-R-32)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former U.S. Senator William H. Benton (now U.S. representative to UNESCO in Paris) as saying: “If you wish, I can show you photos of military bases taken from outer space. I will show them to President Johnson if he wishes.” Mr. Benton said Premier Khrushchev suggested that U.S. could maintain adequate inspection of Cuba with satellites and therefore should discontinue its aerial reconnaissance flights over the island. (Middleton, NYT, 5/30/ 64,D
AiAA 1964 James H. Wyld Memorial Award was presented to Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) head of usaf Titan III development program, for his work on Titan III launch vehicle, aiaa 1964 Propulsion Award was presented to David Altman, United Technology Center vice president, for his contributions to science of propulsion. (A&A, 6/64,87; aiaa “Honors & Awards”)
At conclusion of Ranger management hearings by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that testimony “indicated to me that there was a serious loss of NASA liaison or NASA management. This, I think, is primarily the question that is before the subcommittee, having arrived at the conclusion . . . that the professional, technical people at Cal Tech are extremely able people. .. .” (M&R, 5/11/64,15)
John Stack, vice president and director of engineering at Republic Aviation, predicted that early in the 1970’s a traveler flying westward in supersonic transport will be able to keep up with the sun: “Whether it is a Mach 2 plane or a Mach 3 or better, you could leave London at 8 A.M., arrive in New York at 8 A.M., refuel and be in Los Angeles before 8 A.M., refuel again and be in Hawaii at 8 A.M.” (upi, NYT, 1/8/64, 13)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in hearings before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that for Project Gemini “the year 1963 was, quite frankly, one of development headaches. It was the year of development and qualification testing of Gemini’s many equipments. The program is now largely over the development hump, however, and all Gemini spacecraft and launch vehicle subsystems will be fully qualified in 1964. Significant in 1963 also were a number of hardware deliveries. ... “In 1964, three vitally important flights will be made—the third one manned and orbital. The year will be characterized by production, test, and delivery of spacecraft and launch vehicles. . . .” Questioned about return to earth and landing in Project Gemini, Dr. Mueller and George Low said that plans now called for the two-man Gemini spacecraft to land on water rather than dry land. NASA had been investigating both procedures, and paraglider for land recoveries was still in development stage. Paraglider would be “available” at about the time of the last two Gemini flights but “not necessarily scheduled.” Dr. Mueller added that water landing also would be “characteristic” for manned Apollo flights. (Testimony; Finney, NYT, 2/19/64, \9-,M&R, 2/24/64,21)
George Friedl, Jr., was appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D. Hilbum, who was recently named Deputy Associate Administrator. Since 1962 a management consultant in Santa Ana, Calif., Friedl served from 1960 to 1962 as Chairman of the Board and President of Matthews Corp. and from 1956 to 1960 as Corporate Vice President of Litton Industries, Inc., and General Manager of its Electronic Equipment Div. (NASA Announcement 64-140; nasa Release 64-157)
House Appropriations Committee cut off developmental funds for the aec’s Pluto low-flying, nuclear-powered missile, proposing the missile be mothballed until dod decided whether it needed the weapon. Having gone through nearly 10 years of development costing $196 million, Pluto was nearing the flight stage. The committee provided $1 million to mothball it. aec had requested $8 million additional funds to get the missile to operating stage. (Finney, NYT, 6/12/64, 1, 23)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting in executive session, approved the NASA Electronics Research Center report selecting the Boston area for the center. (NASA LARIII/32)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Assistant Director for Flight Operations of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, was appointed flight operations director for the second Gemini-Titan flight (GT—2), an unmanned suborbited flight scheduled for autumn. Kraft had been responsible for flight direction in Project Mercury and in the first Gemini-Titan flight. For the GT—2 mission he would replace Dr. Walter C. Williams, who resigned from NASA last March to become Vice President and General Manager, Manned Systems Div., Aerospace Corp. (nasa Release 64-185)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, opened hearings on problems of the Government-Science relationship. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Subcommittee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would inquire into (1) geographical distribution of Federal r&d contracts and grants, and (2) allowance of indirect costs by those performing basic research for the Government, (nasa lar III/85)
afsc issued annual report of its 1963 highlights and accomplishments. In preface summarizing and evaluating significant activities, AFSC Commander General B. A. Schriever said: . . In 1963 afsc made maj or contributions to the nation’s defense and space exploration programs. These included delivery of ballistic missiles at an average of one per day, completion of vital early warning and air defense systems, first flight of the transport aircraft which will make world wide airlift a reality, and delivery of the launch vehicles which made possible the orbital flights of Commander Schirra and Major Cooper. . . . “Cancellation of the X—20 DynaSoar program in late 1963 and assignment to the Air Force of responsibility for development of a near-earth Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) represent a shift in emphasis from reentry technology to on-orbit experiments. MOL, which is designed to provide a means of obtaining hard, factual data concerning man’s capabilities in operational space vehicles, is among afsc’s most urgent projects. . . .” (afsc Release 42-R-24; afsc 1963 Ann. Rpt.)
Vice president of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail A. Lavrentev’s disclosure that U.S.S.R. had been forced to abandon attempt to drill through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington Post. Soviet drillers reached depth of about 20,000 ft. near Caspian Sea when economic and technical difficulties forced them to give up the project. Lavrentev said Soviet scientists now were “seeking more effective methods of drilling and shoring up the hole.” Project was akin to U.S. Project Mohole, directed by National Science Foundation, which would attempt to drill through sea floor to penetrate earth’s crust and sample the mantle beneath. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D—Ind.) proposed on the House floor that NASA establish a Midwest office, similar to its North Eastern Office and Western Operations Office. “. . . The benefits of such an office to NASA would be great and certainly it would be a step in establishing a work ing relationship between NASA and the Midwest. It would also assist NASA in exploiting the potential of the Midwest. . . . “I cannot stress enough the need for a more equitable geographic distribution of our defense and space activities. It is in the national interest that steps be taken to spread these activities throughout the country. My proposal for a NASA Midwest office would be a step in that direction.” (CR, 3/11/64,4725)
The Federal Aviation Agency (faa), following up Defense Secretary Mc; Namara’s announced deactivation of 19 airfields, called attention to the procedures by which surplus military airfields could be transferred to state or local public agencies for development as civil airports. The procedures were established by the Surplus Property Act of 1944 and its amendments. More than 600 airports had been transferred to state and local agencies under this statute since the end of World War II. (faa Release 64-108)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908, the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. “Yet, prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development of aeronautics—the force which was to dominate warfare for the next quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of American design and manufacture had entered combat operations during World War I. “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled military aircraft and 5%-ton V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster in World War II. “In the late 40’s, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demonstrated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country in 1926, and despite the memory of V—2’s raining on London during the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our exclusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb advantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our ballistic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become first in space. “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging effort? . . . “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recommended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal. “The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. . . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50) February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current nasa series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. altitude, with 11 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
Westinghouse engineer Harry L. Thurman, Deputy Director of laser program in Westinghouse’s Defense and Space Center in Baltimore, told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles that laser may someday be used to cook meals in microseconds. Citing many present and future applications of laser, Thurman said industry spent $1,000,000 on laser research in 1960 and estimated Government laser contracts alone in 1964 would amount to $27,000,000. (Roberts, Balt. Sun, 5/7/64)
D. Brainerd Holmes, vice president of Raytheon Corp. and former director of NASA manned space flight program, was interviewed in the Boston Globe. Asked if he still thought the 1970 manned lunar landing goal was realistic, he replied, “The timetable now is tougher than it was, but still possible.” (White, Boston Globe, 4/16/64, CR, 4/21/64, A2002-03)
Senator Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in interview that aircraft manufacturers must bear the 25% share of supersonic transport development cost, rejecting the 10% formula advocated by Eugene R. Black in recently reported study. Senator Monroney said usaf should be assigned task of developing sst’s engine and the airframe manufacturers should join together to build the sst body. He said the builder of the aircraft would “have the greatest property ever owned in aviation, a superplane good for at least 20 years. They’ve got to take some risk.” (Steif, Wash. Daily News, 2/27/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that Scout space vehicle had not been performing with desired reliability. Ground tests and modifications were conducted, and when a test vehicle was fired the fixes were shown to be “adequate.” Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), replied that “if NASA spent half as much money on solids as it did on liquid vehicles, the solid rocket program would have 100 per cent reliability.” Discussing Surveyor lunar probe, Dr. Newell said first nine Surveyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs. to 2,100 lbs., and it was hoped flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaur space vehicles would be available to launch the subsequent Surveyors. (SBD, 2/20/64,279)
Senator Wayne L. Morse (D.-Ore.) said on Senate floor that “the most recent developments in the strike of the Florida East Coast Railway by the 11 nonoperating railroad unions, which is now in its second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shutdown of the vital construction work at Cape Kennedy by tomorrow night. . . . “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has just announced that, contrary to the recommendations of the President’s Board of Inquiry last October, it will permit the Florida East Coast, operating its trains with strikebreakers, to use the 18-mile spur newly constructed by the Federal Government to move freight into Cape Kennedy. . . . “This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will, I fear, lead to new labor trouble in the Cape Kennedy area, for the FEC strike still continues. . . .” (CR, 2/5/64,2035-36)	,
In Warsaw at the luncheon of the International Academy of Astronautics (iaa), Rep. George P. Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, expressed the intent of the U.S. to engage in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes as instituted in National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and implemented by NASA. Prof. C. Stark Draper of mit was re-elected as president of iaa for the coming year. In Missiles and Rockets interview while in Warsaw, Rep. Miller said that “the U.S. would be happy to open up negotiations with Poland on space projects.” A possible means of such cooperation, he said, might be incorporation of Polish scientific experiments on U.S. satellites and sharing of data they would acquire, a program such as U.S. already conducts with U.K., France, and Italy, (nasa Hist.; M&R, 9/14/64,
HF—24 fighter-bombers designed by a team of 18 German aeronautical engineers and manufactured in Bangalore at the Hindustan Aircraft Co. were reportedly being delivered to the Indian government. The chief of the team designing the HF—24 was reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank, principal designer for Germany’s World War II Luftwaffe, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Wdbb, addressing Texas Technological College, said that the role of NASA was “essentially the same as that of its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Both were created in an atmosphere of chagrin and deep concern because prior to World War I and following World War II the nation had forfeited early leadership in a new field of technological opportunity—aeronautics in 1915 and space in 1957. In recommending the creation of naca in 1915, a committee of the Smithsonian Institution presented a Memorial to the Congress which began: ‘This country led in the early development of heavier-than-air machines. Today it is far behind. . . .’ “This was at the outset of a war in which, despite the fact that the Wright Brothers had first demonstrated powered flight at Kity Hawk in 1903, the United States had no aircraft design or manufacturing capability of its own. No aircraft of American design or manufacture flew in Europe during World War I, and it remained for naca, in the years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon which achievement of ultimate U.S. air supremacy, civil and military, was based. . . . “The advent of Sputnik I in 1957 revealed that once again, this time in space, the United States had neglected a clear opportunity for technological leadership and to overcome the deficiency, the President and the Congress turned once again to the formula which had proven so effective in aeronautics for more than 40 years. It created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration as a research and development agency charged with restoring the nation’s leadership in space by developing the rockets, the spacecraft, the facilities, the scientific knowledge, and the operational skill required. And like naca, nasa has fulfilled its mission to the extent that we have now reached a point of parity in space with the Soviet Union. . . .” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning to hold further hearings on the NASA proposed electronics research center, although Committee Chairman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) had described NASA Administrator Webb’s report to the Congress as “very comprehensive.” (M&R, 2/17/64,17)
Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) stated in Portsmouth, N.H., press conference: “I don’t feel safe at all about our missiles, to tell you the truth. I wish the Defense Department could tell the American people how undependable the missiles in our silos actually are.” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announced that Senator Goldwater’s charge was “completely misleading, politically irresponsible, and damaging to the national security. There is no information, classified or otherwise, to support the false implications that our long-range missiles cannot be depended upon to accomplish their mission. . . .” (NYT, 1/10/64,1,14)
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved $764 million for advanced research and technology in NASA’s FY 1965 budget authorization, a cut of nearly $30 million from NASA’s request. The Committee restored $10 million for initiating construction of electronics research center, which the Advanced Research and Tracking Subcommittee had cut. (Wash. Post, 3/13/64)
Plans for formation of National Academy of Engineering were drawn up by committee of 25 leading engineers appointed by nas president Dr. Frederick Seitz. The committee, which would seek Congressional charter for the proposed academy, elected Dr. Augustus B. KinzeL, Union Carbide Corp.’s Vice President for Research, as chairman, (nas-nrc Release)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight began hearings on Project Ranger. Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that “the action that precipitated these hearings are letters which Mr. Webb addressed to the chairman of the two space committees” (March 31 letters to Senator Anderson and Representative Miller outlining problems with Ranger spacecraft). (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified: “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year 1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and •the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY" 1964 are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further delays- It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of exploring the moon with men within this decade. “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our program to the reductions imposed for FY 1964 indicates that this will likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is not the case. “In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in the appropriation for FY 1964, we have already sacrificed the margins and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assurance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say is that we have a ‘fighting chance.’ “To sum up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds which the President has requested, there is nothing left to sacrifice except the National goal itself. “. . . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the pace, the momentum, which the supplemental, appropriation and this authorization request will provide. “. . . Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we can do it for less than $20 billion. . . . [But] if the program is further curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which achievement of our goal is delayed. “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar exploration would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits obtained. . . (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, held hearing on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal research and development, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Earl D. Hilburn, said it was NASA’s policy to “locate and fully utilize the best technical competence available wherever it might be.” It was not NASA policy to award contracts on a geographical basis, Hilburn said, but NASA tried to “provide opportunities for and encourage all qualified industrial firms, universities and non-profit organizations to participate in our program.” He added: “NASA makes every effort to award negotiated procurements to contractors who will perform a substantial proportion of their work within labor surplus areas.” (nasa lar III/89; SBD, 5/6/64,30-31)
Dr. George M. Knauf, NASA Acting Director of Space Medicine, described before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics the procedures which NASA had followed for coordinating with USAF in bioastronautics-space medicine programs. Upon suggestions of this Subcommittee, NASA had “made a determined effort to coordinate our program with that of the Department of Defense so that all unwarranted duplication of effort would be eliminated.” Further, to assure that the coordination would be on a continuing basis, NASA established Space Medicine Liaison Office at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks afb. nasa also obtained assurances from Army, usn, faa, and U.S. Public Health Service that NASA was not duplicating work being carried out by those agencies. (Testimony)
Following Senator Goldwater’s charge that U.S. missiles are undependable, unnamed official sources at Cape Kennedy pointed out that newest U.S. ICBm’s—Minutemen and Titan II’s—can be fired in less than a minute’s notice, have been successful in nearly 7 out of 10 test firings, partially successful in 2 out of 10, and completely unsuccessful in only 1 out of 10 firings, (upi, NYT, 1/10/64,14)
Invention of pocket-size x-ray unit, smallest in the world, was announced by iit Research Institute. Device was invented by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, vice president of the Institute, and developed by James J. Ezop, Institute physicist. Besides uses by doctors for home calls, Dr. Reiffel said the instrument would be useful in testing mechanical parts in aerospace hardware. {Chic. Trib., 4/14/64)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed Lunar Orbiter in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1963, die Lunar Orbiter was defined and a contractor selected. This program will move into high gear this year and will require $49.3 million in Fiscal Year 1965 to meet its targeted first launch in 1966. This will be a tight schedule but because of the importance of this mission in support of Apollo, every effort will be made to meet that date. . . .” Questioned by Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), Dr. Newell said NASA was thinking about adding five Lunar Orbiters to the five already approved. The proposed increase was because the Lunar Orbiter “will be a most important spacecraft not only for the support of the manned lunar landing effort, But for continuing research on the moon, on its geodetic properties, and experiments on radioactivity of the lunar surface.” Of the recently orbited echo ii passive communications satellite, Dr. Newell said: “The echo n has shown some scintillation in tfye radio wavelengths which might indicate that it has some defect in shape—perhaps a tear, maybe a dent, or something of that sort. However, it shows no such scintillation on the optical observations, which is puzzling. It remains, however, a completely adequate reflector so that whatever distortion in shape may have occurred has not interfered with its usefulness.” (Transcript)
General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan III program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are undertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite program. . . . “The next major step toward the achievement of future space capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the usefulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the environment in which they will be used. . “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and a wide range of other roles. . . (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, amplified his concern for solar radiation danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70, saying it would be a “sound” decision to delay the Apollo flight into the 1970’s to increase safety. “We don’t know all there is to know about these flares.” He repeated that adding shielding to Apollo spacecraft could impose weight penalty, added that NASA was “intensifying” its study of solar radiation. (SBD, 1/21/64, 104)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Denver Post reporters that the manufacture of the mol spacecraft would be delayed until the Defense Dept, presented an “acceptable definition” of the program. He said that President Johnson was reviewing the 1966 budget which contained $155 million for mol, but that the money would not be spent until Air Force objectives in space were defined and accepted. (Partner, Denver Post, 12/22/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accomplished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion nasa budget for fiscal year 1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added year of delay. (Text)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7, 1964] in which he had proposed a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacrifice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmonizing mol and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the total space effort. “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space Committee in raising questions about mol and Apollo-X was to accomplish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either project.” New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration was the letter’s implication that it would be difficult to defend the proposed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administration could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT, 12/20/64,45)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special hearings “to emphasize our interest in seeing that there is progress” in advanced propulsion systems. At opening session, representatives of four industrial firms recommended development of nuclear rocket power be accelerated and amplified. Officials testifying were George H. McLafferty, United Aircraft; William C. House, Aerojet-General; Dr. Woodrow E. Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory; and Dr. Theodore B. Taylor, General Dynamics. (SBD, 3/19/64, 433; M&R, 3/23/64, 12)	....
Speculation about why Soviet voskhod i space flight was terminated after 24 hours was proferred by experts around the world. U.S. space engineers generally indicated Soviets operated according to plan by terminating flight when they did. However, officials of other Western countries speculated voskhod i was brought down prematurely, for reasons variously given as illness among the crew, faulty radio transmitter, and improper orbit. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said, “We knew the shot was coming and we had information it would involve a week— that’s why they had the doctor along.” He suggested technical problems had caused premature ending of trip. Some sources pointed to Soviets’ own announcement the previous day, which referred to “conditions of prolonged flight.” At least one press analysis, in retrospect, said vosk-hod i was perhaps ordered back to earth because of political events in the Soviet Union—Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being removed from office by Presidium of the Communist Party Central Committee, an occurrence not made public until Oct. 15. (Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trib., 10/14/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/14/64; Time, 10/30/64, 37)
Senate-House Conference Committee on H.R. 11296 filed its Conference Report on the Independent Offices Appropriation Bill for FY 1965. Committee recommended 85,250,000,000 NASA appropriation, which was 850,000,000 less than Senate-passed bill had provided and 850,000,000 more than House Committee had recommended. One amendment, regarding use of funds for a manned lunar landing by U.S. and another country, was reported in disagreement. (House Rpt. 1781)
Bill to authorize appropriations to NASA for FY 1965 (S. 2446) was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, (nasa lar III/9)
First meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, with representatives of 15 nations, adjourned after four days. In its session, the committee approved rules of procedure, appointed Committee Chairman (John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp vice president for international affairs), and heard progress reports on development of global commercial communications system. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 10/4/64, 74)
Senator John Stennis (D.—Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:	* “In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is straining at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are moving into a medium where relatively little is known. As we move into such a medium we are confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future, I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR, 8/5/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs by National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff members. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said the executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet scientific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the U.S. “must keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 30)
CAB Chairman Alan S. Boyd told House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce’s Public Health and Safety Subcommittee hearings on recent jet airliner crashes that investigation showed air turbulence no more hazardous for jets than for other airliners. (Witkin, NYT, 1/9/64, 52)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, recommended in letter to President Johnson that USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs be merged. Jointly operated national space station program would best utilize U.S. resources, according to his letter which Aviation Week cited in its Dec. 7 issue. Senator Anderson argued that $1 billion could be saved over* five-year period if mol were canceled and usaf funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; nasa Archives)
NASA’s equal opportunity employment activities were commended on Senate floor by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R.—N.Y.). Senator Javits introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA indicating specific measures taken in broad-based equal opportunity program, especially in Huntsville, Ala., and Wallops Station, Va. (CR, 1/30/64, 1328-29)
Sen. Kenneth B. Keating (R.—N.Y.) discussed in the Senate NASA’s program of research in aircraft noise abatement. Senator Keating introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA on its past and present noise research and said: “NASA spending on aircraft noise abatement research has increased by 628 percent since 1962, rising from $148,000 in that year to $247,000 in 1963, to $931,000 in 1964. The Space Committee . . . has tentatively approved a sum of $1.4 million for this program next year, a decision which I strongly support. . . .” (CR, 5/22/64, 11344-46)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that DOD would establish a Contract Audit Agency whose principal function would be to consolidate the activities and the 3,600 personnel of various units formerly engaged separately in auditing defense and space contracts. He estimated that this would result in a “manpower” saving of $1.8 million. (NYT, 12/13/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, discussed NASA organization, management, procurement, and programing. “The management and programing processes . . . require continuing program support, assuming reasonable accomplishment by NASA compared with our stated goals. Little that we start in one year is completed in that year. On the average, flight projects require three or more years prior to launch, while total programs have a life of ten to fifteen years. The governmental process for allocating resources can lead to a funding pattern at odds with this inherently long-duration need. We plan to accomplish major objectives over the period of a decade, but we must tailor our actual accomplishment to those resources that we receive annually. “A budget of $5,445 billion, in our estimation, provides the necessary increment of resources to support the technical program .... This is divided into $141 million, requested as our FY 1964 supplemental, and a $5,304 billion budget for FY 1965. During the preparation of this budget, we were asked by the President to make major cost reductions, in part by introducing improved management practices. This was done prior to submission of the President’s budget, and the estimated cost savings are therefore reflected in our budgetary request. . . . Within these estimates, we propose to carry out this year’s increment of NASA’s program of aeronautical research, advanced technological development, space hardware development, and space exploration.” (Testimony)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “In the field of military applications of space, our views as to the future remain unchanged. We believe that we must vigorously exploit the most likely avenues of interest, though we are not yet able to be definitive enough to describe man’s military space role adequately to project specific weapon systems. . . . “The Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program, which replaced the Dyna-Soar, is a research program aimed at giving man the opportunity to operate in space so that we may determine whether and when the manned space vehicle will be militarily significant. The mol program will provide much of the supporting knowledge for indicated future manned space systems. The timing of the program is based upon a technical decision that our primary need is to know what functions man can perform in orbit, before exploring, as completely as Dyna-Soar would have, the problems and techniques of controlled reentry. This latter will now be studied on a more limited developmental basis.” (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) announced nomination of Richard E. Horner, Senior Vice President of Northrop Corp., as aiaa president for 1965. Mr. Homer served as the first Associate Administrator of NASA (June 1959-July 1960) and before that as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development. (NYT, 10/8/64)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
House Appropriations Committee reported $46,785,867,000 military appropriations bill for FY 1965. Report said: “The committee explored in detail the question of missile dependability. . . . [The committee] is inclined to conclude with the Secretary [of Defense] that the missile force we have programmed can be depended upon to carry out its military mission under all of the conditions we can foresee.” The committee also proposed appropriation of $47 million for initiating development of a new manned bomber. (Raymond, NYT, 4/18/64,1)
House Appropriations Committee voted to approve $5.2 billion in funds for NASA in FY 1965, $245 million less than the requested $5,445 hillion ($5,304 billion for FY 1965 and $141 million FY 1964 supplemental combined by the Committee). The appropriation was contained in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill. (Finney, NYT, 5/19/64,1)
In Senate debate, Senator Frank Lausche (D.-Ohio) criticized NASA’s refusal to divulge to congressional space committees its documents concerning the selection of Boston as the site of the Electronic Research Center. He called NASA’s consideration of requests of other states for the installation “a mere front” hiding the fact that the decision had already been made. Senators Keating and Javits (R.-N.Y.), and Case (R.-N.J.) joined Lausche in criticizing NASA’s refusal to divulge the contents of its site selection studies. (CR, 6/2/64, 11951-52; upi, Boston Globe, 6/2/64)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Military Operations Subcommittee heard testimony from NASA witnesses regarding military communications satellites. In response to questioning, Leonard Jaffe, Director of Communications and Navigation Programs in NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) and Robert F. Garbarini, Director of Applications in ossa, said NASA had not participated in current dod-ComSatCorp negotiations for possible dod use of commercial comsat channels. ComSat Act of 1962 designated NASA as technical advisor to ComSatCorp. “We are aware of the negotiations and we expect to be informed so that we can respond under the act,” Jaffe said. (Av. Wk., 4/13/64, 32)
Missiles and Rockets published interview made last summer with Dr. Eugen Saenger, who died earlier this month. Dr. Saenger, whose World War II concept of rocket sled-launched orbital bomber was later influential in design of X—20 (Dyna Soar), had said: “I am assisting a German group within Eurospace in looking into the economics of space transportation. We are considering reusable vehicles. Dyna-Soar is assumed to be the necessary first step. . . . We consider it essential to develop an aerospace plane able to lift off from Earth, go up to orbit in the form of an airplane with wings, return like the Dyna-Soar along a glide path to Earth and land like an airplane so it can be re-used.” He said he had modified his chemical rocket-sled idea into steam-rocket sled and had developed such a rocket. “It'develops 30 tons of thrust. We ran hundreds of tests on it. We would use it to accelerate a stage to subsonic or perhaps supersonic velocity.” Dr. Saenger described Egyptian rocket development, which he had assisted until late 1961 when West German government asked him to stop: “I was asked in the spring of 1960 by the Egyptian government to give lectures at Cairo University and help the country by doing consulting work on meteorological sounding rockets. . . . “It’s a rocket only for vertical launching and liquid fuel. There is no guidance. Although in principle the rocket could be launched into an inclined flight, there is no way of knowing with accuracy where it will impact. So I can’t imagine how it would be used for military purposes/’ (M&R, 2/24/64,35-38)
Journal of the Armed Forces noted that Philip Bono, with Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co., had redeveloped Itha-cus (formerly Icarus), his study concept of a spacecraft which could move 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 troops anywhere in the world in 30 or 40 min. Ithacus was formerly conceived for launch from fixed land site, but under the new concept, there would be seaborne launch from nuclear aircraft carrier of Enterprise class. This would reduce vulnerability of the system. (Haggerty, JjArmed Forces, 7/11/64, 2) *	Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations (codsia) formed under sponsorship of Aerospace Industries Association, National Security Industrial Association, and Electronic Industries Association. Council would operate solely as coordinating and communicating vehicle between Government and industry, not as master association. (// Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R. 10456, NASA’s FY 1965 authorization bill, for $5,193,810,500, which was $110 million less than the $5,304 billion NASA had requested. Of this amount, $4,327,950,000 was for r&d; $248,335,000 was for CofF; and $617,525,500 was for Administrative Operations. (H.R. 10456; NASA lar III/48 and III/49)
Discussing U.S. supersonic transport program, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president Dudley E. Browne told American Bankers Association’s conference in Philadelphia that Lockheed had proposed “increased use of Government capability to underwrite both risk and financing, balancing this with sufficient risk assumption and financing by the contractor to justify returning him a reasonable profit. . . . “Whatever final plan is adopted, the banks will be called upon to play a significant part. “When they are, I think they will find themselves participating in a program whose magnitude they have never encountered before, a total program cost that may run into something like $8 or $10 billion, may involve loan limits for aircraft of as much as 20 years in place of the present 10 or 12, and may require supplemental participation of other financing organizations like insurance companies. . . .” (Clark, NYT, 2/2/64,90)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara testified in military posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasizing that U.S. missile and bomber force was neither too large nor too small for today’s “damage limiting” military strategy. He pointed out that missiles are more reliable than bombers, being mechanically reliable, capable of surviving enemy attack, and able to penetrate enemy defenses in war-time, while the bombers are vulnerable to enemy attack and less likely to reach target enemy defenses. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/64)
Senators Albert Gore (D.—Tenn.) and Ralph Yarborough (D.—Tex.) said dod negotiations to lease channels from ComSatCorp were grounds for repeal of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Labeling the law a “giveaway” of a national resource, Senator Gore said it would be “remarkable and bizarre” for the Government to lease the system. “We will be paying for using what we have given away.” {Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
Dr. Allen E. Puckett, vice president of Hughes Aircraft, said world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird, being built for ComSatCorp, would be completed in less than one year and ready for launch a month later. Early Bird was a first step toward global telecommunications and was a commercial version of Hughes’ Syncom satellite. (Miles, L. A. Times, 7/1/64)
Aerospace Corp. confirmed rumors that Walter C. Williams, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and veteran of 24 years’ service with NASA and naca, had resigned to become vice president of Aerospace Corp. and general manager of its Manned Space Systems Div. Williams’ resignation was effective March 16.	(Houston Chron., 3/15/64; Houston Post, 3/17/64; NYT, 3/16/64, 34; msc Roundup, 4/1/64,1)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed National Capital Section of aiaa and questioned whether hazard of intense solar radiation in the 1968-70 period might postpone Project Apollo lunar flight. He pointed out that 1968-70 is period of maximum solar activity in the 11-year solar cycle, and radiation intensity might require “very substantial shielding for the Apollo capsule.” This raised question of whether heavy shielding imposes too great a weight penalty on Apollo. Citing recent scientific recommendation that there was “relatively low probability” of Apollo crew’s encountering solar flare, he questioned whether maintaining the schedule would be worth such a gamble. (Finney, NYT, 1/16/64, 1; SBD, 1/16/64, 80-81)
Findings of survey on distribution of Federal research and development funds, conducted by Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, were made public by subcommittee chairman Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.—Conn.). Said to be first definitive, Government-wide survey of this subject, survey showed that during FY 1963 California received 38.4% of the total $12 billion spent by the Government on R&D, New York received 9.2%, and Massachusetts, 4.6%. Nine states accounted for 70.9% of the total, and the 41 remaining states had less than 2.5% each. Regionally, Pacific Coast states received 41.8%; Middle Atlantic states, 15.7%; Mountain region, 8.7%; South Atlantic, 8.5%; East North Central, 6.6%; New England, 6.1%; West South Central, 5.5%; West North Central, 3.6%; and East South Central, 2.8%. (Finney, NYT, 9/11/64)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director of ComSat Systems, Aerospace Corp., before Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, was first witness to speak out against military usage of commercial comsat system. Speaking both for himself and for Aerospace Corp., Pritchard said military requirements would be so different from commercial requirements that either the national security would be sacrificed or ComSatCorp would have to charge such high rates that there would be no savings to the Government. He proposed alternative system based on simple spin-stabilized satellite, capable of growth and expansion to accommodate increased needs of military satellite communications. (Av. Wk., 3/30/64, 15; SBD, 3/27/64,479)
House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued a report on its hearings on the repeated failures in the Ranger spacecraft program. The committee concluded that NASA provided too little direction on Ranger, while jpl was too resistant to following NASA orders when they were issued. To strengthen management over JPL, the committee recommended: (1) JPL should be restricted to doing the work of a center rather than that of an industrial contractor; (2) a general manager with industrial experience should be appointed as deputy to jpl director to be in charge of complex projects such as Ranger; (3) NASA should streamline its relationship to jpl to achieve jpl responsiveness to NASA direction. (Text; Finney, NYT, 6/17/64; Wash. Post, 6/17/64)
Patent for system of space communications using x-rays has been granted to Henry R. Chope, executive vice president of Industrial Nucleonics Corp., Columbus, Ohio. The l^-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope as source of energy, (nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64)
Welcoming Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II as eighth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Senator Claiborne Pell (D.-R.I.) quoted Dr. Ripley in the Senate:
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, noted on Senate floor that 100th flight of X—15 was made yesterday. “During the past 4^ years the program has achieved a very commendable record, providing a wealth of research data for the aeronautical and space program of the United States. The past accomplishments of the X-15 program reflect a superb job of management, flight-test operation, and cooperation between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force, and the Navy. . . . “The X-15 program not only has contributed to the increased confidence of designers of current high-performance aircraft but, in doing so, has focused attention on a few areas which require additional research. The planned program will be directed toward these areas. This program is providing information for the next logical step in the NASA’s flight research program, the hypersonic. “In addition . . ., the X—15 program is going to produce information of value, I believe, to the development of supersonic commercial airplanes. This data will include flight controls, materials and surface temperatures.	, “The lesson from the X—15 is that cooperation among agencies having an interest in a project pays off.” (CR, 1/29/64,1358-59)
House passed H.R. 11296 by voice vote, making FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion for NASA. Because Senate had not yet acted upon NASA authorization legislation for FY 1965, Congressional rules permitted any member to block appropriations on a point of order. Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) objected to the construction and administrative operation appropriation—because of $60 million included for electronics research center in Boston—and his objection was sustained. Then Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.—Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, objected to remainder of the NASA appropriations, thus blocking any attempts to cut them further. (NASA LAR ni/102; CR, 5/21/64,11241 ff)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center with members of the subcommittee. Rep. Teague said at msc that the manned space flight budget for FY 1965 “is a tight budget and we have a good program. No major cuts are foreseen.” (Houston Chron., 2/16/64; Houston Post, 2/16/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that some of the byproducts of space research included cure for some types of stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month on one cubic foot of synthetic chemicals mixed with water, and “fail-safe” method of producing oxygen and food for orbiting space stations through electrolytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. (AP, Houston Chron. 2/26/64) Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) noted in the House that House Committee on Science and Astronautics had approved NASA’s report providing for electronics research center in the Boston area. “There is, in my mind, still considerable question as to the need for this center. Furthermore, there is considerable question in my mind as to whether, if such a center is needed, as opposed to developing additional electronics capability at existing centers, the criteria used for selecting Boston as the site were sound. . . .” {CR, 2/25/64, A878)
NASA submitted report to Congress on patent legislation: to House Committee on the Judiciary on H.R. 4482, to provide administration in the public interest of property rights to inventions resulting from R&D financed wholly or partially by public funds; to Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 1290, to establish uniform national policy for proprietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of public funds; and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on S. 1444, to amend National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to waive proprietary interests of the U.S. in inventions, (nasa LAR III/19)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced agreement with National Academy of Sciences that the academy would serve as adviser to the Congress. In recent years nas, created a century ago by act of Congress, has established active working relationship with Executive Branch. Today’s agreement was to establish similar relationship with the Congress. Agreement was result of recommendation by Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Dad-dario (D.-Conn.), which has been investigating relationship of science and Government. (Finney, NYT, 1/3/64, 9; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/3/64)
Dr. Donald F. Homig, Director of President’s Office of Science and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in its hearings on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal R&D. Dr. Hornig said Congress was cutting administrative overhead funds in Federally financed research at universities, and universities were forced to divert funds from other needs to help pay for Federally sponsored research. “Since the university has many scholarly functions to perform, while Federal funds are devoted generally to the sciences or to areas within science, it does not seem to be in the national interest to pursue a policy which diverts private funds from the education of students or the performance of scholarly research in non-scientific areas.” Dr. Homig stated Federal support of research in past decade had produced “a dispersal of university strength,” adding that Southeast and Mountain regions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years ago. (nasa lar III/102; NYT, 5/22/64,8)
At request of Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) and by unanimous consent to motion of Senator Mike Mansfield (D.—Mont.), Senate requested House to return H.R. 10456, NASA authorization bill for FY 1965. Senator Morse was requesting record vote on the bill; action of the previous day was taken without quorum call and with only voice vote. (NASA LARIII/126; CR, 6/23/64,14234-35 and 6/24/64, 14392)
At aiaa former American Airlines’ vice president William Littlewood said problems of sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction of supersonic airliner from 1970 target date to some time between 1975 and 1980. Problems of practicability and noise would have to be solved before supersonic transport became reality, Mr. Littlewood said:	(Finney, NYT, 7/2/64, 28)
In the Letters to the Editor column of the New York Times, Dr. Martin Summerfield, AIAA Vice President for Publications, took issue with sources quoted by NYT to the effect that Communist China would not be able to produce military nuclear-tipped rockets for another decade or even a generation. “As for rocket secrets,” he said, “there are none, either in theory or design. All one needs is a reading knowledge of English, French, or German, and a good collection of recent technical journals.” He said it was a serious underestimate to believe that the Chinese could not plan and execute an efficient research, development, and production program for practical missiles of medium range and a further underestimate to believe they were not close to their objective. (NYT, 11/8/64; A&A, 12/64,10)
In interview with Space Business Daily, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) cited two factors he believed would improve NASA’s relations with House Committee on Science and Astronautics this session. First, committee members now have more knowledge of NASA’s problems and needs, having visited NASA installations and learned first-hand about NASA’s activities. Last session, he pointed out, 10 of committee’s 31 members were new to space legislation. Second, NASA was perfecting its procedures of informing Congress, improving the information flow and clarifying its justifications. (SBD, 1/16/64,80)
Dr. Eugen Saenger, eminent European space scientist, died at 58 in West Berlin. Dr. Saenger was best known for his World War II study “Rocket Propulsion of Long Range Bombers” and his post-war theoretical investigations of photon-powered rockets. He was one of the first to investigate use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel and of metal powders mixed with rocket fuels. Formerly head of Institute of Jet Propulsion Physics in Stuttgart, since last May he held chair of space flight technology at Berlin Technical Univ. Of him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said: “He didn’t see the goal of human endeavor as travel just in our planetary system. He wanted to see travel to the outer galaxies. He made very extensive studies in this field, which one day—maybe 40, 50 years from now—may be looked at very seriously.” (NYT, 2/11/64,39)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking: “. . . space vehicle research, first of all, produces knowledge that permits the accomplishment of new missions. When the knowledge resulting from research is obtained well in advance of the planning of new missions, we may proceed with confidence that the missions are feasible. For this reason, the generation of new knowledge through research should, when possible, precede developments that are beyond the current state of the art. Only when the pressures for immediate development are extremely great, as has been the case in these first years of our national space program, are we justified in violating the principle of order in favor of expediency. When we possess adequate research data, we not only are confident of the feasibility of any new missions for which we may wish to plan, but we also . . . lay the basis for improved reliability and efficiency and for reductions in the weight and cost of the space vehicles required for these missions. The truth of these principles has been demonstrated many times in the past by costly developments which either had to be abandoned for lack of the necessary technical capability to complete them -or which could only be salvaged by crash research programs. “We must, therefore, strive through research to develop new knowledge that will make new space missions possible, if and when national policy should dictate that any one of these missions must be accomplished. At the same time we must conduct the research required to ensure the success of on-going projects, and we must also strive through research to pave the way for increased reliability and efficiency of space vehicles of proven feasibility. . . (Testimony)
Edmond C. Buckley, Director of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We are requesting $274.4 million to support the Tracking and Data Acquisition program in fiscal year 1965, as compared to $307.7 million in fiscal year 1964, a decrease of eleven per cent. The reason for this decrease is that most of our .new station construction requirements in all three networks, were funded in fiscal years 1963 and 1964. . . .” Mr. Buckley pointed out that the largest single item in ot&da budget for FY 1965 was $106.9 million for equipping the manned space flight network for Projects Gemini and Apollo. (Testimony)
Four-man panel of former dod r&d directors, under auspices of Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and Humphrey, responded to Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and stifled innovation. . . .” Panel said: “We favor maintaining a substantial base of defense research and development which is essential if we are to maintain the flow of new ideas and new devices. But support of R&D does not mean the innovation of a large number of operational systems without regard for military requirements or without ample attention to technical and operational feasibility. Senator Goldwater and his advisors have ignored the fact that many of the projects cancelled during previous administrations had proved unfeasible or too expensive in relation to the military benefits they would yield. . . .” (SBD, 11/2/64,5)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e), disclosed in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on Military Operations, that dod planned to use one of the Syncom communications satellites for experimental communications, probably between Hawaii and the Philippines. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64,14)
Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) inserted in Congressional Record a Wall Street Journal article on the “declining demand” for engineers, and said: “According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current slump in demand for engineers results primarily from uncertainty about future spending on defense and space programs. Although the defense budget for the next fiscal year calls for a reduction of only $1.3 billion, the space budget is $200 million above last year’s appropriation. If this minute shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring about a severe curtailment in the demand for engineers and other skilled technicians, it makes one wonder what will happen to our economy when there is more than a token cutback in defense outlays....” (CR, 2/27/64,3666-67)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power, discussed nuclear rockets before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	. . our major effort is in the reactor area. It includes analysis and experimental work on all of the components and subsystems of our reactors with sufficient evaluation and testing to give the greatest possible confidence in the successful operation of the graphite reactors that will form the basis for the first nuclear rocket engines to be developed in the world. We are, however, not overlooking the potential advantages provided by the metallic tungsten reactors. We are, therefore, conducting a program to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of these systems. “Our nerva engine and non-nuclear component technology work has made substantial progress in those difficult areas of engine technology that require extension of presently available information so that system development can eventually be undertaken rapidly and with a high degree of confidence. “Sufficient facilities are available or are being constructed for the conduct of our presently planned program. Tests to be conducted in our reactor facilities during this year should clearly demonstrate the success of the solutions we have designed to avoid the mechanical problems that have been encountered in the past and should demonstrate the operating capabilities of graphite reactors. Our advanced concept work is fundamental in nature; it is long term; but it is being pursued because of the high, theoretical performance potential of these advanced ideas for nuclear rocketry. “Out of this over-all nuclear rocket program, I am convinced, will come a new family of rockets that will open the way to more extensive space travel than is possible with the chemical combustion rocket systems upon which we are now completely dependent. Although new in capability, the nuclear rockets we are now developing are logical follow-ons to the chemical rocket systems and, therefore, do not involve basically new test, development, and system technology or scientific breakthroughs. These nuclear rocket developments must be actively pursued to ensure that this country is not prevented from undertaking missions involving higher velocities, energies, and payloads than are required for the early Apollo manned lunar landing mission.” (Testimony)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) discussed the work of his research and development subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. One current activity: “The National Academy of Sciences is undertaking several studies for us through a 14-man committee headed by Dr. George Kistiakowsky, science advisor to former President Eisenhower. It will look into such questions as what is the level of basic research that should be supported Federally to maintain the nation’s security, economy and industrial strength. . . .” (M&R, 8/10/64, 26)
