U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
Walter R. Dornberger, vice president in charge of research for Rell Aerosystem Co., wrote in the company’s bimonthly magazine, Rendezvous, the United States was spending too much for space exploration. As a start to cutting costs, Dornberger proposed developing space boosters that could be recovered and reused, (ap, Milwaukee ].,
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address before American Nuclear Society-Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington, D.C.: “If anyone doubts the impact that science and technology have had on society, in just the past 20 years, he need look only at the new industries employing many thousands of people which have come into existence during that time—industries based solely on the evolution of new products and services. These include—and i mention only a few —television, the computer, the jet engine and nuclear energy. “Some of these industries have sprung from the application of a single invention or chain of scientific thoughts. “During these past 20 years, too, we have seen in the United States the creation of a constructive partnership unknown in our previous history—a partnership of government, university, management, labor, science and citizen—a partnership devoted to maximum development of science and technology not for the narrow interest of any single group, but for the common good. “To witness the space launchings at Cape Kennedy, as I have, is to see this partnership in action. . . .” Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said; “As chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, I am particularly concerned with the atom’s work in space. “In 1961 our first operating space radioisotopic power source was orbited. And in 1965 our first space reactor was operated in orbit. “The atom will soon become a major power source for our space program—an auxiliary source for spacecraft and life support systems and a necessary source of propulsion for extended space exploration. “I can, in fact, foresee the time when our space efforts will be able to continue only through use of rocket and nuclear power units transported and assembled in space. . . .” (Text)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Independent Offices, paid tribute to NASA on the floor of the House: “. . . too much credit cannot be given the top management of the Space Agency . . . “To this group of distinguished gentlemen, must go the credit of spending some $17 billion without the slightest breath of scandal attached to the many thousands of transactions.” (CR, 6/11/65, 12829)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was one of four persons named honorary chairmen of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program at Clark Univ. The other three were Mrs. Robert H. Goddard; Dr. Charles G. Abbot, former fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; and Mr. John Jeppson, executive vice president of the Norton Co. and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Clark Univ. Mr. J. L. Atwood, president of North American Aviation, was named general chairman of the Library program. (Goddard, 7/65)
Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) expressed concern on the floor of the Senate about advances in Soviet strategic weaponry and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which compared Soviet and American development of large solid rocket motors: “First, the development of rockets has received a high priority continuously in the Soviet Union for 20 years, since the end of World War II. “Second, the Soviet effort has been broadly based and produced several generations of vehicles with increasing performance capability. “Third, solid-propellant rocketry is playing a major role in current Soviet operations and in their future plans. “Fourth, U.S. intelligence has suffered a major failure if the Soviet missiles in the May 9 parade were not fake. “An early review of U.S. intelligence and military planning operations by both the Congress and the administration definitely is in order if the Soviets are operating large solid rockets.” {CR, 7/8/65, 15359-61)	"
Department of Defense should, without further delay, commence full-scale development of a manned orbital laboratory (Mol) project, recommended a report by the Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations. The report also suggested that DOD “pursue a more realistic security policy in its program,” and that “careful and intensive consideration be given to achieving future economies in space operations with greater standardization of systems and subsystems and through such techniques as recoverable and reusable boosters and spacecraft.” Moreover, “NASA and DOD [should] use each other’s facilities and resources to the greatest possible extent.” (Text)
The National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress, established by law in 1964 to find out what technological change was doing to the economic and social fabric of the country and how to obtain its maximum benefits with the least possible harm, met for the first time with Vice President Hubert Humphrey. The Commission would meet again Feb. 18-19 to determine the areas to be explored intensively and possibly to select outside personnel to help with basic research in these studies. (NYT, 1/30/65, 6)
Dr. Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, appeared before the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations, in testimony supporting DOD’s request for $6,709 billion new obligational authority for FY 1966 research, development, testing, and evaluation. He discussed the Vela nuclear detection satellites, orbiting in nearly circular orbits. “All four satellites remain in operation, providing data on the radiation background and the operation of detectors in space.” He outlined the aacb’s 1964 launch vehicle study, which “was intended to identify overall effects and provide a data base for, rather than to resolve, individual user program booster selections or nearterm booster improvement questions.” The study “confirmed earlier estimates” of launch vehicle needs for the near future. [See Jan. 26, Jan. 27] (DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 1—30)
Rep. Westen E. Vivian (D-Mich.) told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that he intended to request adoption of a policy to award one half of all NASA Phase 1A contracts to companies in areas presently receiving less than one half of NASA business. Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said that although fiscal expedience demanded that procurement contracts go to industralized areas, geographic distribution should be seriously considered in the allocation of research and development funds. He said the Subcommittee would consider Vivian’s proposal. (Transcript, 3/9/65)
Summary report of NASA’s Future Programs Task Group, directed by Francis B. Smith of LaRC, was sent by NASA Administrator James E. Webb to the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Report presented “the results of studies made during 1964 to answer inquiries made by President Johnson as to criteria and priorities for space missions to follow those now approved for the decade of the 1960’s. . . It examined (1) conditions and constraints for future planning, (2) major capabilities existing and under development, (3) intermediate missions, and (4) long-range aeronautical and space developments. Report concluded: “. . . The details of these new missions such as specific spacecraft designs and exact mission plans will, of course, be the subject of continued study. . . . Continued space exploration will be an evolutionary process in which the next step is based largely on what was learned from the experience of preceding research and flight missions. The pace at which these new programs will be carried out will necessarily depend upon many other factors, such as the allocation of budgetary and manpower resources and the changing National needs of the future. “This study has not revealed any single area of space development which appears to require an overriding emphasis or a crash effort. Rather, it appears that a continued balanced program, steadily pursuing continued advancement in aeronautics, space sciences, manned space flight, and lunar and planetary exploration, adequately supported by a broad basic research and technology development program, still represents the wisest course. Further, it is believed that such a balanced program will not impose unreasonably large demands upon the Nation’s resources and that such a program will lead to a preeminent role in aeronautics and space.” (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 3], Senate Comm, on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 1015-1102)
Writing about the visit of President Johnson and Vice President Humphrey to NASA Hq. for a briefing on NASA programs on Feb. 25, Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in an article for the San Diego Union: “1 was particularly pleased at the deserved tribute the President paid Jim Webb and Hugh Dryden. I have known them both since 1937. They are extremely modest men. They avoid personal publicity. They are not jealous of subordinates, but prefer that the publicity and credit for NASA successes carry the pictures and headline the names of those members of the NASA team most directly responsible. For this reason they can attract and hold able people. . . . “While we are giving out the space medals, it is only fair to say that without the vision and tenacity of Lyndon Johnson, the first man on the moon could not be an American. “To have man’s most dramatic and significant adventure become the achievement of a slave state instead of a free society would be intolerable.” (Eaker, cns, San Diego Union, 3/14/65)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite successfully received, amplified, and returned a television signal to Andover, Me., ground station in an unscheduled communications test. ComSatCorp Vice President Siegfried H. Reiger said that “the picture quality of the test pattern was excellent.” (Clark, NYT, 4/8/65; ap, Balt. Sun. 4/8/65)	'
The Soviet Union was considering sending weather observers into outer space in manned meteorological satellites, Prof. K. I. Kondratief, Univ. of Leningrad, said at a meeting in Geneva of the World Meteorological Organization’s Scientific Advisory Committee. (NYT, 2/21/65, 24) February 21: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks taped for the nbc-tv program, “The Sunday Show,” that the U.S. would extend its national strength into the space dimension. “We expect to explore the moon, not just to photograph it or visit it,” he said. “We plan to explore and chart the planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories.” Mr. Humphrey praised the Nation’s space effort, saying that such activities had encouraged economic development, stimulated new products and processes, and furthered the cause of peace. This was Mr. Humphrey’s first public statement on the space program as Vice President, (nbc-tv)
Panel on Science and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Technology reported on its sixth meeting (aeronautics), Jan. 26-27. Report was a comprehensive summary of views by the Committee and Panel members and the more than 150 scientists and engineers attending as representatives of Government, industry, and the scientific and academic communities. In its general conclusion, report stated three objectives for future improvement of U.S. civil aeronautics: “Insure that our economy continued to have the best air transportation system to give it a continuing advantage in world competition”; “Insure that U.S. aeronautical development is immediately responsive to the demand, and sufficiently great to continue leadership in the domestic and world markets”; and “Maintain recognized world leadership in technical matters to insure a favorable image and stature of the U.S. technological competence in aeronautical development.” Some of its general observations on the future of aeronautics: “There is a need for more centralized direction, control, and procedure . . . [of the] widely dispersed . . . technical competence and expertise behind aeronautical development in the United States. . . . “The aircraft industry in general is willing to contribute to any program designed to further aviation advancement, but the degree of their contribution will depend upon the extent of Government support, and the availability of a market. The extent is also dictated by the extent of their earnings on marketable products for which the Government is usually the principal customer. “There are indications that an insufficient amount of research effort is being put forth in the hypersonic regime of the flight spectrum, particularly in the field of propulsion. “The aeronautical research and development capability of NASA is not being used to its maximum capacity.” (House Rpt. 227, 32-34)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries of America, Inc., addressed the Economic Club of Detroit: “. . . the aerospace industry of today does indeed represent a truly unique phenomenon in industrial history in almost all of its aspects. ... it is that industry which places at the disposal of the nation—both its public and its private sectors—the capacity to manage the research, development and production of the most technologically advanced product that is possible—for whatever purpose desired. . . it is essential that we all understand the principal factors—■ historical, present and future—that have produced and will continue to produce this uniqueness. “First, the genesis and evolution of what is today’s aerospace industry is a direct product of the nation’s post-World War II history and is inextricably linked thereto. . . . World War II unleashed for the world, but particularly for the United States, two revolutions which have been gaining momentum ever since. The first of these was a form of economic revolution which saw the economy of the United States surge into new dimensions. The second was a scientific/ technological revolution which saw all that had gone before in man’s scientific history fade into a pale background. . . . “World War II itself provided an extreme example of the explosive expansibility of the industrial base of the United States. This expanded industrial base remained after the war to serve as a foundation for a general economic upsurge. “. . . the aerospace industry has become and remains, in a very real sense, an instrument of national policy, not only in terms of the hardware directly provided the government, but also as it underpins the economic/technological advances in the private sector of our economy. ...” Discussing the future of the industry, Harr noted that “the size and viability of this industry is not tied to defense and space programs, important as these have been and will continue to be in shaping its destiny. It is tied, rather, to the total technological progress of the nation, meaning the application of advanced technology to whatever purposes may be desired. Programs now well underway in such diverse fields as air freight, urban transportation, desalination, oceanography, 2000-mph aircraft and hundreds of others serve to illustrate this fact. . . .” (Text)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
President Lyndon B. Johnson is briefed on the Mariner mission at nasa Headquarters. Left to right, James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, President Johnson, Vice President Hubert 1L Humphrey, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. world were “deep in your debt.'’ (NASA Announcement 65-43; Simons, Wash, Post, 2'26 65; Seldstedt. Balt. Sun. 2* 26 65: Young. Chic. Trib., 2/26/65: Mohr, NYT, 2/26/65, 10) February 25; usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite pavload. I U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 190S, 135)	'	_	_
On the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, commented on the successful ranger VIII spacecraft as “yet another major American space achievement. For the second time in less than a year a Ranger spacecraft has successfully taken closeup pictures of the lunar surface and returned them to earth from a distance of a quarter of a million miles. . . .” (nasa lar iv/33-35)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of nasa Space Vehicle Research and Technical Div., told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that lightweight, flexible plastic baffles had proved more efficient for controlling fuel “sloshing” in launch vehicle’s propellant tanks than heavy metal baffles. He said plastic baffles could also serve to prevent leakage of propellant gas used in fuel-pumping during weightlessness. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings, 133-50)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee that about $1.2 billion—80 per cent of the allocated money—had been wasted on the abortive b-70 bomber project, Howard Margolis reported in the Washington Post. The question of how much of the money spent was wasted arose when McNamara was asked whether knowledge from the b-70 work would be valuable to other military and civilian projects. McNamara suggested that at least 80 per cent of the money had been wasted, Margolis said. McNamara’s general view had been that substantial “waste” of this sort was unavoidable in the defense program since it was rarely possible to know how valuable a development project would be before large sums had been spent. Margolis added that McNamara suggested minimizing such waste by insisting on good evidence of probable value before allocating large expenditures and, even then, by limiting spending as much as possible until the value of a project was proven. (Margolis, Wash. Post, 5/15/65)
In a Christian Science Monitor editorial, Leonard Schwartz posed the problem of “how the capability represented by manned orbiting space stations can be used to enhance national security and promote peaceful-scientific uses of outer space.” Schwartz suggested formation of an inspection agency—International Space Patrol—to neutralize military potential represented by manned space stations and to ensure usage of outer space for peaceful purposes only. He pointed out that Vice President Humphrey, one of the first proponents of an arms control agency and an international space agency, was now Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, on which sat the Secretaries of Defense and State and administrators of AEC and NASA. This position provided him with “an appropriate vantage to supervise their arms control capabilities in order to reach a national decision which would reconcile control with security and scientific use of outer space.” (CSM, 3/2/65, 4)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey wrote to Cape Kennedy technician Richard Tennis: “I understand that you are the gentleman who corrected the problem of the oxidizer leak on the Gemini-Titan [GT-3]. “I simply wanted to express to you the thanks of all of us here in Washington who have watched so carefully the success of this program. It is the excellent and quick efforts of people like yourself that have made this program so successful.” ( ksc Spaceport News, 4/15/65, 2)
NASA’s actions in releasing foreign satellite information were criticized in a report by the House Committee on Government Operations, based on study by its Foreign Operations and Government Information Subcommittee. Committee stated NASA had deleted from its biweekly Satellite Situation Report certain Soviet launches because they were designated as secret information by Norad. “nasa has not once challenged these security classifications, blindly accepting the military decision. . . .” Compounding the problem, NASA had “publicized the facts about Soviet failures [Sept. 15, 1962, letter from Administrator Webb to Senate and House space committees] after those facts had been carefully deleted from its routine report of satellite information. “. . . NASA has ignored two clear requirements of law—the requirement for civilian control over nonmilitary space activities and the requirement for the fullest possible flow of public information. By yielding, automatically, to the military judgment on what the American people shall know about Soviet space activities, NASA fails to implement its legal mandate. By playing an on-again, off-again secrecy game, NASA tends to confuse the American public. . . . “Therefore, the committee recommends that, in every possible instance consistent with the dictates of national security, NASA exercise its right to challenge military-imposed restrictions by requiring justification and, thus, carry out the mandate to keep the American people informed. . . .” (House Rpt. 197)
President Johnson visited nasa Headquarters, accompanied by Vice President Humphrey, for a briefing on the mariner iv project and to congratulate and express appreciation to NASA officials and members of the Mariner and Ranger project team. The President recalled that he had sponsored legislation in 1958 that had created NASA: “I think it is really incredible that we have come so far. It was only seven years ago this month that we were deliberating and debating and still seeking to come to grips with the realities of the space age.” Mr. Johnson told NASA officials that the people of America and the whole
Strongly urging greater emphasis on U.S. aeronautics and aviation than now exists. Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D—Okla.), Chairman of Senate Aviation Sub-committee, addressed Air Force Association in Dallas, Tex. “I am afraid some people, and I mean people of high stature and great influence, seem bent on relegating aeronautics to a secondary position. This I think is a crucial mistake. In aeronautics we stand on the threshold of a boundless upsurge which may well dwarf what has been achieved by aviation over the past 61 years. “Also, the economic productivity of aeronautics makes dollars . . . and sense. It means money in the bank, or rather gold in Fort Knox. On the other hand, I don’t know of any scheme . . . and I doubt that one will emerge within this century . . . for fighting the balance of payments deficit in outer space. “There simply are no dollars floating around between here and the moon. For the time being, outer space commerce just doesn’t seem to be in the cards. And as long as this is the situation, I don’t think we should banish aeronautics to the back seat ... or have a NASA budget which is better than 08 percent spacecraft and less than 2 percent aircraft. And this in spite of the fact that NASA and its forerunner, naca, were ostensibly founded to serve aeronautics! “I am not saying this to downgrade space, but to suggest that we strike a balance based on how the national interest and economy are served best. . . . This widening disparity between NASA’s space and aeronautical efforts . . . this wall flower treatment of the airplane ... is a reckless gamble, economically, politically and militarily, that will come back to haunt us in the future. My criticism, by the way, is not directed at the level of competence in that agency but at the lack of programming of aeronautical goals and the failure to mobilize this nation’s brain power on behalf of aviation. It seems to me the real deficiency is that the well qualified aeronautical talent in NASA js so far down in the hierarchy that these men rarely ever get involved in the decision making. It’s crystal clear that other nations, the Russians included, have cut this Gordian knot and are rapidly filling the vacuum which we so invitingly created for them. . . .” (Text; ap, NYT, 7/2/65)
Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.) introduced a bill (S. 1899) in the Senate “to prescribe a national policy with respect to the acquisition, disposition, and use of proprietary rights in inventions made, and in scientific and technical information obtained, through the expenditure of public funds.” Senator Long said in introducing the bill: “New discoveries derived from research supported by public funds belong to the people and constitute a part of the public domain to which all citizens should have access on terms of equality.” (CR, 5/4/65, 9023-9027)
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson conferred Exceptional Service Medals on GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Charles Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts. The President announced that military promotions for the astronauts would be submitted to the Senate immediately. (Richard, Wash. Post, 9/15/65, A3) Following the ceremony, Vice President Hubert Humphrey accompanied the astronauts, their families, and Dr. Berry to the National Academy of Sciences. Humphrey told the Academy: “The achievements of our astronauts are not just the achievements of two men. They are the achievements of family, country and of a society. . . . “This is the best example of cooperation between Government and industry, between public and private, that I know in this nation, and might I add, that it is an example that should be emulated by many others in many other endeavors in this country. “But our space program ... is more than national. It would be well enough if it were only national, but it is more than that. It is truly international. And I want ... to stress our space program’s potential as an arm of our foreign policy, of our international relations, and particularly of our peace policy, because this Government has but one objective in the world: a just, honorable and enduring peace. . . .” Astronaut Cooper summarized some of the things that man could do in space: “. . . we again showed that man can do a great deal of geological observations while in space. ... I think it is very significant that although you pass across some [geological formations] rather rapidly you still are able to . . . observe them and you are very capable of photographing them in great detail. “. . . man is very capable of doing oceanographic observations. We have noted that you can detect a great deal of detail as to the depths of water, as to the currents of running water, and even to wind patterns that run on the waters, the wave patterns caused by the wind. “. . . man could do a great deal of weather observations, both in real time and photographically. And we . . . were able to pinpoint one tropical storm in between some of the planned observations, and apparently that was very accurate pinpointing of its position. “We determined in our discussions later with the Weather Bureau people, that for future use ... we could get much greater accuracy even on pinpointing these by the use of our platform combination and taking angles to a great deal more accuracy, rather than just estimations of the angular distance and locations. “We found that you could do a great deal of visual observations of the phenomena around the earth ... we picked up ship wakes, several hundred miles away of . . . the contrast of the white wake against the blue background in very clear weather areas. . . .” Conrad revealed that photographs taken during the Gemini v mission at the request of the Mexican government, had located volcanoes in Mexico that “the Mexicans didn’t know they had. . . .” He also said: “I think a system that has been left out and nobody has talked about is our environmental control system, which performed in a most outstanding manner for eight days. We had probably the nicest, freshest air that anybody could want to breathe, and we had an unusual first in the space business: most environmental control systems had been loaded down and pilot after pilot came back and said they were too warm, and we fought and fought it, and at McDonnell, to have a little change made because of some of the problems of heat exchange between the inlet and outlet pipes. It turned out that we were too cold. “With two tubes running, we were probably the first ones to shut the cabin heat exchanger down and run everything as hot as we could get it in there. We were just right. And the thing that most surprised us on opening the hatch on landing, we couldn’t tell the difference between inside and out, and that is a monumental job for that small system.” Dr. Berry concluded the program by presenting a review of the medical data received from the gemini v mission. The astronauts’ party then proceeded to the Capitol where Vice President Humphrey presented them to the Senate and then to the House. Cooper told the House: “We set out with our prime objective on Gemini 5 to fly 8 days. We were to fly this 8 days primarily to show that man, with all the various equipment on board, and the machines, could safely and very functionally do this 8-day mission with no adverse effects. We were entirely successful in this. . . .” Conrad explained: “Gemini 5 was a significant advance in the whole program in that we flew the first all-out spacecraft. We would not have been able to go without the fuel cells for 8 days. This was the first time they were flown. We had the first radars from which we got some very excellent data to enable the GT-6 to continue with their present rendezvous plans. It was the first time that the cryogenic storage of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been run that long in space. . . .” Dr. Berry told the Senate: “We are conducting a program such as this [Gemini program] ... to make man a vital part of such a research effort and to show the facility that man has to gain scientific information using vehicles such as we are able to build in this country. . . . “I think I can report, so far as information has been obtained in this country to date and at the moment, that we are the only ones who have that sort of information for the duration of which we are speaking. We can confidently say that man has been able to perform very well up to 4 days in a weightless state earlier, and on this mission 8 days in a weightless state. He has then been able to re-adapt back to a 1-G environment. We have living proof of that.” (Texts; CR, 9/14/65, 22924-22927; nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 1-2)
Commenting on Dr. Warren Weaver’s Nov. 29 statement to U.S. News and World Report questioning the wisdom of spending $30 billion to get an American to the moon by 1970, the Wall Street Journal said: “Now Dr. Weaver is not against going to the moon . . . what he is against is the hell-for-leather way the moon program is being whipped along . . . where the emphasis rightly should fall is on Dr. Weaver’s assertion that ‘the great ideas that develop within the body of science —strange and improbable as this sounds—arise from curiosity and not from urgency,’ and that the moon program has caused a massive diversion of scientists and engineers from possibly more productive fields. . . .” (WSJ, 12/8/65, 16) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Conference, warned of the possible consequences of reduction in the NASA budget request for FY 1967:	. . history should have taught us that new space capabilities, in which we have made a considerable investment, must be used or their benefits will be lost.” Webb said history should have taught us also “that plans for the future should not be drawn by a timid hand.” He quoted the late Dr. Hugh Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, as saying “the present gap in manned flight activity [between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.] is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960 until May 1961.” (Text; LRC Release 65-88)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
In an address at Duke University, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said: “How fortunate we are to live in this dramatic and creative period of change, of challenge, of opportunity. How great is our responsibility to achieve excellence of mind and spirit to do the tasks that must be done. “I appeal, therefore, to you the generation of 1965. “Make no little plans. “Have not little dreams. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of your mother and father. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of this time. “Challenge the impossible. Do what cannot be done. “Thirty years ago it was ‘Brother, can you spare a dime.’ “Today we reach the stars.” (Text, CR, 4/26/65, 8179-80)
House Rules Committee deferred bill to study conversion to the metric system, proposed by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 41)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey urged establishment of research and experimental institutions in underdeveloped nations that would enable young scientists and technologists there to develop their own countries. “To train people without giving them the opportunity to put their training to full use can only result in frustration at home or migration abroad,” he said. The Vice President, speaking at a dinner given in New York by the American Committee for the Weizman Institute of Science, emphasized that measures must be taken “to make these talented people actually want to work in their own countries, by opening up to them careers which are genuinely and deeply rewarding in professional advancement and service to their people.” (ATT, 12/7/65, 10)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
Eighty per cent of the $4 million needed to construct new bridges, modernizing the access road complex to Cape Kennedy, would be contributed by the Federal Government. The announcement was made jointly by Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Florida Governor Haydon Burns, and Florida Senators George Smathers and Spessard Holland. NASA and USAF would divide the $3.2 million Federal share and the state of Florida would provide $.8 million. (Cocoa Tribune, 8/24/65; KSC Spaceport News, 8/26/65, 1)
The suggestion that the Gemini vu/vi endurance-rendezvous mission scheduled by NASA for Dec. 4-13 might be a “space spectacular for spectators sake,” was firmly rejected by Rep. George P. Miller (D— Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at an MSC press conference. Miller said he believed the U.S. would land a man on the moon by 1970 and emphasized that information from the Gemini vu/vi mission would further the orderly exploration of outer space “for this country and the world.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/65)
In commemoration of Goddard Day, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator and other Washington officials telephoned greetings via relay II to Dr. Goddard’s widow in Worcester, Mass. The call had been arranged by Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Other events commemorating Goddard Day: At NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, a film on Dr. Goddard’s life and work was premiered; at NASA Manned Space Flight Center, Astronaut Scott Carpenter spoke to several hundred science students about Dr. Goddard and rocketry; at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, special recognition was shown, and at Smithsonian Air and Space Museum an original Goddard rocket was displayed. (NASA Release 65-87)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight issued a report on investigation of Project Surveyor
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, George Friedl, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, said: “NASA spends about 93 percent of its dollars on contracts with industry, universities and private research organizations. These procurements during fiscal year 1964 amounted to $4.6 billion. Approximately 96 percent of this amount or $4.4 billion was awarded by our field installations in accordance with program and project research and development requirements. NASA contracts support our in-house research and development activities and establish our coupling with industry and the private scientific community. . . Reporting on contract administration, Mr. Friedl testified:	“The cost reimbursement contract has been the basic instrument for procuring research and development because the Government has had to risk the uncertainties and assume the high cost involved. No other type of contract provides the Government and the contractor the latitude and flexibility needed to relate scientific and technical requirements, schedules and use of resources to mission objectives. By adding incentive provisions pertaining to time, quality and cost to this type of contract, it is our intention to offset some of its deficiencies and strengthen the purpose of the Government-contractor relationship. “nasa has made a concerted effort to introduce suitable incentive arrangements in our cost reimbursement type contracts whenever practicable. In each case, the objective is to encourage the contractor to manage better and improve his performance; adhere to schedules; and hold down costs. “As a consequence of our incentive contracting drive, there has been a marked increase in this activity in the past 4 Vi years. In fiscal year 1961 we had one contract worth about $100,000. By December 31, 1964, we had awarded 75 contracts with a target value of over $751 million, 7 of these have been completed leaving 68 contracts totalling over $724 million currently being administered. . . . “In view of the undesirable features of letter contracts, NASA Headquarters began a concerted effort, early in 1963, to curtail the issuance of new letter contracts and to assure the timely definitization of all outstanding letter contracts. Headquarters issued instructions to all centers directing program and project managers to plan ahead and allow adequate lead time for the initial negotiation of definitive contracts. ... At the end of January only 3 letter contracts having a total value of $4 million were outstanding. We expect that these contracts will be definitized in March 1965.” Mr. Friedl said that NASA had “structured a sound practicable managerial technique to direct the planning, approval and execution of . . . future programs. We believe that adoption of what we have termed ‘phased project planning’ will materially assist us in achieving this goal. “Phased project planning represents an orderly sequential progression in the execution of NASA major projects. It provides for formulating proposed work goals and missions, and allows for decisions, reappraisal points for management consideration to advance or replan such proposals, as well as the resources to implement them. “Specifically, phased project planning provides for four distinct phases as follows: “Phase A Conceptual/Feasibility Phase . . . “Phase B Preliminary Definition Phase . . . “Phase C Final Definition . . . and Phase ^ Development/Operation. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 269-88)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, said that during 1965, data processing facilities would handle 70,000,000 data points per day and that there would be an increase to 200,000,000 data points per day in 1966. He continued: “In fiscal year 1966, effort under this category will be directed toward developing and evaluating techniques for building up the existing telemetry data reduction capability to match the increasing requirements. In order to reduce this tremendous amount of data in an efficient and reliable manner, new techniques must be evaluated for obtaining this additional capability. “The heart of this prototype system is the Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction System (Stars). The development program for this system was initiated in prior years and is planned to continue through fiscal year 1968. The Stars equipment presently includes automatic editing, decommutation, and calibration of the telemetry data. Functions in addition to these will be included in the prototype equipment as the developmental subsystems become available. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 1-87)
Civil Aeronautics Board request for $2.1 million in subsidies for commercial helicopter lines in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, to be paid during July-December period, was denied by House Appropriations Committee. {WSJ, 5/7/65, 2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
U.S. should build a supersonic transport regardless of the fate of the Concorde or any other country’s effort because “this is the next technological step in air transportation,” faa Administrator William F. McKee told the House Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices requesting $140 million for the project for FY 1966, according to Aviation Week and Space Technology. The House subcommittee responded by approving the money request. Acting Chairman Joe L. Evins (D-Tenn.) said: “Once we have made a basic decision to go forward with this program, I think we ought to go forward with it. This continual question of reservations as to whether we are going to build a supersonic transport is disruptive to continued progress.” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 28)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc Ret.), speaking at a National Space Club luncheon, said: “Looking back over the 3 years since the flight of Friendship 7, I am impressed most of all by the tremendous progress the United States has made in space science and technology. “I am proud of the determination the American people have shown to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. . . . “Three years ago, Mercury spacecraft were limited in weight to about 3,000 pounds. Today, the Saturn I booster is operational and can put 22,500 pounds into Earth orbit, or seven times the weight of Mercury. Saturn i-b, which will begin flying next year, will be able to orbit a payload equal to 11 Mercury spacecraft. Saturn V, which will fly in 1967, will be able to orbit a payload equal to more than 80 Mercuries. That’s some jump—but it is no more than typical of the great gains we are making in national space capabilities. “The accuracy requirements for all these missions are almost incomprehensible and are one of the least understood parts of the space program. A good case in point was the launch of Friendship 7 3 years ago. The speed at insertion into orbit was over 25,000 feet per second or 5 miles per second, and the booster and spacecraft were accelerating at approximately 240 feet per second at a steadily increasing rate. At booster cutoff, each error of 1.4 feet per second resulted in a difference of approximately 1 mile in apogee on the far side of the Earth. When you consider that before the onboard signal for cutoff was received, information had to be obtained by radar at the Cape, transmitted by landline to Goddard, run through the computers, returned by landline to the Cape, checked against Cape data and then transmitted 350 miles down range to the spacecraft, still allowing time for onboard delays in operation of relays, valves, and thrust termination, it looks like an almost impossibly accurate requirement. “Those accuracies, however, are rather crude compared with some now being obtained on the deep space probes. “Now we have Mariner IV which at 6 o’clock tonight will be 20,194,023 miles out from Earth on an extremely difficult and significant mission. As you know, there was a checkout of equipment aboard the spacecraft last week that indicates the chances are still good that we will get revealing pictures of Mars next July, when Mariner IV will be 134 million miles from Earth, so far it will take 12)/> seconds to get a radio signal back. “To wax philosophical for a moment, we might liken our space program to one of Plttto?s ollsgories. fie told of prisoners ciisined in s cave for so long they had lost touch with reality and felt that their whole existence was wrapped up in the shadows they could see on the wall ahead of them. He goes on to say that if one escaped to the outside world and returned to tell the others of what really lay outside the dark cave, they would probably think him completely crazy. “Even though we have seen such tremendous break-throughs in scientific knowledge in recent years, our knowledge has necessarily been limited to such a cave, for practically all we know has been limited to this one tiny speck of earth in a much larger environment. But that is in the process of becoming changed and with a rapidity no one can forecast.” (Text, CR, 2/22/65, A751-531 February 19: Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.) said in an interview that if commercial airlines would voluntarily join the Federal Government in subsidizing helicopter lines, these services might be saved. Commercial helicopter lines operating in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco had received Federal subsidies since 1947, but President Johnson proposed in his budget message that they be cut off after Dec. 31. Sen. Monroney said: “Congress isn’t going to appropriate any more money. We haven’t a chance of selling them or continuing the subsidy without added help from the airlines.” His plan involved artificially lowering helicopter fares so that a greater portion of the flying public would use them. This higher load factor, combined with the use of larger, more economical aircraft and hoped-for improvements in helicopter technology might lead to self-sustaining helicopter service in a few years, the Senator said.	(NYT, 2/19/65, 69)
Prospects for U.S.-European industrial cooperation in space were discussed in Air Force and Space Digest by Elmer P. Wheaton, Vice President of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Wheaton offered four “guiding principles” for any program of U.S.-European industrial effort: “The program to be jointly undertaken should avoid unnecessary duplication of an existing program. . . . “The project or program should contribute to a better understanding of the space environment. . . . “The program must provide a logical extension of our current space technology. . . . “The program must not require such a substantial increase of knowledge in either the space environment or the space technology that it involves a high risk of failure. . . .” Wheaton suggested: scientific areas that could be usefully investigated by Europe; advanced programs for “more distant European ex,-ploration”; and satellites that could be profitably developed by Europe —notably, applications satellites. In such company-to-company cooperation, contribution of the U.S. companies should be chiefly in space systems management. (AF Mag., 7/65, 53-57)
ComSatCorp, in a letter to the FCC, outlined its position regarding ITT World Communications, Inc.’s request to use EARLY BIRD I satellite for live television coverage of the recovery of the Gemini 5 astronauts. George P. Sampson, ComSatCorp’s Vice President of Operations, said that although itt and ComSatCorp had agreed that technical and operational aspects of the shipboard station would be subject to ComSatCorp’s control, ComSatCorp took “firm exception” to itt’s insistence that the fcc designate ITT as the responsible operating entity. Sampson noted the Fee’s May 12 decision giving ComSatCorp sole responsibility for operation of the initial terminal stations for the proposed global satellite system and said: “Despite our fundamental concern with the proposal, ComSat Corp is willing to give consideration to a joint application for the operation of the station.” (ap, Wash. Post, 7/23/65)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	“I feel that our record over the past calendar year is evidence of the success we have had in building a team that is dedicated to effective management. The space flight record for 1964 is impressive by several standards:	number of flights, percent of success, and variety of missions. The graph (spaceflight mission record) shows that, in terms of percentage, our 1964 success record is nearly the same as the high achieved in 1963; 83 percent compared with 85 percent in 1963. However, we more than doubled the number of successful missions from 1963 to 1964, from 11 to 25. . . . “Other significant measures of the pace and rate of change in our space program have been our performance in terms of spacecraft operations and data return. These performance indicators are at the heart of a successful space program. “For example, in 1964 an average of 54 experiments were functioning in space throughout the year; this is an improvement of over 35 percent from 1963, when we averaged 40 working experiments. “The volume of information brought back from space, measured in millions of data points per day, shows a tenfold increase over previous years:	in 1964 we were collecting about 57 million bits of information each day from our flight missions. . . .” Dr. Seamans listed NASA management accomplishments during the past year “to find new techniques and new methods to carry out our jobs.” Among them:	establishment of Mission Analysis Div. from the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology at Ames Research Center; conducting the joint dod-nasa Launch Vehicle Cost Study; growth of incentive contract program (“over $1 billion are under active incentive contracts”) ; and application of phased project planning. “The budget presented here has already undergone critical review by NASA’s management, the Bureau of the Budget, and the President. It does not provide any contingency funds for the approved missions; it is predicated on a cost reduction program that will require us to operate more efficiently; it represents a carefully pared program priority list. In summary: “First, NASA is dedicated to the accomplishment of the present approved missions and projects in terms of cost, schedule, and technical performance. “Second, new effort is needed to maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics and space. This includes the definition of a new program for exploration of the planets commencing with Mars in 1971; the research and design necessary for effective extension of present Apollo and Saturn capabilities for manned flight; integration of the Centaur stage with the Saturn launch vehicle for planetary and other unmanned payloads; initiation of an advanced solar observatory satellite; and utilization of a prototype xb-70 aircraft for aeronautical research. “Third, an aggressive research and advanced development effort must be maintained in many fields, including chemical and nuclear propulsion, to assure the nation meaningful options and alternatives in the selection of future aeronautical and space goals and the ability to react decisively to external pressures and opportunities. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 37-51)
DMS, Inc., aerospace market intelligence operation that published annual analysis of DOD and NASA budget requests submitted to Congress, forecast a $106.57 billion market for the aerospace industry from 1966-1970, an increase of 13% for the five-year period, dms preferred this “generally favorable market climate,” to the “glorified major growth period of fiscal 1962-1964, when Government spending skyrocketed, inevitably producing an influx of hopeful though unusually ill-equipped competitors, followed by over-capacity as the market tapered off, and finally a retrenchment still under way.”	(NYT,
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, described to members of the Charlotte, N.C., Chamber of Commerce the development of the U.S. ballistic missile program: “In the ballistic missile program, of course, we were not concerned with the missile alone—complicatd as it was—but also had the problem of constructing the facilities to test the missiles; building the ground support equipment; and training crews to install, service, and launch the missiles. This was a $17 billion program, and was larger in scope than the Manhattan Project which produced the atomic bomb during World War ii. “To give you some idea of the size of the task, imagine that Henry Ford in the early days had not only had the problem of designing and building his automobiles, but at the same time had to construct all the highways and bridges, build all the service stations and garages, and plan and conduct driver training programs. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Mac C. Adams was sworn in at NASA Hq. as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator. Dr. Adams came to NASA from Avco Corp., Wilmington, Mass., where he was vice president and assistant general manager for space systems. In 1949-51 he was an aeronautical research engineer with NASA Langley Research Center (then naca Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory). (NASA Release 65-317; nasa Ann.)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent six hours visiting Cape Kennedy launching pads, talking to space experts, and looking over NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). “I’m sure the American people can feel this program is in good hands,” he said before returning to Washington. At one point, Humphrey rode to the top of the 100-ft. launching vehicle to be used in next month’s manned orbital flight and exclaimed: “Man, oh man, what a fantastic job!” (NASA Release 65-57; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/65)
In summary of activities of the NASA Office of Lunar and Planetary Programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “The Ranger pictures represent our major scientific achievement in 1964. In addition to their direct value as new information, the subtle significance of these pictures toward increasing the value of other astronomical data is perhaps worthy of mention, as it may not be recognized generally. It is interesting to note how the information presented in the high resolution Ranger pictures has sent scientists scurrying back to the files of photographic plates taken years before to discover features which have remained unnoticed throughout the years. Some new interpretations of long recognized features have also been made possible by the close-up look obtained by Ranger.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 56-111)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
President Johnson named Dr. Finn J. Larsen, Honeywell vice president, as Principal Director of Defense Research and Engineering for DOD, succeeding Dr. E. G. Fubini, who left the job July 15. (ap, NYT, 12/3/65, 22; Pres. Doc., 12/6/65, 546)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, vice president and assistant general manager for space systems at Avco Corp., would succeed Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Adams, a consultant to NASA and NACA, was expected to assume his new duties in October. Dr. Bisplinghoff would become Special Assistant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 65-276)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on H.R. 2626, a bill to provide that the National Bureau of Standards conduct investigations to determine the practicability of U.S. adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. J. Herbert Hollomon, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, told the Committee that if the U.S. did not adopt the metric system it would stand alone in this regard in 10 to 15 yrs. (CR, 8/3/65, D740; Transcript)
U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing appropriations to NASA for FY 1966 totaling $5,183,844,850, as follows: $4,537,121,000 for research and development; $60,675,000 for construction of facilities; and $586,048,850 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.26 billion. During the debate preceding passage of the bill, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) said: “We have moved quickly. But we are not in a crash program. We are now conducting a reasonable program . . . it is a well-planned program. “It is impossible to believe that in the fiscal year 1959 only $48,354,000 was authorized for space [nasa]. In fiscal year 1960 it went up ten times to $485,550,000. It doubled again in fiscal year 1961 to $915 million. “In fiscal year 1962 it went to $1,361,900,000. “In fiscal year 1963, it went to $3,742,162,000 and in fiscal year 1964 to $5,238,119,400. “In fiscal year 1965 it went to $5,193,810,500. “For this fiscal year, the committee has recommended $5,183,844,850, which is down from last year’s level. “I want the House to know we have gone over these programs thoroughly. We have made cuts in the committee, and the cuts were worthwhile. They are responsible, and they are substantial. They are not small.” Regarding funds restored to the NASA budget, Rep. Fulton said: “The M—1 engine development, the 260-inch engine development, and the snap-8 development, were ongoing programs of research that were approved by the committee and authorized by the House over the past several years. However, for reasons of economy, the Administrator cut these three programs entirely from the NASA budget. The committee on the other hand, believed that such actions in the long run would be extremely wasteful and later result in very high costs when it would become necessary to reactivate these programs. “Consequently, the committee restored $15 million to the M-l program to continue it on a technological development level, $6.2 million to the 260-inch solid rocket program to carry it through the test firing of two full length rockets, and $6 million to the SNAP-8 to continue it at the scheduled level of effort.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) discussed changes made by the Manned Space Flight Subcommittee: “The total request by NASA for manned space flight for fiscal year 1966 is $3,567,052,000. . . . The subcommittee is recommending a total reduction of $42,825,000. “NASA requested $3,249,485,000 for research and development in manned space flights. Total reduction in research and development amounts to $30 million. All of this reduction comes from the Apollo program. It is the view of the subcommittee that in the areas of Apollo mission support and engine development that program improvements could be made. However, the reduction was made in the total request to allow NASA to make program alterations with a broad management latitude of choice without adversely affecting the total program. It was recognized by the subcommittee that NASA, prior to coming before the committee, had made substantial reductions in their total research and development program. A further reduction was also made by the Bureau of the Budget. Based on this, the $30 million reduction is considered a maximum amount that could be taken without jeopardizing the pace and progress of the Apollo program.” (CR, 5/6/65, 9291, 9296, 9301)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said at msc that nasa’s fy 1967 budget would be limited to about the same level as the fy 1966 budget ($5.3 billion) because of military expenses in Viet Nam. He said nasa would like “$200 million or $300 million more” for fy 1967. “With the war in Viet Nam, I doubt there’ll be more money for NASA. And NASA needs more money than it is getting now to use its team with top efficiency.” (Houston Post, 8/30/65)
Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini program, and Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward White II (Maj., usaf) received NASA’s Exceptional Service Award from President Johnson in a special White House ceremony. Introducing the President, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . we . . . should never forget that at the beginning of the space age, in 1957, the challenge of this new frontier which was laid down to us was first met by the man who is now the President of the United States and who has so graciously invited us here today to indicate again his interest in, and the importance he attaches to, the new systems we have developed for building our national competence in space and using the science and technologies acquired to work toward a peaceful world and a better world. “This great leader of our nation, and of the Free World, is still pioneering, this time on an even more difficult frontier where we must learn to master the restrained but decisive use of the powers which technology gives our nation. Those of us who are responsible for the build-up of our new base of technology believe that power, based on advanced technology, can provide new means to hold back those ruthless forces which answer not to the need of all men for security, freedom, dignity, and opportunity. The pioneering which President Johnson is engaged in today on this new frontier is, if anything, more important than his pioneering actions in 1958 to create our national program in aeronautics and space. “Seldom in the history of the world has one man had to play so vital a role in developing the tools of modern science and technology and then in the development of a national capability to use them to achieve cooperation toward a world consistent with our own ideals and those we have sought for others as well as ourselves.” Accompanying citations noted “outstanding contributions” and singled out Major White as “the first man to engage in self-propelled extra-vehicular activity.” Terming the three “the Christopher Columbuses of the 20th century,” Mr. Johnson said their work had nudged the world toward greater international cooperation. “Men who have worked together to reach the stars are not likely to descend together into the depths of war and desolation,” he said. Later, the recipients were guests at a luncheon held by Vice President Humphrey and received accolades in both the House and Senate. A crowd estimated at 50,000	applauded the motorcade as Mathews and the astronauts rode to the Capitol. In the evening, Majors White (usaf) and McDivitt (usaf) narrated a 20-min. film of the GEMINI IV flight for the chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. President Johnson, in a surprise appearance, told the astronauts to “take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.” He said: “Many people in many lands were thrilled by what you have done. I want you to join our delegation in Paris and go out among the friendly peoples of the earth to share with them the excitement and thrills of your experience.” Astronauts White and McDivitt then returned to the White House where provisions had been made for them and their families to remain overnight. (Text; Clopton, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al, A3; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/18/65; Semple, NYT, 6/18/65, 1, 13; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/18/65)
Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Director of Advanced Studies of General Dynamics Corp., in a series of talks at Evanston College, predicted several “realistic possibilities” for the 1980’s and 1990’s: (1) a manned space station to handle the world’s communications needs, including global telephone calls complete with televised views of the speakers; (2) space vehicles to keep man informed of all weather developments, detect forest fires, and inform firefighters; (3) orbiting manned information centers to supply doctors and other scientists with data an any subject regardless of how distant they were from the source of material on earth; (4) orbiting hospitals or lunar hospitals to relieve persons suffering from certain ailments by providing gravityless or very low gravity conditions. (Chic. Trib., 10/10/65) During October: Dr. Walter Dornberger, Vice President for Research of Bell Aerosystems Co., former chief of German v—2 missile program, and father of the Dyna-Soar concept, was interviewed on the eve of his retirement from Bell by Claude Witze in Air Force and Space Digest. Witze said:“. . . [Although Dornberger is] the outstanding pioneer in the development of ballistic rockets, he feels strongly that we have erred in relying on this single vehicle, with its inherent limitations.” He quoted Dr. Dornberger:
Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, professor of chemistry at Harvard Univ. and former special assistant to President Eisenhower for science and technology, was selected Vice President of the National Academy of Sciences for four-year term beginning July 1, 1965. nas also elected 35 new members in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research. National Academy of Engineering, holding its first annual meeting in coordination with NAS, elected 19 new members including Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nas Releases; nas-nrc News Report, 4/65)
Vice President Humphrey announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council, of which he is chairman, would meet July 1 to consider a proposed USAF manned orbiting laboratory. Meeting was later postponed to July 9. (NYT, 6/26/65, 5; eph)
Participants in the World Peace through Law Conference in Washington, D.C., agreed that advances in international communications, including early bird i communications satellite, were important milestones on the road to world peace. John A. Johnson, vice president of ComSatCorp, told the international communications panel that early bird I had provided a case study of progress in “the development of legal principles and institutions which further international cooperation.” He said global coverage in the satellite communications system was planned for 1967. Prof. Ivan A. Vlasic, McGill Univ., warned we may be facing “a proliferation of competing, possibly even antagonistic communications systems. Given the present state of international relations the chances of conflict are considerable.” Jean Evensen, Norway’s government broadcasting system adviser, felt “a pressing need for ways of enforcing international communications rules. One rebel, one nonconformist . . . can create havoc ... to the damage of the rest of the world,” he said. (Bullen, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/65)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Solid Rocket Operations, Aerojet-General Corp., received aiaa’s James H. Wyld Propulsion Award during the Institute’s Propulsion Joint Specialists’ Conference in Colorado Springs. He was cited for “outstanding contributions to the field of solid rocketry for over 15 years, including the development of thrust-vector control and thrust-reverser systems that made possible the use of solid rocket motors in ballistic missiles.” (NYT, 6/17/65, 54M)
Machinist union members at Boeing Co. installations throughout the country voted to accept a new contract and end their 19-day-old strike against Boeing Co., announced Charles F. West, the union’s general vice president. Under the contract, IAM would be free to strike again after six months if agreement were not reached on performance analysis—system by which the company graded employees for promotion, demotion, or discharge, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 10/5/65; Wash. Post, 10/5/65)
Expansion of the role of the National Science Foundation and expenditure by Federal mission-oriented research agencies of more money on basic research were two major recommendations of a special panel of the National Academy of Sciences to Congress. Recommendations were in a report, Basic Research and National Goals, submitted to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The panel, headed by Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky of Harvard Univ., former science adviser to the President, was comprised of 15 scientists, engineers, and economists. The panel held that the National Science Foundation, as the sole agency of Government whose purpose was support of science across the board without regard for immediate practical gains, should be expanded to serve as a “balance wheel” to soften the impact of variable research policies of mission-oriented agencies on “little science.” The recommendation that agencies should devote greater portions of their budgets to basic research was based on the view that in many cases these budgets were becoming stationary while the capacity for scientific growth was expanding. The panel also recommended that in some cases the Congress should extend the mission of the agency to include the pursuit of certain branches of basic research. Three general opinions were widely held by the panel regarding the balance of science support today: first, Federal funds should be allocated with some consideration to the geographical-social effects of their expenditure; second, biological sciences had been under-supported and should receive support to expand them faster than the physical sciences; third, there was an impending crisis in the physical sciences because mission-oriented agencies, faced with stationary budgets, would probably not expand their support of basic physical research as fast as capacity to do basic research expanded. (Clark, NYT, 4/26/65, 55; SBD, 4/30/65, 330)
Speaking before the Senate Commerce Committee in support of his bill calling for a three-year feasibility study of this country’s adopting the metric system, Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) said: “Should Canada follow Great Britain’s example and convert, the United States would be virtually the only remaining country that uses a system of weights and measures based on other than the metric system. Actually, 90 percent of the people in the world use metric measures right now.” The proposed three-year Dept, of Commerce study, Senator Pell said, would include not only a detailed estimate of the cost of conversion, but also a statement of the possible side benefits in foreign trade, (ap, NYT, 7/15/65, 35)
Rep. Adam Clayton Powell (D-N.Y.), Chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor, personally wrote the presidents of the Nation’s 116 predominantly Negro colleges and universities urging them to apply for NASA grants and research contracts. In his letter he noted that of 187 colleges and universities receiving NASA grants, only one—Howard Univ.—was predominantly Negro and that 20 universities (10%) received $61,451,000 (50%) of the $121,115,000 total expenditure. (House Comm, on Education and Labor Release)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved a $5.2 billion nasa authorization for fy 1966, cutting only $75 million from the President’s request. An unrequested $27.2 million was included for the 260-in. solid propellant program, the M-l liquid hydrogen engine, and the Snap 8. Biggest single reduction was $42 million cut in $3.6 billion request for Apollo. Other programs affected by the cut included Oao, Ogo, Surveyor, Rover, Lunar Orbiter, and Centaur. (WSJ, 4/28/65)
Aerospace and defense planning concepts could be applied to many of the Nation’s major social problems, Dr. Ruben F. Mettler, executive vice president of TRW, Inc., told a luncheon meeting of aiaa in New York. Dr. Mettler listed transportation, medical services, and housing as areas where the systems approach to problems would prove beneficial. He said that he thought the application of aerospace systems concepts had a bright and profitable future in civilian endeavors. (NYT, 10/27/65, 74M)
In answer to the query “Is a permanent role waiting in space for military astronauts,” Robert Brunn in the Christian Science Monitor quoted an Air Force official as saying: “No strategy is known for space as yet. We can’t use space the way the cowboys and Indians used high ground for advantage, nor the way the Air Force in World War II climbed to altitude and dove out of the sun. “Something with military importance may turn up in the next five years. The Air Force doesn’t know what the usefulness of space will be. . . .” (Brunn, CSM, 10/13/65, 14)
Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said at the 16th annual luncheon for Albert Lasker Medical Journalism Awards in Washington, D.C.: “The most important race is not the space race or the arms race. It is the human race. If America can get excited about putting a man on the moon in 1970, why can’t we get excited about putting a lot of people on their feet by the same date? . . . some day we will be able to tell the world that science has discovered the secrets of aging or of cancer or of muscular dystrophy or multiple sclerosis or mental retardation. That news will outrank in importance even the wonderful tidings that man has landed on the moon.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb was asked by Rep. Charles R. Jonas (R-N.C.) in NASA appropriations hearing of the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, House Committee on Appropriations, to “set to rest” the rumor that NASA was planning to phase out msfc in Huntsville, Ala. Mr. Webb explained that during his recent visit to Alabama leading Alabama businessmen had asked “questions about the future and whether the budget was going to be larger, and whether more would come to Alabama. Perhaps injudiciously, I said, ‘Unless we can recruit better and more able people for the new phase of our program, you are not going to keep what you have.’ . . . “We have a real problem in recruiting the kind of people needed to manage these contracts with American industry to go and live in Alabama, and the image of the State has been one of the problems that we have had. I pointed this out to the businessmen, and pointed out to them also that not only the problem of our recruitment was involved, that the State itself, in my opinion, was missing a valuable opportunity to use these kinds of people to build up its own economy, because the very existence of them there in the various areas could be of great benefit to the State. . . .” I Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 1264-65)
A nasa report on its Aircraft Noise Research Program to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences said: “. . . there is a growing understanding that efforts at a practicable and mutually effective solution will need to be evolutionary in nature, and involve a dedicated attack on all major aspects of the problem. These include the acquisition of definitive information on the manner in which aircraft noises are generated and propagated, and the associated development of efficient methods for the reduction of adverse aircraft noise at its source; the establishment of safe and efficient aircraft operating procedures that minimize and control the exposure of airport community property to undesirable aircraft noise; and the provision of a rational understanding of the specific aircraft noise factors which produce subjective annoyance for various activities and environments of a community population, and of optimum methods for the control and adjustment of community property usage in critical noise areas in the vicinity of the airport.” {CR, 5/27/65)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, said in an article in Boston Sunday Globe: “The need for increased electronics research to develop devices which will meet the demands and rigors of long space flights will affect our industrial outlook and economy in many ways. By requiring a ‘new look’ at electronics, NASA, led by ERC, will provide a research emphasis such as we have not had since World War II when the golden age of electronics started. “We have been in the ‘rocket phase’ and are now entering the ‘electronic phase’ of space flight development, a phase which will affect us dramatically over many years.” (Boston Sun. Globe, 1/3/65)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Aerojet-General Corp.’s solid rocket operations, announced that a new solid fuel multipulse rocket engine containing several charges of propellant that could be separately fired by electrical signal had successfully completed its first series of test firings. The rocket could zip, glide, and dart about much like a bird, he said, or could lie dormant in space a year and then be restarted on command. Key to multipulse firings was described as a lightweight thermal barrier separating each charge. Aerojet had conducted demonstration firings of six flight-weight configurations in the company-funded program, (ap, Denver Post, 4/21/ 65; Av. Wk„ 4/19/65, 30)
James C. Elms and L/Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF-Ret.) had been appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrators for Manned Space Flight effective Sept. 1, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced. Elms had served as Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center before assuming his present position as vice president of Raytheon Co. General Bogart, former usaf comptroller, had served as Director for Management Operations, omsf, since February. Paul E. Cotton, who had been assistant to Dr. Mueller since November 1963, would become Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations, succeeding General Bogart. B/Gen. Julian H. Bowman (USAF, Ret.) would succeed Cotton. General Bowman had been a special assistant to Dr. Mueller, (nasa Release 65-264)
Discussing the missions and plans of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Dr. Winston E. Kock, erc Director, told the Harvard Engineers Club in Cambridge: “I believe that the recent strengthening of research in NASA can act to overcome any such braking of scientific enthusiasm which the recent changes in our defense program . . . may have instigated. I have seen at first hand true research enthusiasm at two NASA Research Centers, Lewis in Cleveland, and Ames in California, and, at Cambridge’s new NASA Research Center, the response we have had from inventive, research-minded individuals, expressing an interest in association with the Center has been phenomenal. I have always believed in the saying ‘necessity is the mother of invention,’ and I feel certain that it was the necessities of World War II that brought into bloom radar, the jet aircraft, nuclear power, the v-2 rocket (which led to our present missile and space rockets), and many other developments which have proved to be of vital importance to our way of life. So, I feel that a counterbalance to today’s reduced necessities of the broad, new opening field of space research . . . will help to keep our nation’s research talent active and enthusiastic, and maintain it in the strong virility it has exhibited since the start of World War n.” (Text)	_	_
Hearings on NASA budget authorization for fy 1966 began before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Of the $5,260 billion requested for fy 1966, $4,576 billion was for research and development; $74.7 million was for construction of facilities; and $609.4 million was for administrative operations. Administrator James E. Webb testified:	“This budget . . . supports an on-going successful research and development effort and the use of this knowledge to develop and test operating systems designed to give us what we need to know for national security, for applications in meteorology, communications, and other working satellite systems, and from which to make any decisions which may be called for in the future. “An important fact that underlies the President’s 1966 budget decisions is that the program is now operating at a level of 5/4 billion dollars instead of at the optimum level of 5% billion originally recommended by President Kennedy or the ‘fighting chance’ level recommended last year by President Johnson. This means that we cannot accomplish the 15 Saturn V-Apollo flights now included in the program within the period of this decade. If all 15 flights are required to succeed in the lunar landing, then this will not be done before 1970. However, our overall major milestones are being met and we still have a reasonable opportunity for success on a flight earlier than the 15th and thus within this decade. In effect we will be launching toward the moon on earlier flights than we thought a year ago would be possible, but we simply cannot predict which flight will be the first either to orbit the moon or to land there. “What we can say is this:	the systems of equipment for the utilization of men for flights of all kinds out as far as the moon are now rapidly proceeding toward tests that will work out any imperfections; and our fast-developing knowledge of both the space environment and the capabilities of this equipment gives us more confidence than we had a year ago that we are on the right track and proceeding on a reasonable basis for the development of machines of this size and power. . . . “In preparation of this budget, the President has faced two important facts. The first of these is that the central core of NASA activities as planned in 1961 is proceeding with excellent results. . . . “The second major fact faced by the President was the necessity for a continued emphasis on supporting research and development. . . . “Bearing these two facts in mind, this budget and this request for authorization call for an operating level which is approximately the same as that approved by Congress for fiscal years 1964 and 1965. This means that the work planned in 1961 for accomplishment in this decade must be spread out over a longer period, and the cost for the total will be increased. . . . “The essential funds to give us some opportunity to make the lunar landing within this decade are included, as are funds for studies toward further use of the Saturn launch vehicles and the Appollo-LEM manned space flight systems in the period following the lunar landing. By 1969, we will have the capability to launch 6 Saturn-iB’s and 6 Saturn V’s per year. In the unmanned area, we have begun planning for a Voyager-Mars mission in 1971 with the possibility of a test flight in 1969; funds are included in the budget for expansion of this design effort during fiscal year 1966. Development and hardware procurement could then be initiated in fiscal year 1967 if appropriate. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 5-14)
Former faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby was appointed senior vice president of Pan American World Airways and elected to its board of directors. Halaby’s initial responsibilities would embrace the airline’s defense activities, its services for USAF at the Eastern Test Range, and its business-jets division. (NYT, 9/15/65, 77M; Wash. Post, 9/15/65, B9)
Vice President Humphrey, in France for the International Air Show at Le Bourget with Astronauts White and McDivitt, met for 80 min. with President de Gaulle. (Tanner, NYT, 6/21/65; Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/65)
The National Science Foundation’s past activities were reviewed in a report by the Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. No judgments were made, but the 286-page report called attention to broad areas of concern: (1) Could the Foundation meaningfully promote the progress of American science on a very limited budget? (2) What was its relationship to the Office of Science and Technology which was developing national science policy? (3) What was its relationship to American universities conducting research? (4) Had it effectively gathered data and made statistical analyses essential to research planning and administration? (5) Should the Foundation continue to manage large-scale research projects? (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 10329, which would authorize the Secretary of Commerce to conduct a feasibility study on adoption of the metric system. {CR, 8/24/ 65, 19007)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, reviewing overall manned space flight objectives and reporting on the Gemini and Apollo programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Chronologically, the first objective of manned space flight is to establish man’s capabilities in space. Next is the establishment of a national competence for manned space flight, including the industrial base, trained personnel, ground facilities, flight hardware, and operational experience. Next, we use this capability for further space explorations and for other purposes. Finally, accomplishment of all these objectives brings about United States leadership in space. “. . . In 1964, we concentrated our efforts on Gemini ground tests and accomplished the first flight test. Filling the pipeline with hardware and carrying out development testing of subsystems were the major Apollo activities. Now in 1965, we have entered a year that will be devoted to Gemini flight test operations and the conduct of Apollo system development tests. “Looking at the remainder of the decade, 1966 will be the year when we learn new' space flight techniques in the Gemini Program, and conduct unmanned earth-orbital flight tests of the Apollo/Saturn IB space vehicle. In 1967, Gemini will be available as an operational system and we will carry out manned earth-orbital flights of the Apollo/ Saturn V space vehicle. Manned flights of the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle are scheduled for 1968, leading to the beginning of manned lunar missions before the end of the decade. “. . . I want to emphasize again that Apollo is an orderly program. The buildup of the Apollo effort has proceeded over more than three and a half years to its full strength. It is not a crash program. “The duration of Apollo, as we reported to the Congress last year, is one of the longer United States research and development programs, resulting in a schedule that permits rapid, orderly progress. The Apollo priority is high but not overriding. Parallel and backup development efforts are limited. Flight testing is being carried out on a logical basis, and only after all possible tests are conducted on the ground. “Efficient use of available resources is a major consideration in the conduct of the Apollo program, whereas a crash program follows the most expeditious course regardless of cost. “Finally, crash programs typically have goals beyond the existing state of technology and pursue these goals under the pressure of having to achieve a technological breakthrough. Apollo, on the other hand, harnesses current technology in the development of launch vehicles, spacecraft and facilities to permit effective space exploration. The greatest challenges in Apollo, in fact, are in the integration of those systems and the men who must fly them as well as the provision of ground operational support, and the overall management of this enterprise.” Dr. Mueller said that data received and analysis continued in 1964 regarding radiation and the lunar surface indicated that these matters were of less importance than had been previously deduced:	“. . . First, the chance of a significant solar event occurring during a mission is very low. Second, if the worst solar flare previously observed had occurred during an Apollo mission, the maximum dose that could have been received at the bloodforming organs by astronauts in the command module would have been about 10 per cent of the allowable safe dose, rather than 15 per cent as estimated last year. “Regarding the lunar surface, the data from ranger vii have been very helpful. The large area photography has indicated the probability that there are many areas of the moon’s surface where the design of the lunar excursion module is adequate with respect to surface slope and roughness. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 53-134)
“If Major Edward H. White leaves his space capsule during next Thursday’s Gemini 4 flight, it will only be a ‘space spectacular’ stunt,” said Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) during a news conference in San Francisco. Rep. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had made the same comment at the time of a similar feat by the Soviet Union. (NYT, 5/28/65)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began a two-day seminar with a panel discussion on science and technology, with specific reference to aeronautics. Speaker of the House John W. McCormack opened the seminar. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began executive hearings on the subject of launch vehicles. (NASA LAR iv/17)
Members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting to consider H.J. Res. 597 providing for a monument to Dr. Robert H. Goddard at Clark Univ., agreed to limit cost of the memorial to $150,000.	(CR, 9/7/65, 23315)
A crowd of two million gathered in Chicago during the parade and motorcade honoring Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf), accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Honorary citizens medals were presented the astronauts at a special City Council meeting. Civil rights leaders postponed a demonstration protesting de facto school segregation in deference to the celebration, (ap, Wash. Post. 6/16/65; Wehrwein, NYT, 6/15/65)
Paul Haney, Chief of Public Affairs for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, addressed Oklahoma members of the American Legion to open their state convention: “Although we are not pursuing any military objectives as such, every once in a while somebody turns over a rock and finds something which could be of immense military value. “As Detroit learned to produce millions of cars in a hurry by production line development and thus was able to convert without a bobble to tank production in World War II, so could our entire manned space flight program be converted.” (ap, Houston Post, 8/8/65)
Discussions at last week’s Eurospace meeting in Philadelphia indicated that “Europeans are eagerly seeking means to acquire U.S. technical know-how and systems management capability without buying hardware,” wrote William J. Coughlin in a Missiles and Rockets editorial. He continued: “This was recognized in a blunt statement by Lockheed vice president Elmer P. Wheaton:
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey visited nasa Flight Research Center. (frc X-Press, 4/9/65, 1, 2)
Fuel cells used in the Gemini v mission August 21-29 were being developed by General Electric Co. for commercial use, Dr. Arthur M. Bueche, ge vice president for research and development, told a news conference in New York City. The first models, expected to be ready next year, would provide only 12 watts [gemini v cells provided 2,000 watts] but could power remote television cameras and other communications equipment. Larger units might soon provide emergency power to homes, Dr. Bueche said. (NYT, 9/2/65, 38C)
Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff (r&d), stated in fy 1966 appropriations hearings of House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “I cannot help but believe, if we take a look at the last 40 years of Russian national development, that they are watching for an opportunity to gain a major military advantage over us. I cannot help but feel that they are examining opportunities in space very thoroughly for this particular purpose. “In order to be able to offset any advantage which they may discover, I feel we must move as rapidly as we can in this area, and take full advantage of any other national space programs such as the NASA activity. “The big program that we hope to get a go-ahead on here shortly is the Manned Orbital Laboratory. Here we think we will achieve a number of answers in the next 2 or three years. . . .”	(DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 148)
Sen. A. S. Monroney (D-Okla.) told a meeting of the American Helicopter Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA was spending too small a share of its budget on aviation research. Senator Monroney, the chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, said he became angry when he compared the $43 million earmarked for aeronautics next year with the space agency’s total budget of $5.2 billion. He said that although the agency allocated less than 2 percent of its budget to solving the many flight mysteries it acknowledges still exist, the agency’s working-level scientists wanted to do more in this area. Monroney also said he disagreed with those who contended that subsidy for the helicopter airlines was wasteful and unwarranted. He said that while helicopters might not have made the progress many wished for and some had promised, commercial revenues had increased, costs had declined, equipment had improved, and capability to operate on instruments had been developed, (ap, NYT, 5/15/65)
The British Defense Ministry announced that its fleet of Valiant bombers would be scrapped because of weakened structure caused by metal fatigue. Valiant was the first of the three “V” types of jet bombers built by U.K. following World War II. They had been in service nine years and only about half the original force remained in service as reconnaissance or tankers. This would not affect Britain’s contribution to nato or its proposal for an Atlantic nuclear force. {NYT, 1/27/65)
Former German missile experts who helped foster American rocketry after World War II met at NASA msfc to celebrate their 20th year in the U.S. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, attended, (upi, Cocoa Trib., 11/4/65; Marshall Star, 11/10/65)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA had an obligation to make information gained from space exploration available to the public. He continued: “To help achieve this, a National Space Science Data Center was established at GSFC in April 1964. . . . “The Data Center is responsible for the collection, organization, indexing, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of all scientific data resulting from experiments in space and the upper atmosphere. Since its establishment the Data Center has begun: (1) to maintain a continuing inventory of data from sounding rockets and spacecraft; (2) to acquire data generated by spacecraft previously launched; (3) to collect selected ground correlative data; and (4) to produce the announcement publications which support its functions. “In anticipation of the need for this facility, NASA has established a line item in the Physics and Astronomy budget, Data Analysis, of three million dollars in FY 1966. Of this, 600 thousand dollars is for the operation of the Data Center and 2.4 million dollars is for analysis of data from a flight experiment under the flight project. After the initial results have been published by the Principal Investigator and the data are placed in the data center, the additional analyses of these data will be funded from Data Analysis funds on the basis of proposals from competent scientists throughout the Nation . . . This approach is expected to . . . encourage them to use all of the available information in their theoretical research.” Dr. Newell discussed NASA’s orbiting observatory program: “The primary reason for . . . solar studies is to meet the overall NASA objective to expand human knowledge of space phenomena. . . . “oso-c [Orbiting Solar Observatory-C] is the next spacecraft to be launched and it is undergoing final testing at this time. On 30 May a solar eclipse of unusually long duration will occur. Every effort is being made to launch oso-c prior to this event so that two oso’s, with complementary payloads, can be operating and transmitting unique data on the solar radiation at the time of the eclipse.” He said that the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) program would make a major contribution to our understanding of earth-sun-environment relationships and that although OGO I had not functioned as planned “it has proven that the basic spacecraft design is adequate and that large numbers of experiments can be integrated and operated from a single satellite. Furthermore, should OGO I continue to transmit data for a reasonable period, it is expected that the results will contribute substantially to studies of the Earth-Sun relationships. “Investigation of the OGO i failure indicated there was no common cause for failure, but as a result of the investigation, design modifications and additional tests are planned for future OGO spacecraft. The modifications include: (1) relocation of the horizon scanner and certain boom appendages to assure a clear field of view for the horizon scanners; (2) the use of a new type development spring and the addition of separate appendage ‘kick-off’ springs; and (3) the relocation of the omnidirectional antenna.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 461-580)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, addressing 4,000 employees and officials of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., warned Grumman to reduce contract proposals sharply if it expected to gain a share of future defense contracts. McNamara said Grumman’s proposals for construction of a portion of the f-111 fighter’s tail assembly were “higher than other competitive sources. “There is no question in my mind that you can reduce costs on this $1 billion contract. They’ve got to come down,” he said. The contract he was referring to had not yet been awarded. McNamara, accompanied by Senator Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) and Asst. Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester, was making a brief tour of defense plants on Long Island. (Maiorana, NYT, 10/14/65, 41)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Charles R. Able, group vice president, Missile and Space Systems, Douglas Aircraft Co., defined for the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., the reasons the U.S. must have an on-going space program. He concluded: “The most important single factor in deciding what space programs we will implement in the future ... is going to be, simply, how well we perform in the programs now going and those just getting started. “The extent to which this Nation will be willing to commit itself to new ventures in space in the years ahead depends entirely on how well we stay on schedule and within the budget set for us. “The most important task we have in preparing for the future is to do a good job now.” (Text, CR, 9/22/65, A5370-71)
In NASA fy 1966 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb testified: “Among the hard decisions and difficult choices which had to be made in the preparation of this budget was the decision to terminate the programs to develop the m—1 large liquid hydrogen fueled engine, the large 260-inch solid propellant motor, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power supply. The reduction in the requests for space technology activities amounting to about $18 million when compared with fiscal year 1965, results mostly from these terminations. However, as this Committee knows, there is pending before it notification of a plan to reprogram $16,950,000 of 1965 funds so that these projects can be carried forward into 1966 to appropriate developmental points at which important segments of the engineering data for which the projects were originally planned can be obtained for incorporation in our total bank of technological and engineering knowledge.” Mr. Webb was questioned by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D—Minn.) on when the first U.S. extravehicular activity was planned, and he replied: “Within the next year. We are not sure on which Gemini flight we will do it as yet.” Senator Mondale asked: “When do we plan our first rendezvous maneuver?” and Mr. Webb replied: “Within the next year, maybe the latter part of this year.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 623, 663)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and DOD Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced NASA—dod agreement on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), released in conjunction with fy 1966 budget: . . Planning for the Defense manned orbiting laboratory program will also consider, in cooperation with NASA, broader objectives of scientific and general technological significance. “To determine the essential characteristics of the vehicle that will be required, the DOD will continue intensive studies and design of experiments and systems aimed at the primary military objectives. “Cooperative studies, by NASA and Defense, will identify and define scientific and general technological experiments which might be carried out, with NASA participation, in conjunction with the military program. “dod, with assistance from NASA, will compare configurations of Apollo which may be suitable for military experiments with the Gemini b-mol configuration to determine the complete system that can meet the primary military objectives in a more efficient, less costly, or more timely fashion. “On the basis of these studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with full-scale development by Defense of a manned orbiting laboratory system and what the specific developments and vehicle configurations are to be. The Defense budget includes $150 million in fy 1966 for the program. . . . “Depending upon the manned orbiting laboratory decision, upon the progress in the Gemini and Apollo programs, and upon the results of NASA studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with modifications to the Apollo system and the nature and timing of necessary specific developments. The NASA 1966 budget includes about $50 million for proceeding with design and pacing developments. . . (nasa Budget Briefing fy 1966)
Curtiss-Wright Corp. could participate in future naval weapons procurement, including the procurement of weapon system trainers, DOD announced. Last March when R/Adm. Allan M. Shinn, Chief of the Bureau of Weapons, testified before a closed session of the House Appropriations Committee he disclosed “inadequate performance” on the part of Curtiss-Wright in connection with the p3-a trainer program. (Text; NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
