House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed its report on H.R. 1441, the $4.986-billion nasa budget authorization, (nasa lar V/65-66)
nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Breene M. Kerr, reviewing nasa technology utilization program for 1965 in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, stated that the total number of NASA Tech Briefs now published was more than 600. He continued: "We anticipate publication of approximately 700 Tech Briefs during calendar year 1966. ... we estimate the average Tech Brief is seen by more than 10,000 persons. . . . Industry interest in our program is . . . indicated by the fact that approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field Center Technology Utilization Offices during calendar 1965. . . . Two additional Regional Dissemination Programs have been started in the last year, one at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and the other at Southeastern State College in Durant, Okla. One hundred and thirty-one companies are now paying annual membership fees at our established computer-based centers. ... Of real significance ... is the fact that approximately 3,000 companies have received some degree of service from these centers. . . . We have also recently concluded an interagency agreement with the Small Business Administration whereby several of that organization’s field offices, under an experimental program, will be providing NASA technology to selected small business concerns.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634-9)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the nasa FY 1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the gap between the U.S. and Soviet space programs still remained and "this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2 years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new launch vehicle with some WA to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the moon and they have reached Venus with two probes. "The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. . . . The massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capabilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United States has achieved a manned lunar landing to prevent them from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 5)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
The study of future national space objectives by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight was termed a "timely and thoughtful” document in Technology Week editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting that its major contribution "is to focus attention on the urgent need for a major decision concerning the nation’s space program,” Coughlin added: "Not only does Congress have a role to play in such decisions, but the Teague subcommittee is moving to fill a vacuum in the decision-making process. The Administration has shown itself reluctant to bring forth decisions in this area. NASA itself has backed away from defining the next space objective. The subcommittee is performing a valuable national service in attempting to bring the matter to a head.” (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 50)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told AP he saw "no urgency” in landing on the moon first. Discounting the theory that a manned lunar landing would have military significance, Senator Anderson said "had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated from the start in space exploration, more knowledge at less expense might have resulted.” (AP, NYT, 12/15/66, 34)
President Johnson signed into law Marine Resources and Engineering Development Act of 1966, establishing national goals for an expanding national oceanographic effort. Legislation, sponsored by Sen. Warren G.	Magnuson (D-Wash.), provided for Cabinet-level National Council of Marine Resources and Engineering Development—and administrative and coordinating organization similar to nasc. Chairman would be Vice President. Bill also provided for 15-member Marine Science, Engineering and Resources Commission to conduct 18-mo. study of U.S. oceanographic capabilities and recommend Government organizational plan for oceanography. (CR, 6/2/66, 11490-92; Wash. Post, 6/19/66, A17)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, speaking to a group of Life magazine executives visiting ksc, remarked:	. . the space program has added greater meaning to our lives. I have talked to a great many Americans recently about the benefits of the space program, and I have found that my fellow Americans get a thrill and a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction out of this great undertaking of our nation. "Our young people have a new frontier to explore. And this comes at a time when we thought all the frontiers were gone. They have new and exciting places to go out in the universe, new ideas to bring home and enrich their lives, new challenges to hone their character. "Yesterday our horizon was limited by the globe of earth, and today, as a result of this new frontier, our horizons are as limitless as the universe itself.” (Text)
Soviet rocket pioneer Vladimir Vasilyevich Razumov, presumed to have died in Stalinist purges of Leningrad during World War II, had been located and interviewed by Leningradskaya Pravda reporters. Razumov had headed the Leningrad Jet Study Group of space enthusiasts until Stalin abolished it in 1935. His residence was not disclosed, possibly because of his continued association with missile manufacture. (NYT, 1/10/66, 46C)
General Dynamics Corp. announced that U.S.S. Redstone, one of three World War II T-2 type tankers being converted by corporation into Project Apollo tracking-communications vessel, had undergone initial sea trials out of Quincy, Mass. (NYT, 6/12/66)
National Science Foundation must abandon its passive role and be more dynamic if scientific progress is to keep pace with society’s growing technological needs, concluded a report released by the Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee viewed the revitalization of nsf as "an area of the government-science relationship in which Congress should provide a large share of the leadership essential to significant improvement in the Nation’s resources and development.” Some recommendations of the report: (1) NSF supplement its traditional philosophy with positive plans and programs; (2) character and functions of the National Science Board be strengthened; (3) authority of nsf’s director be widened; and (4) important executive and policy problems of NSF be acted upon administratively or legislatively in the near future. (Text, Committee Print)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended ceremony at nasa Hq. celebrating successful launch of essa i, essa’s first operational meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures taken by essa i, launched by nasa from etr Feb. 3, were released; nasa Administrator James E. Webb administered the oath of office to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and the Vice President presented nasa Exceptional Service medals to Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Programs; Herbert I. Butler, nasa Chief of Operational Satellites, gsfc; and David S. Johnson, essa Environmental Satellite Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the spirit of cooperation between nasa and Dept, of Commerce, noting that "science leaves no room for jurisdictional disputes.” He said of NASA’s Administrator and Deputy Administrator: "I know of no two men who are more dedicated to our space program than Jim Webb and Bob Seamans. Their devotion is almost sacrificial.” (nasa Release 66-29)
Report on national document-handling systems in science and technology prepared by Federal Council for Science and Technology’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information (cosati) was summarized in Science by Launor F. Carter, vice president of System Development Corp.-—a participant in the study. Report had recommended that Office of Science and Technology: (1) accelerate its efforts to organize an integrated national network of information and document-handling systems in science and technology; (2) collaborate with other Federal agencies and private organizations to develop comprehensive, coordinated program and sponsor effective legislation; (3) encourage private sector to formulate plans for its consideration; and (4) encourage Federal support of experiments in information technology, including prototype information systems. (Carter, Science, 12/9/66, 1299-1304)
Martin Co. had been awarded a three-month, $75,000 contract to design and develop a flight-qualified, lightweight, hand-held lunar core driller for use on Apollo missions, msc announced. Similar contract, also for $75,000, had been awarded Northrop Space Laboratories. {Chic. Trib., 8/18/66) Ford Foundation president McGeorge Bundy said that although the use of profits from a commercial business to finance a noncommercial undertaking might be novel to television, creation of a special carrier service in the public interest was not without precedent. He cited the Government’s granting of special mailing privileges to newspapers and magazines. Bundy disclosed the Ford Foundation was planning to arrange "a series of meetings in various parts of the country with potential users of a noncommercial satellite system.” Fred W. Friendly, TV consultant to Bundy, described what he said was the underlying irony of modem TV: commercial networks had the money to do qualitative public service but lacked sufficient time on the air, while educational TV had the time but lacked the money. ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack said the heart of the Ford proposal called for the 'Tunneling of savings” that might be enjoyed by commercial communications carriers into support of a cultural undertaking. While acknowledging the value of educational TV, McCormack said he felt only Congress could rule whether one segment of a diversified society could be compelled to support another segment without benefit of specific legislation to that end. AT&T vice president Richard Hough, itt executive Bertram B. Tower, and Western Union Telegraph Co. vice president Earl D. Hilburn challenged the proposal saying that any such communications system should adhere to the common carrier principle of serving all users rather than any particular group such as broadcasters. While these witnesses supported the objective, they questioned the feasibility of the plan on economic and technical grounds. Tower suggested that consideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services through existing common carriers. Hilburn said that rate adjustments in favor of educational broadcasters might be authorized if some form of subsidy were determined to be in the national interest. Sen. John O. Pastore (D-R.I.), who had called the hearings, said they were a "prelude” to action by fcc and noted that Congress almost certainly would want to explore the implications of the Ford proposal as it related to a private corporation. Hearings were completed Aug. 23. (ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8/18/66, 59; Wash. Post, 8/18/66, A12; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/66, A2)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
NASA’s second space-tracking station near Canberra, Australia, was officially opened by Minister of Supply Denham Henty. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, attended ceremony and praised Australia’s contribution to U.S. space program saying: "We will explore space together for the benefit of mankind.” (NYT, 2/25/66, 3)
Report of the White House Committee on Meteorology concluded that global weather experiment using meteorological satellite and network of sensors on constant-altitude balloons, remote land stations, and ocean buoys could be deployed in four years for $50 million. Assignment of overall management responsibility given to single agency to begin design study was discussed in Aviation Week. Designated Ghost (global horizontal sounding technique), project would attempt to extend atmospheric measurements to that 90% of the earth’s surface not yet adequately covered, using meteorological satellite in 600-mi.-altitude polar orbit to obtain pair of readings from all global points every 12 hrs. In addition, 1,000 to 3,000 super-pressure balloons would be floated at six different atmospheric levels to measure wind, pressure, temperature, humidity, and overpressure. NASA Nimbus B meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in 1967, would carry interrogation, recording, and locating system experiment (Iris) designed to perform ranging and data collection function on which Ghost was based. However, NASA would attempt only limited experiments with Iris involving a check of the system’s ability to locate fixed sensor packages, and track them on slow-moving and fast-moving platforms, Dr. Morris Tepper, Director, Meteorological Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, told Aviation Week. Tepper said any agency providing its own transponders and funding its own equipment could participate in the Iris tests. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66,55)
The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-fueled rocket from Auburn, Mass., 40 yrs. ago. Annually on the anniversary of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address, emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: "I feel the necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he could foresee "dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration, notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of "a whole family of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3) development of "recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneuverable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5) improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be made in a week or less; (6) "launching of unmanned probes to every part of the solar system—and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as well.” (Text; CR, 5/4/66) National Space Club Press Award "in recognition of his exceptional photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went to nasa photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews "for his contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as a key engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space flight, culminating in Project Mercury... and in the successful Gemini program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for "making a major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented jointly to msc, usaf Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for "Danish Rocketry in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to university of recipient’s choice) "in recognition of the need for higher scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C. (Text; Program)
In letter to Congress transmitting report on the Nation’s oceanographic work, President Johnson urged that funds be voted to continue work on Project Mohole. House Appropriations Committee had denied (May 5) $19.7-million Presidential request for nsf work on Mohole in FY 1967. Total cost was estimated as $110 million; about $25 million had already been spent. President Johnson wrote: "The Mohole Project will provide the answer to many basic questions about the earth’s crust and the origin of ocean basins. It will teach us how to drill in the ocean depths— the prelude to the future exploitation of resources at the bottom of the sea.” (Pres. Doc., 5/23/66, 661; AP, NYT, 5/19/66, 23; Wash. Post, 5/19/66, A6)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
NASA’s lunar and planetary programs were discussed by NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: "It is important to note that the Mariner IV photographs do not determine whether life exists on Mars. Even before the flight of Mariner IV, it was known that pictures taken at this resolution could not give any direct evidence of life forms. . . . "We propose to continue the exploration of Venus and Mars begun so well with Mariners II and IV, respectively, by utilizing for the 1967 Venus opportunity an appropriate modification of the spare spacecraft from the Mariner IV program. This will be launched on an Atlas-Agena vehicle.” Cortright presented prepared statement by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell summarizing comsat and sounding rocket launches: "The first launching by NASA of a satellite for the Corporation [ComSatCorp] took place on April 6, 1965, when the Early Bird satellite was placed in orbit using a thrust-augmented Delta launch vehicle. The launching was carried out under an agreement between Comsat and NASA, signed in December 1964, which detailed the services to be performed by NASA, financial arrangements, etc. . . . "Although the original agreement gave Comsat options for as many as seven additional launchings through March 1967, none of these options has been exercised. In the meantime, Comsat has inaugurated tbe HS-303A program, and has advised NASA that it will require two or three HS-303A launchings in 1966, beginning in August. The HS-303A is larger and heavier than Early Bird, and will need the capabilities of the thrust-augmented improved Delta launch vehicle. Otherwise, launch services are expected to be similar to those provided in support of the Early Bird. "The Corporation is now negotiating for development and procurement of spacecraft for the eventual global system. These spacecraft are expected to be deployed beginning in 1968.” Referring to the NASA sounding rocket program, Dr. Newell said: "Since 1959 to the present NASA has launched 668 sounding rockets for scientific investigations in space and 516 of these were for investigations in the areas of physics and astronomy.” He mentioned as significant the International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) Mobile Launch Expedition carried out in spring 1965 using an aircraft carrier as a launching platform: rockets carrying instrumented payloads were launched off west coast of South America from 5° north latitude to 60° south latitude with the greatest concentration of flights at the geomagnetic equator near Lima, Peru. 45 Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache rockets and 32 single-stage Areas rockets were flown carrying experiments furnished by NASA, usn, usaf, universities, and industry. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 233-4, 359, 375-6)
Dr. Eric A. Walker, president of Pennsylvania State Univ. and chairman of the National Science Board, was elected president of the National Academy of Engineering, (nae News) Dr. Vannevar Bush, Honorary Chairman of the Corporation, MIT, received the National Academy of Engineering’s first Founders’ Medal at 2nd annual nae meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Bush, former president of Carnegie Institution of Washington, director of Office of Scientific Research and Development during World War II, and naca Chairman 1939-41, was cited as "the engineer who mobilized this country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the blueprint for the post-war cooperation of science and government.” (nae Release, 4/19/66)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey said in address at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colo.: "It was seventy years ago this May that Samuel Pierpont Langley, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, launched his sixteen-foot, steam-powered model airplane off the Potomac River and flew a half a mile in the incredible time of 90 seconds. . . . "Seventy years—in the larger scheme of history—is not a very long time. "But though those seventy years are but the average length of a full American life, they reach back into an incredibly distant world—a world that has receded from us by a quantum of change that no other period in the vast sweep of human history can surpass. "One measure of that change is flight itself. "I flew here this morning from Washington—nonstop—in 3 hours and 20 minutes. "Had I made the flight from Washington to Colorado Springs in Langley’s plane, it would have required 127 days—and we would have had to make 2,987 fuel stops along the way. . . (Text)
A "commercial missile” that could transport 170 passengers from Bombay to New York in 39 min. was described at the Pacific Area Travel Association Conference in New Delhi by B. F. Coggan, corporate vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co. He said the rocket—which would reach a speed of 17,000 mph—would be a bell-shaped vehicle 114 ft. high with a diameter of from 33 to 49 ft. It would weigh more than three million pounds at liftoff. Passenger compartment would have 45 individual passenger couches arranged on each of four decks; during the period of weightless flight, passengers would be held to the couches by belts. On a typical flight plan, Coggan said, the rocket would reach 125-mi. peak altitude. Then, it could hover and maneuver horizontally before landing on four extendable legs. (NYT, 1/29/66, 54)
President Johnson established White House committee headed by Dr. Donald F. Hornig to study ways to help West European nations improve their technology. Serving with Dr. Hornig would be representatives of Depts. of State, Defense, and Commerce; NASA; aec; and Council of Economic Advisers. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 41; Wash. Post, 11/27/66, A6)
President Johnson said at news conference at Texas White House that there would be $60-million program reduction in NASA FY 1967 budget requiring some contract cancellations. About $30 million in expenditures was involved. Asked if changes in the NASA budget would cause postponement of target dates for any of the space programs, Johnson said: ". . . $30-million out of some several billion dollars wouldn’t cause a change in the target date of the moon schedule, if you are talking about that.” (Pres. Doc., 12/S/66, 1741; Transcript, NYT, 11/30/66, 18)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told Clear Lake (Tex.) Chamber of Commerce that he foresaw no curtailment of space program because of Vietnam war. If there were curtailment, "it will be aimed at all Government programs.” (Amerine, Houston Chron., 10/21/66)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey designated Col. Donald W. Paffell (usaf) his Assistant for Aeronautics and Space Matters, (usaf Hq. Bull., 2/14/66,2)	_
ucla dedicated new center for space sciences, Schlichter Hall, made possible by $2-million NASA grant. Six-story building, named for Dr. Louis Byrne Schlichter, Prof. Emeritus of Geophysics and Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics from 1947 to 1962, would contain 30 large laboratories and 50 research and administrative offices. Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator, said in a dedication speech: "nasa thinks that this is a singularly important type of activity as many of the problems confronting NASA in the space program reach across disciplinary lines and require the combined efforts of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, biologists, psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists and economists.” Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cornell Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics; ucla Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Schlichter; Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald; and Nobel Laureate Willard F. Libby, director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, (ucla Release, 4/3/66; Text)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey proclaimed Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill "Multiple Sclerosis Woman of the Year” in ceremony at his Washington, D.C., office and presented her with engraved bronze hope chest— symbol of Multiple Sclerosis Society. Dr. Gill, an MS patient for over 20 yrs., was with NASA Manned Flights Experiments Office, ossa. She formerly had been Chief of In-Flight Sciences, ossa, and on March 1 had received one of six Federal Women’s Awards of 1966. (Wash. Post, 6/16/66, Dl)
Vice president of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Boris Konstantinov discussed mission of Proton spacecraft series in Tass interview: "Research already carried out with the help of the Proton stations gives reason to expect that the growing weight of such laboratories will allow scientists to delve deeper into the processes occurring within the universe.” He revealed that proton in, launched July 6, would attempt to experimentally detect "quarks,” fundamental particles believed to appear during collision of cosmic ray particles with atoms of interstellar environment. Spacecraft carried "new, complicated instrumentation which is more sensitive than the old equipment.” (Tass, 6/8/66)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Werner A. Baum, Vice President for Scientific Affairs of New York Univ., as Deputy Administrator of essa to succeed V/Adm. H. Arnold Karo who would retire Jan. 1, 1967. (Pres. Doc., 9/19/66, 1305)
$500-million XB-70 No. 2 experimental bomber and its F-104 chase plane collided and burned near Barstow, Calif., destroying both aircraft and killing F-104 pilot Joseph A. Walker and XB-70 co-pilot Maj. Carl S. Cross (usaf). Walker, NASA test pilot, held world’s records for his 4,104-mph and 354,200-ft.-altitude flights in X-15 rocket research aircraft. XB-70 pilot A1 White ejected in seat capsule and parachuted to ground, suffering arm.and back injuries. On basis of preliminary usaf reports that F-104 apparently hit two vertical stabilizers on XB-70 at 25,000-ft. altitude during "routine” flight, President Johnson praised pilots who gave "their lives to advancing science and technology” and added "immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in the effort” to advance supersonic flight, usaf later revealed that aircraft were flying in formation as close as 10 ft. with T-38, F-4B, and F-5 aircraft "to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Disclosure prompted AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard Schriever to establish two usaf accident boards and Congress to designate House Appropriations Committee to investigate the disaster. (Edwards afb Release; Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748; Wash. Post, 6/14/66, A3)
Aerospace rather than shipbuilding companies were competing for $l-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) program because of USn’s new contract policy, Robert Wright reported in the New York Times. Under new policy, firms were required to bid for total package— concept, design, and construction—instead of construction only. Vernon A. Johnson, a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president, believed Lockheed, General Dynamics Corp., and Litton Industries, Inc., were competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked resources and experience for total-package systems design. Goal of Fdl program was fleet of 30-40 ships capable of remaining at sea for indefinite periods and making fast delivery of heavy supplies to fight small wars. (Wright, ATT, 12/11/66, 12)
Question of "garbage problem” in space was raised during recent House Appropriations Committee hearings on Spacetrack, which maintained surveillance on over 1,800 orbiting objects, Drew Pearson reported in Washington Post. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Alexander H. Flax replied there was no danger of collision "because of the tremendous amount of volume that these 1,800 objects are disposed in. It is like the problem of stepping on a flea in Grand Central Station. It could happen, but it is highly unlikely.” (Pearson, Wash. Post, 6/27/66)
U.S. Army claimed 21 world records for its new light observation helicopter, OH-6A. NAA-supervised flights at Edwards afb resulted in 12 speed records, and three each for distance, climbing, and sustained altitude. Records had been submitted to Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Paris for official approval. (Chic. Trib., 5/23/66, 16) May 23: Debate began in Senate on authorization of NASA budget for FY 1967. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said: "It is important to note that the pressures creating the great surges in progress-—whether it be in science, technology, exploration, or economic and social development—come from outside forces and considerations. . . . "It is these forcing functions which mainly set the pace of progress and development. Space is no exception. Indeed, the great surge in space research and exploration is a classic example of this historical pattern. It was these forcing functions which set in motion the revolution in science and technology which has brought us to the era we know as the Space Age. And it is these forcing functions which today and tomorrow will determine our future course and our future policies in space. .. . "The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether the history of the last half century will repeat itself a few years hence, and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. Indeed, in today’s cold war arena, the question boils down to whether this Nation can afford such a luxury, in terms of our very survival. For it is clear that future leadership in this scientific and technological competition—which has such great economic, military, and political significance—will not be easily held, nor would it be easily regained once lost.” (CR, 5/23/66, 10681-2)
Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (usaf), special consultant to President Johnson, was appointed president of Institute for Defense Analysis replacing Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would return to mit. ida also named Dr. Gordon J. F.	MacDonald, of ucla’s Dept, of Planetary and Space Sciences, vice president for research. Both appointments would take effect in September. (ida Release)
Dr. Clark Blanchard Millikan, director of Cal Tech Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories and pioneer in the development of multiengine, high-altitude airplanes, jet propulsion, and guided missiles, died of a heart ailment. Millikan, chairman of the board of jpl in its early days, had been awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work in wind tunnel research during World War II and had been given the British King’s Medal. (NYT, 1/3/66, 27; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/3/66; M&R, 1/10/66, 13)
Former Vice President Richard Nixon told a Republican fund-raising dinner in Houston that U.S. should divert some of its space exploration funds to the Vietnam war effort. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A36)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew by helicopter to gsfc for three-hour tour, during which they watched GSFC technicians receive first photos from essa ii meteorological satellite. Successful operation of essa ii officially created world’s first fully operational weather-forecasting satellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
Najeeb E. Halaby, vice president of Pan American World Airways and former faa Administrator, suggested that Government build two Sst prototypes—one Boeing and one Lockheed—using same prototype power plant for both before selecting the final design. "There is no substitute for flight testing,” he said. "The whole world would benefit in the economics and safety of a flight-tested plane.” Airframe designs by Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and engine designs by General Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div. had been submitted to faa Sept. 6 for evaluation. President Johnson would announce final selection in late 1966. (NYT, 11/11/66, 73)
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
Tonnage of U.S. bombs dropped on Vietnam in 1966 would surpass that dropped by U.S. in the entire Pacific during World War II or during three years of the Korean War, Ted Sell reported in the World Journal Tribune. U.S. planned to drop 638,000 tons of bombs in 1966 compared to 502,781 tons dropped by usaf in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945. (Sell, WJT, 10/3/66, 4)
U.S. Sst program had been assigned "Dx” priority—highest manufacturing priority usually reserved for key defense and space programs—by President Johnson in April without public announcement, the press reported. The New York Times questioned secrecy and priority implied by President’s decision: "It was an error to keep the decision secret.” (Clark, NYT, 8/7/66, 1; WSJ, 8/9/66, 1; NYT, 8/8/66, C26)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, "chief constructor of space systems for the Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after World War II. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union, Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from sputnik i in 1957 to voskhod ii manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; upi, Wash. Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66, 82)
Reps. William Green (D-Pa.) and Earle Cabeil (D-Tex.) were appointed to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replacing Reps. Bob Casey (D-Tex.) and Brock Adams (D-Wash.), who resigned, (nasa lar V/41)
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president and designer of numerous aircraft, was named recipient of the Air Force Academy’s 1966 Thomas D. White National Defense Award for "outstanding contribution to the national defense and security of the United States.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/66, A18)
Rebutting Aug. 14 Washington Sunday Star editorial which called the U.S. Sst program "a dubious venture moved by extraordinary pressures,” Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) told Senate that program was "moving forward on a logical basis” to make Sst available for commercial use in 1974 at total cost of about $4.5 billion-—25% of which would be paid by manufacturers. Senator Magnuson said that planners were "well aware” of potential hazards of excess radiation, internal heat, lack of maneuverability, and structural stress suggested by Star and assured the Senate that aircraft had been designed "to preclude catastrophic conditions. . .	(CR, 9/6/66, 20909-10; Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 17)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at NASA FY 1967 budget briefing that the "extremely stringent budget” ($5,012 billion) approved by President Johnson and the bob was the result of pressing needs of the Vietnam war and the Great Society. Major loser in the nasa budget reduction was the Apollo Applications (Aa) program: "The option to go ahead or not [on the Aa program] will be made in 1968 [budget],” he said. Although nasa had wanted $5.58 billion to carry out its FY 1967 program, Seamans said, the $5,012 billion would make it possible to continue "a good space program” with most of the projects intact. Yet, nasa did "not have the funds we would like to see” for Apollo. He said the approved FY 1967 Apollo budget of $2,974 billion (compared to $2,967 billion in FY 1966) would give the U.S. "a chance of lunar landing in this decade,” but there were no funds "for major difficulties that might occur.” (Transcript)
Charles W. Harper, Director, Aeronautics Div., nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart), testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on the nasa aeronautics program. Citing the need for close coordination between scientific groups within Government, he said: "Recognizing the Air Force interest in hypersonic flight, a proposal was made to the Air Force Systems Command Headquarters that the two agencies prepare a single coordinate program representing a national effort in hypersonic technology with each agency supporting that portion most appropriate to its capabilities. The proposal was accepted. . . . Technical approval of general plans is through the nasa oart Office and the AFSC RTD Office and generation and coordination of program details are developed through appointed technical groups from the NASA and Air Force research centers. To date this coordination activity has been very effective. ...” As major elements of NASA’s 1967 aeronautics program, Harper listed: (1) a continuing effort in advanced research; (2) major effort in support of Sst with emphasis on flight operations and advanced propulsion; (3) a substantial increase in research in propulsion systems appropriate to the whole speed range, from V/Stol to hypersonic speeds with special attention directed to the noise problem and supported by two new facilities; (4) a substantially increased effort in V/Stol research supported by construction of the first research facility to be built expressly for conducting research on problems unique to V/Stol aircraft. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 170-1, 179)
Lowell T. Wingert, at&t vice president, wrote a letter to ComSatCorp urging discussions on development of a large-capacity communications satellite for "long haul domestic communications of all types,” to be owned and operated by ComSatCorp with "equitable access to domestic common carriers” in return for "bearing their share of ComSatCorp’s charges.” He called for ComSatCorp and other interested communications users "to undertake a joint study promptly with the hope of placing this newest type of communications facility into early domestic use.” (NYT3/25/66, 48; at&t Release)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey told group of young scientists visiting Washington, D.C., under National Youth Science Camp program to devote some of their talents to solving problems on earth as well as in space. "If we can put a Surveyor on the moon to take pictures, why can’t we get some one in from La Guardia Airport to downtown New York City before he collects his old age pension ... we must try to harness our divergent and separated resources and our energies to solve the problems of our earthly environment.” The Vice President forecast scientific break-throughs for the year 2000, including the elimination of bacterial and viral diseases, the correction of hereditary defects, landing of men on Mars, farming of the ocean, manufacture of synthetic proteins, control of weather on regional basis, and creation of life in the laboratory. (Text)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Appropriations’ Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of cancer. A member of the House for almost 30 yrs., Thomas had heen deeply interested in Congressional funding for naca, nsf, and NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/66, B8)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams said: "During 1965 we flew the three X-15 airplanes 32 times, setting a new activity record. These aircraft comprise a unique research facility capable of providing data during actual hypersonic flight. . . . "At the end of 1965, the three X-15 airplanes had been flown 156 times. . . .” Referring to rocket reactor tests, Adams said: "The kiwi-nerva-Phoebus operations during 1965 demonstrated an altitude equivalent specific impulse of over 750 lb-sec./lb., equivalent thrust of over 50,000 lbs., and total duration of 4200 seconds, or over an hour. The experiments have shown that rapid starts and restarts can be made and that operation is stable over a wide range of conditions. "On February 3, 1966, we made the first power run with a complete nuclear rocket engine system. Although the major components were spread out and connected in a 'breadboard’ fashion, the system started and operated as a unit with no external power. On February 11, the system was operated again. We feel that these runs are very significant milestones in the nuclear rocket programs.” (NASA Autk. Hearings, 50, 57)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investigators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II died Feb. 28. msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told upi that full report would not be completed for "at least six weeks.” The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time required and the justification for such requirements, (upi, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; nasa lar V/36)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably H.R. 14832 incorporating changes and improvements in organization and operation of nsf recommended in Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development report, "The National Science Foundation—Its Present and Future.” (House Rpt. 1650)
T. R. May, vice president of Lockheed-Georgia Co., disclosed plans to build commercial version of the C-5A military fan jet which could carry up to 900 passengers and thus reduce fares drastically. May, speaking at an Air Force Assn, seminar in Salt Lake City, said Lockheed "fully expects” to have the aircraft, designated the L-500, "flying commercial routes” in the early 1970’s. Lockheed-Georgia Co. had received a $1.4-billion dod contract Sept. 30,1965, to develop and build the C-5A—a military carrier that would be world’s largest aircraft. Delivery was scheduled for mid-1968. (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66, Dl; NYT, 2/18/66, 53M)
More than 70 tethered balloon ascensions to 1,500-ft. altitude for vehicle drop tests had been conducted by afcrl at Holloman afb over past three years to test Surveyor spacecraft’s retrofire descent and impact capabilities, oar Research Review reported, (oar Res. Rev., 6/66, 17) During June: Dr. Dorothy Martin Simon, Avco Corp. vice president and director of Corporate Research, received 1966 Achievement Award of Society of Women Engineers. She was cited for "significant contributions to engineering administration and space engineering, especially in the fields of combustion and ablative coatings.” (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 46)
Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane fighter used in World War II, the Hunter fighter, the P-1127 Vtol aircraft, and other combat aircraft, died in London. Sir Sydney, honorary fellow and member of council of Royal Aeronautical Society, had received the Society’s Gold Medal in 1958 and had been selected to receive the Guggenheim Medal, highest U.S. aeronautical award, in the spring. (NYT, 3/14/66, 31)
Role of NASA in aeronautical research and development was examined in Policy Planning for Aeronautical Research and Development, 279-page report released by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Document noted "space budget demands have probably hampered what might have been expected to be a normal growth of the level of effort in aeronautics within the agency” and questioned adequacy of $124 million (about 2%) earmarked for aeronautical r&d out of nasa FY 1967 appropriation of $5,012 billion. Separate budget for aeronautics was suggested as possible solution. (Senate Doc. No. 90, 5/19/66)
Three earth-orbiting objects not identified "with any launching or country of origin” were reported by gsfc Satellite Situation Report. Two had inclination of 85° and the third, 35°. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66,19) September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding rocket were launched from nasa Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in 1969—probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration had definite plans for "very active post-Apollo schedule,” but refused to "put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unmanned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice President foresaw no possibility of merging usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 12, 13) During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal began Sept. 6 with pictures from essa i meteorological satellite, launched Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Regions photographed—primarily Atlantic Ocean and Western Europe-—had been matched so operations of satellite systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs: U.S. scientists found Soviet photos "poor” in quality; Soviet scientists described U.S. photos as "usable.” Receipt of photos from cosmos cxxii had enabled U.S. to analyze satellite’s instrumentation: cosmos cxxii carried pair of 48° TV cameras canted 16.5° to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about 690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1°; frames transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 26-7; Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed B. L. Dorman, vice president of Aerojet-General Corp., Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Jan. 16, 1967, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) Acting Administrator for Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1967. Both positions were formerly held by William B. Rieke, who resigned to return to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. (nasa Release 66-327)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
White Paper released by U.K. Defence Minister Denis Healey said RAF would buy 50 F-lll variable wing bombers from U.S. for 2.1 million pounds ($5,880,000) each and that plans for new British aircraft carrier had been dropped. F-lll aircraft operating from land bases would take over the strike-reconnaissance and air-defense functions of carriers. First Sea Lord, Adm. Sir David Luce, resigned in protest; Navy Minister Christopher Mayhew had resigned Feb. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/66, Al; Lewis, NYT, 2/23/66, 1, 5; Meyer, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, All	_	_ Reconnaissance satellites, adapted for peaceful observations of earth’s surface, would bring revolutionary scientific and economic advances, Willis B. Foster, Director of Manned Space Science in NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications, predicted: "Remote sensing from space has unique capabilities, particularly in the opportunity it provides for repetitive synoptic coverage of the earth’s surface. . . . Spaceborne sensors will add to the knowledge of the figure of the earth, its mass distribution, and its magnetic and gravity fields. Movement of glaciers, growth of deltas, growth of crops, and even growth of populations can all be followed with this type of survey.” (Text) Austin M. Stanton, president and board chairman of Varo, Inc., said features of space such as airlessness, weightlessness, extreme temperature, and radiation could be "exploited as a completely new realm” for manufacturing. He said the earth might ultimately be encircled by a "vast doughnut-like ring 150,000 miles in circumference,” of articulated orbiting manufacturing facilities: "As a businessman, I propose that the time is ripe for a profitable industrial venture in space. ... It will not be difficult to persuade investors to venture into buying stock in the new companies for three reasons: the predictions of the early advocates of astronautics have been fulfilled; the efforts of space agencies have been spectacularly successful; and . . . the communications satellite venture seems sound.” (Hill, NYT, 2/27/66, 60) The massive investment in technology and manpower created by space programs could be used to handle pressing problems associated with anticipated population growth on earth, suggested Dr. Peter A. Castruccio, director of IBM’s advanced space programs. Satellites could survey earth from space, pinpoint tillable land and examine staple crops using infrared techniques to detect diseases invisible to the naked eye. Seas could be mapped, isolating concentrations of fish and edible seaweed, and growing consumption of water offset by using satellites to map snow fields and glaciers. Underground rivers could be detected from space by measuring the tiny difference in soil temperatures above them; such streams were estimated to have 3,000 times the water present in all known rivers. Other fields, such as weather control and geological survey searches for fuel and minerals, could also be handled from space. (M&R, 2/28/66, 9, 12) "The ultimate goal of weather modification and control may be realized only if man himself is placed in a Space Meteorological Lab,” suggested Sidney Sternberg, vice president and general manager of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. He said the "ability and bandwidth of transfer of information between experiments and experimenter could not be duplicated by unmanned observations.” (M&R, 2/28/66, 12)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x unmanned spacecraft had achieved lunar orbit (1,000-km. [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km. [217-mi.] perilune, 3-hr. period) at 1:44 p.m. est April 3 to become world’s first artificial moon satellite, U.S.S.R. announced at 23rd Communist Party Congress meeting in the Kremlin. Accomplishment was dramatized by direct broadcast from luna x of the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” Tass released details of luna x’s structure and flight. 3,530-lb. spacecraft consisted of two main parts: moon satellite section and engine facilities section. 540-lb. satellite was an airtight package containing radio equipment, telemetry system, equipment for studying the moon and near-lunar space, heat-regulation and power supply systems, and small jet engines to stabilize the flight. Approximately 8,000 km. (4,969 mi.) from the lunar surface, spacecraft was oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction of its movement. At approximately 1:44 p.m. est retrorockets fired automatically, slowing spacecraft to 1.3 km. (.8 mi.) per second and putting it in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets, earth command was sent to separate instrumented lunar satellite from engine facilities section, and first radio communications session was held. Equipment was functioning normally and radio communications were stable. There was no suggestion that photos of the lunar surface were being transmitted to earth, or that LUNA x was "tumbling” [see April 3]. (Tass, 4/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/4/66, A6; AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/66, A12) Aoril 4: House Committee on Science and Astronautics voted to report $4,986,864,150 NASA authorization bill—$25,135,580 less than $5,012, 000,000 nasa had requested for FY 1967. (nasa lar V/57-58)
