Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee would conduct a “full review” of the Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex) announced. {NYT, 1/29/67,47; WPost, 1/29/67, A18)
House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations released testimony on U.S. missile strategy by dod officials at closed hearing March 20. Dr. Charles M. Herzfeld, who resigned as Director of Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) May 26, testified that advanced missile systems based in space rather than on land were being studied. He recalled that dod had studied, until 1964, the “Bambi” system designed to use satellites to locate and destroy enemy missiles shortly after they had been launched. Work had been stopped because it was “much too costly,” but “we think the time is getting ripe again to look at the whole question because the costs of putting things in orbit have gone down dramatically, the reliability of space engineering has gone up dramatically so that the overall cost of the system ought to come down significantly.” Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, revealed that repairs had had to be made on all Minuteman icbms because of missile’s failure to fire in three tests during October 1966. He emphasized, however, that all missiles were operational at the time of his testimony and said overall readiness of the Minuteman and Polaris missile forces was “excellent.” (Beecher, NYT, 5/31/67, 1, 28; W Star, 5/31/67, A6)
Although junior colleges constitute a major segment of higher education in terms of number of institutions (about one-third), their resources . for science, in terms of expenditures and manpower, are meager,” nsf reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, nsf report, The Junior College and Education in the Sciences, stated that junior college “share of expenditures for separately budgeted research and development, in 196364, was one-tenth of 1 percent of the total for all colleges and universities; for science ‘plant,’ 3.7 percent; and for instruction and departmental research, 4.8 percent.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries’ Subcommittee on Oceanography, summarized nasa’s activities in national marine science program. NASA’s activities, primarily exploratory, were aimed at ascertaining what potential benefits could be gained in oceanography through the application of space techniques and equipment, he said. Major areas included: (1) investigation of the applicability of existing space technology to problems of oceanography; (2) studies of remote sensing of oceanographic phenomena, including analysis of data obtainable from space missions not originally conceived for oceanographic purposes such as Gemini, Tiros, and Nimbus photos; and (3) development and test of remote sensors for viewing and discrimination of oceanographic phenomena. Spacecraft, Dr. Seamans said, “will not supplant surface, subsurface, and airborne research and monitoring systems; rather they will supplement them. The absolute accuracy, three-dimensional capability, and selective resolution of these conventional systems will continue to be necessary and must be utilized as a part of the overall system to their best advantage. However, Earth-orbiting spacecraft have unique advantages for obtaining certain types of marine data as follows: repetitive worldwide coverage, greater frequency of observation (once or twice daily for polar orbiting satellites and continuous lor geostationary satellites), ability to observe remote areas at will, and an ‘all-weather’ capability for certain parameters.” (Testimony; SBD, 12/20/67,257)
U.S.S.R. and North Vietnam signed agreement to establish a satellite tracking station in North Vietnam and cooperate in synchronic photography of earth satellites. (Reuters, NYT, 10/19/67,9) Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on role of Congress in r&d in 1970s. Citing increasing “Government concern for the involvement of science and technology in the welfare and security of the American people,” he said it was increasingly obvious that science and technology, a prime source of many environmental problems, must be means by which they are solved. He also called for realism in minimizing influence of competition between political philosophies on implementation of scientific knowledge for human problems. “We must direct more and more attention ... to the effects of urbanization, such as the pollution of air, water and the land, the practical control of population, to offsetting the constantly decreasing supply of natural resources such as fresh water, arable land, and fuels.” (Text) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), speaking on techniques for forecasting technological advances, emphasized need for enlightened and comprehensive planning and bold, imaginative management. He described technological forecasting as one of most valuable new tools for planners and managers. Indicating that forecasting must go beyond advanced planning, he called for its use in determining long-range implications of technological progress. If a manager, keeping a program open to possible advances in technology, chose improved performance, then he could be assured that when his truly advanced item entered the market or the military inventory, it would be effective for the maximum number of years. (Av Wk, 12/4/67,21) All scientific instruments and spacecraft subsystems performed properly during encounter sequence, as they had throughout flight. Sequence of 15 significant events during encounter, occultation, closest approach, exit occultation, and return to cruise mode, had begun at 10:49 pm edt Oct. 18 and had ended at 3:55 am edt Oct. 23. Full recorded account of experiments performed by Mariner V—first and second playbacks— exhibited clear and steady signals, jpl scientists obtained meaningful scientific data from all of spacecraft’s experiments. Results of experiments included: solar plasma probe and magnetometer showed existence of solar wind/Venus interaction; trapped radiation found no energetic particles or radiation belts, and found magnetic moment less than 1% of earth’s; S-band occultation estimated carbon dioxide and found ionospheric observations on daytime side indicated electron density; dual-frequency radio propagation provided data on Venus mass as 81.50% of earth’s mass, and astronomical unit determination agreed with radar computations; and ultraviolet photometer found hydrogen corona comparable with that of earth, detected no oxygen, and found night airglow to be very faint ultraviolet emission detected at dark limb of planet—probably result of chemical reactions, particle bombardment of electrical discharge. Spacecraft’s mission also was to accumulate data on interplanetary environment during period of increased solar activity. After return to cruise mode, Mariner V would resume report on interplanetary space weather. By end of November 1967, when earth was no longer in direction of high-gain antenna pattern, communications would be terminated; however, three-month-duration communications would be possible during next five years. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 10/20/67, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 10/22/67, 12)
North American Aviation, Inc. (naa) , NASA’s prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, announced major management changes: (1) William B. Bergen, former President of Martin Marietta Co., who joined naa April 7, replaced Harrison A. Storms, Jr., as President of Space Div.—formerly Space and Information Systems Div.; (2) Ralph H. Ruud, corporate vice president in charge of manufacturing, replaced William Snelling as executive vice president of Space Div. Snelling assumed new post of assistant vice president; (3) Bastian Hello, former Martin Marietta Co. executive, assumed new post of vice president in charge of Space Div.’s launch operations at ksc; and (4) Paul R. Vogt, former vice president of engineering at naa’s Rocketdyne Div., assumed new post of assistant to President of Space Div. in charge of quality control. (Clark, NYT, 5/2/67,1,53; upi, W Star, 5/2/67, A13; O’Toole, W Post, 5/2/67, A4; Wilford, NYT, 5/4/67, 9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that NASA would present, within two weeks, detailed estimates of how much the Jan. 27 Apollo accident had cost; what changes in spacecraft would be made to reduce fire hazards; and the earliest date for the first manned Apollo mission. He declined to disclose his thoughts concerning canceling nasa’s contract with North American Aviation, Inc., because of failures to meet development schedules and stay within cost estimates: “They did not do all die things they should have done, but I can say the same thing about us at NASA.” He stated his conviction that he was obligated to “act responsibly in respecting confidences between himself and contractors.” Denying that undue risks were taken in order to speed the program, Webb emphasized that NASA had “never put schedule above safety.” Apollo 204 Review Board’s study was “a good report,” he said, but it should not be construed to be an evaluation of the entire space program: “The board has done an outstanding investigation of one accident but it is not a full and fair appraisal of the space program... [and] cannot be taken as a guide to the realities of this program. . . .” In response to questioning Webb stated that, in his judgment, the pacing item in the manned lunar landing program remained the Saturn V booster, and when it was ready for manned flight there would be a spacecraft ready. Committee Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) requested that nasa witnesses appear again not later than May 9 to detail changes the program, as suggested by Webb. (Wilford, NYT, 4/18/67, C26; O’Toole, W Post, 4/18/67, Al; SBD, 4/18/67, 275)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described correction of “serious procedural deficiencies in the flow of timely information” from NASA to the Committee, J. V. Reistrup reported. A letter from Rep. Miller to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) had explained the corrective measures, worked out with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. NASA would notify the Committee staff immediately of any accident involving death or serious property damage; NASA Oversight Committee would be briefed every three months on Committee-defined “critical problem areas”; NASA would report significant program changes and problems as soon as they occurred; and nasa would furnish budget data in October, updating the data monthly. (Reistrup,. W Post, 9/23/67)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, said the scientific community saw a need to develop a spacecraft to make measurements at low altitudes—about 80 mi—to investigate transition between the meteorology of the lower atmosphere and the aeronomy of the upper. In the lower atmosphere the constituents are thoroughly mixed; in the upper, they tend to separate by gravity with the heaviest below and the lightest above. “The importance of this transition region has been revealed by the [sounding] rocket program, but only satellites can provide the global measurements needed to establish the lower boundary conditions for the upper atmosphere as a whole,” Newell said. “Such a mission would require the development of a spacecraft with a restartable engine in order to achieve an adequate lifetime.” (Testimony)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, and his Deputy Dr. Alfred J. Eggers testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. U.S. space program was entering a period when NASA would . utilize existing capabilities, Dr. Adams said, and it was therefore particularly important for oart to “emphasize new technology so that new systems will be available for the next major thrust in aeronautics and space.” He mentioned highlights of the program to develop new technology: (1) Nerva nuclear rocket engine; (2) experimental research related to hypersonic propulsion; (3) advanced cryogenic engine; (4) improved life-support systems; and (5) increased effort in electronics problems because “electronics systems may well be the limiting factor in our future exploration.” Dr. Eggers noted that r&d budget request in aeronautics for FY 1968 nearly doubled that for 1967 and said the expansion reflected “recognition of the rapidly growing importance of air transportation and the need for increased r&d to provide required advances in the associated technology. Aeronautics is already the order of a $24 billion a year industry and it is netting the nation better than $1 billion per annum in favorable balance of payments. Accordingly, our proposed major strengthening of aeronautics r&d will be to the great commercial as well as military benefit of the nation in the future.” (Transcript, 8, 13; Testimony)
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
TV coverage of space launches and press coverage of rising costs of space program had been almost the only source of public exposure of U.S. space effort, said Aerospace Systems Group Vice President J. Lynn Helms at Rotary International meeting during Michigan Univ.’s Ses-quicentennial Celebration. Speaking on “A Citizen’s Return on Investment,” he outlined many accomplishments of U.S. space program that affect daily life, stating that “money spent in the quest for new information keeps coming back to us again and again ... a society that continually invests part of its annual profits into the future is a progressive society. Progressive societies serve their people better, in living standards, medicine, and health, and consideration for and by other nations of the world.” (Text)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), introduced to Senate new $5.1-billion FT 1968 NASA authorization bill (S. 1296) to reflect President Johnson’s Feb. 28 request for funds to develop nuclear rocket technology. Original NASA authorization bill for $5.05 billion (S. 781) had been introduced Jan. 31. (CR, 3/15/67, S3781)
Technology Week marked beginning of its second decade of publishing by asking some of the Nation’s leading educators, scientists, and engineers to project their goals for technology, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Sea-borg emphasized the need for man to first choose goals for technology: . . we must give more thought to guiding the direction of our technological future. “. . . if there are any ultimate goals for technology we will know what they are only when we all agree on the goals of man.” MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun proposed an earth resources management system employing space technology—principally, resourcesensing satellites—to meet the needs of the world’s rapidly growing population. Said Dr. von Braunam firmly convinced that one of the great future contributions of our space program will be in helping to manage more effectively the utilization of our world resources.” In discussing long-delayed peaceful application of nuclear explosions—Project Plowshare—Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Lab., suggested that questions of safety, fear of the unknown, limited nuclear test ban, and international politics were chief obstacles to program. Until these obstacles were removed, Plowshare would continue to lie dormant. Prof. Isaac Asimov, Boston Univ. School of Medicine, foresaw that mankind, now faced with the practical need for working under low-gravity conditions, would have to develop “low-gravity engineering.” Low-gravity engineering might also prove useful in future exploration beneath the sea. Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Professor of Genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine, proposed that man’s central technological goal was the harmonization of his technical goals, a process Dr. Lederberg called “eutechnics.” He went on to declare: “In the eutechnical society, the penultimate crime may become to introduce any technological innovation as a subsystem benefit without analyzing its impact on the whole future of man. The ultimate one would be to deny man his humanity by denying him the chance to think, to know himself.” Dr. Charles S. Draper, head of mit’s Aeronautics and Astronautics Dept., emphasized the need to establish an adequate balance between “directly beneficial” and “remedial” technologies. As air and water pollution, land damage from mining, soil erosion, and other problems become acute, man must give more thought to remedial actions for disturbances inflicted on the environment. Dr. Draper suggested space vehicle technology as “. . . an excellent model for the technology of overall environmental control for the earth.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, believed that the big challenge of the next 25 yrs would be the effective management of technology for the public good. Schriever suggested that: “the systems management concept [developed in Nation’s military and space programs] will be required to bring these technologies to bear on these problems. ; . .” Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President, listed 10 aerospace projects which, he felt, should receive major attention during next 20 yrs. Among these projects were use of nuclear power plants in aerial transports to reduce fuel-to-cargo ratios, solution of sonic boom problems, and development of high-density fuels. Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, explored the objectives and benefits of geotechnology— use of geophysical and geochemical knowledge “to intervene in the natural processes of our environment on a massive—and even global— scale.” Dr. Spilhaus said he believed the public would “. . . welcome ... an imaginative experiment in city living designed to remove the chores, dirt, delays, and human wastage, and emphasize the opportunities for social, cultural, economic and recreational advantages that high-density living provides.” In final article, TRW Vice Chairman Simon Ramo wrote: “We are in the science era of mankind; we are not yet in the social era of mankind. ... A quick look at our society shows that science’s greatest challenge now and for the next few decades is for the application of science to human needs.” (Tech Wk, 1/23/67, 32-79)
Report on spaceflight emergencies and spaceflight safety, released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, made several specific recommendations: (1) NASA and USAF continue to devote intensive study effort to spaceflight safety and report periodically to the committee; (2) NASA and usaf establish joint working-level committee to eliminate duplication of effort, assure compatibility in equipment features, conduct joint accident reviews, and achieve a coordinated effort; (3) each agency establish a separate flight safety group to monitor system designs for specific missions to ensure close attention to the problem of flight safety; (4) development of possible space rescue or escape capabilities be considered in the design and development of all future manned spacecraft; and (5) NASA prepare a long-range “plan for meeting future spaceflight emergencies”—including program identification and long-range funding requirements—by the end of 1967. (Text)
Vice President and Mrs. Humphrey, accompanied by nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, would visit msfc and U.S. Army Missile Command (amc) at Redstone Arsenal March 22-23, msfc and AMC announced. Trip was later postponed because Mr. Humphrey felt he should remain in Washington, D.C., to greet President Johnson on his return from a Pacific trip, (mfsc Release; Marshall Star, 3/22/67,1)
Dept, of Agriculture scientists, in April testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Agriculture, predicted that the application of remote sensing techniques developed in conjunction with U.S. space program, could revolutionize agriculture. They requested $340,000 for FY 1968 to adapt equipment to agricultural requirements. Equipment, currently flown in aircraft, was used to identify accurately and within minutes the soil conditions and moisture, crop yield, and incidence and severity of diseases. Dr. G. W. Irving, Jr., Agriculture Administrator of Agricultural Research Service, predicted: “Once we are in operation from satellite-type spacecraft, the possibilities for securing vast amounts of useful information within extremely short time periods are almost limitless.” (AP, B Sun, 5/29/67)
President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget recommendations marked “a turning point in the Nation’s space program,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said President Johnson had “placed before the Congress a program which says that this Nation must go forward in space and not call it quits at the end of this decade.” He summarized recommendations for (1) completion of Apollo program; (2) development of capabilities for long-duration manned space flight in Apollo Applications (aa) program; (3) development of “practical applications of our space know-how” using capabilities of AA program and “advanced unmanned systems like the ats-4”; (4) planetary exploration through Voyager program; (5) development of Nerva II nuclear rocket engine; and (6)	increase in aeronautical research efforts to deal with “emerging problems of civil as well as military aviation” [see Jan. 25]. Webb announced that NASA had established Voyager program management responsibilities “designed to make the best possible utilization of the proved capabilities” of JPL “and of our field centers and laboratories.” Voyager program, since 1964 under NASA Hq. Division of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become a separate division in OSSA with Oran W. Nicks as Director and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director. JPL would be responsible for surface laboratory, tracking, and mission operations systems; msfc, for orbiting spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle systems; and LaRC, for landing capsule bus system. Discussing the NASA program, Webb said: “I should be very clear on the subject of risks. In moving ahead to utilize the resources made available to us, we have had to take technical risks in the development of our equipment and in establishing our schedules. These have included risks that a particular design or line of development would not succeed in meeting the specifications; risks that schedules might not be met; and that we could not recover from a serious setback because we did not have parallel or back-up developments. But we have not knowingly accepted a higher level of risks in order to meet our manned flight schedules. In our specifications, trade-off studies, test criteria, or mission plans, we have taken no risks to the lives or safety of the astronauts that we could find a way to avoid.” Webb urged that decisions on Voyager and aa programs and on Nerva II be made this year to avoid acceleration of the “dispersal of the know-how that we have built up in government, industry, and universities that has already begun___” Questioned by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space technology, Webb replied that U.S.S.R. would be ahead in large spacecraft until “we get the nerva as a third stage for the Saturn V which will roughly double the capability of the Saturn V for Earth-escape missions.” While U.S.S.R. may lead in planetary exploration, he said, U.S. was superior in “the very sophisticated use of microminiaturization and many new techniques of handling data.” (Testimony; Transcript, 14-15, 28-9, 34; NASA Release 67-40; NYT, 3/1/67, 29)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed $>4.9-billion nasa authorization bill (H.R. 10340) with the House and recommended that it he passed without amendment [see May 16]. (NASA lar VI/64)
As of .Nov. 15, U.S. had dropped 1,630,500 bombs on North and South Vietnam since July 1965—twice the tonnage dropped during the Korean War, and three times that dropped in the Pacific Theater during World War II. (Wilson, W Post, 1/5/68, 4)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
The U.S. should expect “an early Soviet attempt to send a large payload around the moon and recover it on earth,” Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in releasing committee report: “Review of Soviet Space Program,” prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Library of Congress’ Science Policy Research Div. This 1957-67 review drew comparisons with the corresponding program in U.S. Rep. Miller commented: “At the same time that space efforts in the United States appear to be slackening, the pace of Soviet space flight has picked up by about 60 percent this year over the corresponding ten months total of last year. The strong technological base the Russians are building through a sustained, longterm commitment to space [assures them] sophisticated and intricate planetary probes . . . unmanned or manned space platforms . . . [application of] aerospace technology systems management to a great variety of industrial and social purposes here on earth.” Committee report gave “no simple, direct answer” on “whether there is a space race” but suggested “at the present time both the Soviet Union and the United States have put large resources of somewhat similar size into very broadly based programs of great strength.” Competition in overall space capability, especially on weight lifting and thrust of launch vehicles used by U.S. and U.S.S.R., was illustrated: “In connection with the nasa Administrator’s August 1967 pronouncement on the expected large Soviet vehicle [Saturn V class], he made a plea for support of an American nuclear stage to mount on Saturn V in order to leapfrog the Russians. A month later, Leonid Sedov in Moscow stated his belief in the importance of nuclear propulsion for the very large rockets which will soon be needed.” (Text; nasa SP-4007, 212; Committee Release, 11/20/67)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued statement on Jan. 27 Apollo accident, commending “the diligence, integrity, and patent independence” of the Apollo 204 Review Board which would serve as a model for future inquiries. Noting the “admitted mood of overconfidence” exhibited by NASA and North American Aviation, he urged that a “renewal of chain successes . . . never again be permitted to encourage indulgence in such a potentially dangerous attitude. “. . . the Apollo accident may well move the date for an American landing on the moon beyond the reach of this decade. That would be regrettable. But there is nothing sacred about the goal. When set in 1961 it was a goal which was technically achievable. A target date was, and still is, essential to efficient planning and to maintaining a vigorous and competent organization. . . . The accident has taken a toll in morale and in momentum within the program . . . [but] that momentum will be regained and NASA will emerge stronger. I intend to support NASA in its requests for manpower and funds to get on with the important job.” (Text)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey told the National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Dinner that U.S. space program would continue to move forward despite the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. “On behalf of President Johnson, I assure you . . . that we have not lost heart—that we will not falter—that we shall move forward with renewed determination in our exploration of space.” The Vice President said the first obligation was to “come as close as humanly possible to determining the cause of the Apollo 204 accident, so that we can make sure it will never happen again.” He said he was impressed with the “tough-minded way the Review Board is going about its work.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/3/67, 31)
Manned expeditions to every part of the solar system would be achieved by the end of the 20th century, Vice President Humphrey predicted in his opening statement to a student panel at North Dakota State Univ. in Fargo. He envisioned “the development of a whole family of earth orbiting stations, manned and supplied by regular ferry services; the launching of unmanned probes to every part of our solar system, and probably manned expeditions as well.” (upi, NYT, 5/14/67)
President of Aerospace Industries Assn. Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., testifying before Senate Special Subcommittee on Scientific Manpower Utilization, urged that the systems approach—“an extremely high degree of capability to evaluate, plan and do certain complex and difficult things”—be applied beyond the national defense and space effort to “problems connected with improving the quality of American life. . . . Many of these problems, such as air pollution and water pollution control, relief of traffic congestion, provision of adequate food supply, school systems, housing, and crime control are already fully identified and very much on the front burner of public concern.” Harr pointed out the need for experimentation in the application of the systems approach to gain breadth of experience and emphasized that efforts should be aimed at regional, state, and municipal levels. “It remains for us as a nation to find the various political formulae for its application wherever needed. Whatever the cost it will be far cheaper to solve these problems than not to. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles, and Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., NASA Office of Advance Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Ames said land recovery of manned spacecraft was one of OART’s major objectives; NASA had enlarged research plans substantially to acquire “without delay” the detailed technology necessary to “permit the confident application of steerable flexible-winged parachutes to the recovery of manned spacecraft.” Earliest major potential application would probably be to Apollo, to provide for land recovery in post-lunar-landing period of the early 1970’s. “Such a capability would greatly extend the operational flexibility and utility of the Apollo system and . . . contribute to the feasibility of refurbishment and reuse.” Dr. Jones said increased possibility of aspiration of particulate matter had been identified by nrc Space Science Board as a potentially serious effect of prolonged weightlessness. “In zero gravity conditions, dust particles do not settle out. This could lead to deposits in the respiratory tract which could have important implications in the production of pulmonary disease.” Jones said a new instrument to measure and record the number and size of dust particles in a spacecraft was scheduled for an Apollo flight. (Testimony)
A completely fireproof version of the spacecraft fabric Velcro had been perfected and would be used on NASA’s first manned Apollo mission in 1968, William Hines reported in the Washington Evening Star. In tests conducted at msc early in August, the all-metallic fabric did not ignite, even in pure oxygen atmosphere at 16.5 psia. Velcro Corp. vice president Jack Mates told Hines in an interview that NASA had not yet placed an order for the improved Velcro, but that his company was beginning production of a substantial quantity. In the Jan. 27 Apollo fire, flames in the spacecraft had quickly spread along the surface of ordinary nylon Velcro adhesive pads which were used to hold frequently used equipment. (Hines, W Star, 8/18/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by Apollo 204 Review Board members, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testified on Jan. 27 flash fire before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Webb said the Board had found error, “but it has also found the capability within NASA and the Apollo team of contractors to overcome error.” NASA and industry would share their part of the blame “for what we have done or left undone,” Webb said, but the committee could have confidence that “nasa and its contractors have the capability to overcome every deficiency required to proceed to successfully fly the Apollo Saturn system and accomplish its objectives.” He said Board Chairman Dr. Floyd Thompson had reassured him that the “concepts and the basic design on which the Apollo system is based can be made to work in a reliable manner,” and Astronaut/Board member Frank Borman had reported he would be confident to fly the Apollo spacecraft if reported deficiencies were eliminated. Webb concluded: “If any man in this room asks for whom the Apollo bell tolls, it tolls for him and me, as well as for Grissom, White and Chaffee. “It tolls for every astronaut test pilot who will lose his life in the space simulated vacuum of a test chamber or the real vacuum of space . . . for every astronaut scientist who will lose his life on some lonely hill on the moon or Mars . . . for Government and industrial executives and legislators alike . . . for an open program continuously evaluated by the opinion makers with little time for second thought—operating in the brilliant color and brutal glare of real time, worldwide mass media with the speed of the television, from euphoria to exaggerated detail....” Asked why six of the eight Board members were NASA employees, Webb replied that they were the best qualified people for the investigation and noted that they were all familiar with the spacecraft or with similar types of investigations. He said that in his opinion the Board had “to a large degree . . . overstated the case.” Questioned about charges by the press that many qualified Project Apollo technicians were not called to testify before the Board, Webb responded: “It is easy to make allegations, hard to conduct an investigation, and even harder to make the Apollo Saturn fly at the earliest possible date. I do not believe these allegations are worth your consideration.” Dr. Thompson discussed methods and procedures followed by the Board, and key Board members traced the process of establishing the course of the fire, the “most probable” ignition source, and detailed findings and recommendations. (Testimony; Transcript 10, 15-8)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) expressed concern on Senate floor that the Nation’s space program suffered from a “serious lack of centralized leadership within the administration. Leadership is needed to weigh and decide on the merits of proposed space projects; to coordinate program requirements and development efforts of civil and defense agencies; and to establish long-range national space goals and to seek the resources necessary to achieve them. “I believe that this failure to assert administrative responsibility has resulted in the costly and needless development of two families of launch vehicles—one for NASA and one for the Department of Defense. Currently, NASA and the Department of Defense are each separately undertaking manned space programs having similar, if not identical, basic objectives—to determine whether man can effectively operate in space. . . .”	. Criticizing President Johnson’s support of NASA FY 1968 budget cuts recommended by House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 21], Sen. Smith said: “I am mindful that some significant budgetary decisions must be made because of our commitments in Vietnam and social strife at home. But is the Congress to supply the initial decisionmaking power for the executive branch? Is so little consideration and concern given to determining the required resource level for space technology programs that across-the-board reduction recommended by a legislative committee can be accepted so lightly ? “There are many of us who feel that science and technology may well be the key to our future existence—to the very survival of freedom in the world of tomorrow. In the past, I believe that the administration also held this to be true. However, the present lack of responsible action in regard to our space program leads me to wonder whether the administration plans and manages the future course for our country with any foresight or merely reacts to events with fear and trepidation.” (CR, 8/29/67, S12399)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
House Appropriations Committee reported $ 1.53-billion dot authorization bill (H.R. 11456) which included $142.3 million for development of two sst prototypes. Bill was approved by House July 18. (AP, NYT, 7/14/67,5)
NASA would delay scheduled 1967 launch of second Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) until late 1968 to incorporate changes made necessary after failure of Oao I, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Third oao would be launched in 1969 and fourth in 1970 to continue studies in ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray spectral regions. Dr. Newell explained that “the intensive investigations by NASA of Oao—I program development, test, and operations history have resulted in design and program modifications directed toward increasing the reliability and the operating efficiency of the OAO system in order to insure the success of the second oao missions. . . . Although the remaining three approved missions have been delayed . . . the scientific goals of these missions will be accomplished . . . [and oao] will continue to be the backbone of the NASA space astronomy program. . . .” (Testimony)
Senate and House adopted conference report on amended NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) totaling $4.6 billion, and legislation was cleared for President’s signature. Report approved $3,925 billion for R&D, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization and decrease of $356.5 million from budget; report approved $35.9 million for Construction of Facilities, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget; report approved $628.0 million for Administrative Operations, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of House, said that “Voyager and nerva II programs should be funded this fiscal year. Voyager is the only major planetary exploration program this Nation will have in the 1970’s. If this program is abandoned, we will be abdicating our responsibilities. . . . This is particularly significant following the recent Russian Venus IV soft landing on the planet Venus.” Sen. Gordon L. Allott (R-Col.), ranking minority member of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Space Appropriations Subcommittee, was forced to accept no specific funding for Voyager and Nerva programs (in final version) but said in statement read by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) on floor of Senate that “agreement was reached to add $15.5 million to [r&d] over the House figure.” He added that the agreement would provide that NASA’s Administrator “may reprogram funds . . . with approval of the appropriate committees of the Congress.” He added: “. . . conferees share this belief, that this country must move ahead now in [r&d] leading to interplanetary exploration.” (CR, 10/26/67, H14036-8, S15405-8)
Najeeb Halaby, Pan American World Airways, Inc., Vice President and former faa Administrator, praised the Johnson Administration’s “carefully calculated risk” in the development of the SST, in a speech before the Wings Club in New/York. He suggested that as a result both the Government and industry involved in producing the aircraft “are in a position to make a better decision and a better plane than . . . France, Britain, and the Soviet Union.” Halaby said aviation industry had a duty “to help the President and the Congress make the most prudent and the most temporary investment of public funds in a national interest venture.” {NYT, 1/19/67, 57)
Congressional cuts in the nasa budget had forced an agency-wide hiring freeze, Aerospace Technology reported. No job vacancies might be filled or new positions created unless there were exceptionally mitigating circumstances, jpl expected to lose about 200 engineers during the freeze, but no estimates had been released by NASA field centers. There was no indication of how long the freeze would last. (Aero Tech, 9/25/67,3)
Congressional role in space program and possibilities for improved international cooperation in space was discussed in General Electric Forum interview by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Congress’ role, Rep. Teague said, was “to examine periodically how well the work is being done and what return we are gaining in new knowledge and practical utility from the space program. . . . Each decision . . . involves the setting of a relative order of priorities for the use of the Nation’s resources for science and technology.” Expressing conviction that international cooperation in space would increase, he noted that there was “great potential in the use of space for human betterment. . . . More than 60 per cent of the world’s people, for instance, are protein-deficient today. If, by earth orbital surveys, in cooperation with the less-developed countries, we can improve that situation, our entire space program will have paid for itself many times over.” (GE Forum, Autumn 1967, X/3, 11-12; CR, 10/19/67, H13719-20)
Current attacks on the SST project appeared to stem from ignorance of the plan and a failure to appreciate what it would contribute to the economy and security of this country, reported columnist l/g Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.). He had presented estimates of the sales volume and financial aspect of the SST programs which had been developed, checked, and rechecked by civil advisory groups, the airlines, and individual experts in transportation, industry, and finance. He said no Federal program since World War II had had the thorough analysis, careful examination, and close scrutiny accorded the present sst plan. He emphasized that the sst was not competitive in any way with social reform programs. On the other hand, it would stimulate continued growth of the economy, create employment, and provide a higher standard of living for thousands. (Eaker, Detroit News, 9/4/67)
Washington Evening Star suggested that House Committee on Science and Astronautics might have been “the victim of a high-level snow job last year when it did research for a 1,200-page report on Project Apollo” because report’s conclusions conflicted so greatly with findings of Apollo 204 Review Board. Committee report issued March 29 praised ability of NASA and industry “to identify and solve technical and administrative problems” and stated that the Apollo accident did not “alter the basic conclusions of the report.” Board report, by contrast, criticized NASA and naa for poor management and deficient quality control. (WStor, 4/10/67, A7)
House and Senate both passed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills which were less than the $5.1 billion originally requested by NASA. Senate bill (S. 1296) authorized $4,851 billion: $4,136 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. House bill (H.R. 10340) authorized $4,791 billion: $4,076 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. Senate defeated two amendments by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce nasa authorization—-one by $317 million; one by $98 million. An amendment by Sen. Charles Percy (R-Ill.) which would require NASA to keep Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences “fully and currently informed” was also defeated. Committee Chairinan Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) said the proposal had been considered by the Committee and rejected as unnecessary: “It’s not needed. What is needed is enforcement and compliance with existing legislation.” House bill authorized $200.7 million less than Committee on Science and Astronautics had recommended [see May 16]. An amendment by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R-Ind.) to an amendment by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) cut $65 million from $455 million proposed by Committee for aa program. Fulton’s original amendment had recommended cutting the program by $250 million. Remaining reductions, totaling $135.7 million, were contained in surprise recommittal motion offered by Representative Fulton at the end of the day. They included: (1) $6.2 million from advanced missions (funding eliminated); (2) $21.5 million from Voyager; (3) $20 million from nuclear rockets; (4) $78 million from launch vehicle procurement; and (5) $10 million from sustaining university program. Amendment also contained provision to establish an independent safety review board within NASA. Establishment of the board had been urged by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) as one means of avoiding another accident like the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Differences between Senate and House authorization bills would be resolved by joint House/Senate Conference Committee. (CR, 6/28/67, S9078-94, H8150-200; upi, NYT, 6/29/67, 11; Reistrup, W Post, 6/29/67, A6)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, praised NASA’s Lunar Orbiter program on the House floor: “In the short span of just under 1 year, all five Lunar Orbiters have been launched and have provided the world with more information about the moon than has been obtained in all previous history. Lunar Orbiter photography has certified four potential landing sites for our Apollo astronauts, and has provided detailed photographs for 99 percent of the front side of the moon and 60 percent of the back side. “Successful completion of the present mission (Lunar Orbiter V] will provide supplementary data for the certification of five more Apollo landing sites, detailed photography of virtually the entire moon’s surface, front and back, and very close view of 36 areas of great scientific interest on the front face of the moon. “I wish to compliment the NASA team that has made the Lunar Orbiter program one of the most successful in the 9-year history of that agency. . . .” (CR, 8/9/67, H10175)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research and Development Subcommittee, spoke on “A Challenge to the Scientific Community,” at autumn meeting of nas, at Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He urged scientists to become more actively involved in helping Government leaders find effective ways of dealing with national problems, and he believed that Congress should take an active interest in the “state of science” because scientific activity “is critical to the deliberations and the decisions of our political representatives.” In turn, he urged an understanding by scientists and engineers of “pressures and functioning of a government which must be responsive to every shade of thought which our nation harbors.” (Text)
U.S. leaders expressed sorrow at the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. President Johnson: “The death of Vladimir Komarov is a tragedy in which all nations share. Like three American astronauts who lost their lives recently, this distinguished space pioneer died in the cause of science and in the eternal spirit of human adventure.” ~ Vice President Humphrey: “It is with great sorrow that we learn of the tragedy involving Vladimir Komarov. The loss of a dedicated life is indeed a heavy price. Yet progress and space development is necessary.” NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “All of us who have faced the difficulties of understanding and putting to use the forces of nature at the outer edge of Man’s knowledge of what is possible in this decade deeply regret the loss of life represented by the death of Cosmonaut Komarov, and extend our sincere sympathy to his family and associates. We feel certain that man will achieve great things in space. Some of these will determine what the men will be able to do on earth. “We also feel that at this dawn of the space age, man has the duty to seek cooperation between nations, such as the USSR and the United States on a realistic basis. “We at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration want to make every realistic effort. Could the lives already lost have been saved if we had known each other’s hopes, aspirations and plans? Or could they have been saved if full cooperation had been the order of the day?” U.S. astronauts: “We are very saddened by the loss of Colonel Komarov. We feel comradeship for this test pilot because we have met several of his fellow cosmonauts and we are involved in a pioneering flight effort which is not without hazards.” (Text; PD, 5/1/67, 660; AP, NYT, 4/25/67, 21)
New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics were named: Reps. Jack Brinkley (D-Ga.); Bob Eckhardt (D-Tex.); Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Guy Vander Jagt (R—Mich.); Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.); Donald E. Lukens (R-Ohio); and John E. Hunt (R-N.J.). (nasa lar VI/8,11; Committee Ofc.)
Report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations said that DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) had many inadequacies and urged that steps be taken “forthwith” to reinforce it by adding synchronous satellites. Report argued that undue reliance on present system would stretch it “skintight,” impairing its capabilities if unexpected failures developed. The subcommittee expressed concern over DOD’s apparent intent to use IDCSP “for a longer period than originally planned” and its tendency to lean “rather heavily on the future promise of technological breakthroughs and improvements in the state-of-the-art.” It conceded it would be wrong to settle for a limited system when new technological advances could be made, but also felt it would be an error to inflate the possibilities of present system as an excuse to defer needed improvements. (Jones, M/S Daily, 8/29/67)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA did not know whether U.S.S.R. was adequately sterilizing its interplanetary spacecraft. “If we find . . . that . . . [Soviet] sterilization procedure is many orders of magnitude less good than ours, then we will be able to relax in our standards simply because there will be no value in our going through an expensive process only to find that they have already contaminated the planet. “However, we do not know at the present time, and there is reason to believe that their procedures may well turn out to be adequate.” (Transcript, 446)
Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, in its report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended that $46.8 million be cut from $3.4 billion requested by nasa for FY 1968 manned space flight program. Recommendation, which included $25-million reduction in Apollo program, was approved by full committee May 16. (W Post, 5/12/67, A13)
U.S. industry would spend $16.6 billion for r&d in 1967—double the amount spent in 1957, McGraw-Hill, Inc., reported in its annual economic survey. Federal Government had financed 54% or $8.4 billion of the $15.5 billion spent for research in 1966. Survey estimated that 1970 expenditures would reach $21 billion. It noted that more than half of the R&D was concentrated in two industries—aerospace, and electrical machinery and communications—both of which were heavily involved in defense and space exploration. (Koshetz, NYT, 5/12/67,67)
The number of scientists, engineers, and physicians immigrating to the U.S. had increased 77% between 1956 and 1966, according to report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee. Report said this influx from poor nations was an “involuntary gift of valuable resources. “Such a loss by the developing countries is. of direct concern to the United States. To the extent that it undermines development, it also defeats a major United States foreign policy objective for the sake of which this country is currently spending about $3.7 billion per year. . . .” Reduction of this influx would probably have to be the joint responsibility of the U.S. and the nations that were losing their skilled professionals, report said. (Text; Science, 8/18/67, 783; NYT, 8/3/67, 13)
House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill—$516.6 million less than NASA had requested and $282 million less than NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). Committee said the bill was “less than would be recommended under less stringent fiscal circumstances,” but it would support “a viable space program, and one that is consistent with available resources. “The reductions . . . should in no respect be interpreted as an expression of a lack of confidence in our space endeavors. . . .” Cuts included: (1) $50.5 million from Apollo program; (2) $154.7 million from aa program; (3) $27.5 million from Nuclear Rocket Program; (4)	$37.7 million from Tracking and Data Acquisition; and (5) $71.5 million from Voyager (funding eliminated), (nasa lar VI/91; WSJ, 8/21/67,4; O’Toole, W Post, 8/19/67, A4)
National Academy of Sciences had concurred in House Committee on Government Operations recommendation that outside experts as well as those in Government be used to advise decisionmakers of R&D deficiencies and remedies. Committee released report of NAS and Bureau of the Budget comments on recommendations to improve Federal r&d decisionmaking process, which also showed nas had concurred that Executive Office should examine program-level recommendations but had warned of danger of attempting to determine gaps or establish levels of support on too centralized a basis. NAS also had voiced strong reservations on a cost-benefit approach to R&D evaluation. (Text)
U.S. must “answer the post-Apollo question . . . very soon,” Douglas Aircraft Co. Vice President and General Manager J. P. Rogan told aiaa/aas Space Forum in Washington, D.C. He suggested that U.S. develop five “building blocks” which would maintain options for any future course of action chosen: (1) long-duration orbital experience; (2) reusable spacecraft; (3) reusable launch vehicles; (4) nuclear-powered stages; and (5) improved secondary power systems. (Text)
House voted 312-92 in favor of $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474)—NASA’s lowest in five years. This was the sum recommended by the House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 18]. Two amendments by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.)-—one to reduce R&D funds by $100 million, one to reduce administrative operations’ funds by $37 million—were defeated by voice vote, (nasa LAR VI/93; CR, 8/22/67, H10909-30)
An advanced concept in solid rocketry was demonstrated when Lockheed Propulsion Co. static-fired large-scale motor with two interconnected combustion chambers for 7.5 min. Firing—longest ever achieved by high-performance solid-propellant gas generator—was 80% successful. Lockheed Vice President Kenneth H. Jacobs commented: “The firing demonstrates the feasibility of a large-scale, all-solid rocket propulsion system for spacecraft attitude control and trajectory adjustment.” (Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 5)
A report expressing confidence in NASA’s management of the Apollo program was released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Report was prepared before Jan. 27 Apollo fire, but Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said the findings of the study were “essentially unchanged. . . . The public may look with confidence to the management, engineers, scientists and technicians of NASA and industry as the Apollo program progresses.” Report praised the ability of the NASA-industry team to identify and solve the administrative, technical, and engineering problems “inherent in performing a program contributing major technological progress. . . .” It identified the major Apollo pacing items as the Saturn V 2nd stage, the Lunar Module (lm) for the Saturn I and V, and the Command and Service Module (csm) for the Saturn I and V. “Any significant delays in attainment of flight capability of these items could affect both program shcedule and cost adversely.” Report said that an additional $300 million in NASA’s FY 1967 budget would have provided: “(1) increased confidence in meeting unforeseen development problems when encountered; (2) broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and (3) an increased assurance of meeting the national goal of a lunar landing in this decade.” (Text; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/20/67)
Vice President Humphrey commissioned into service usn’s $130-million Atlantic undersea test center, which he predicted might become the Cape Kennedy of oceanography. Speaking at West Palm Beach, the Vice President said: “This center has been established primarily for purposes of national security. But the knowledge we gain here will help us in other ways.” It would contribute to man’s knowledge of tides and provide information on untapped mineral resources and unutilized food sources. “We may learn how to divert and even prevent hurricanes,” Mr. Humphrey said. “But perhaps the greatest promise of all lies in food from the sea.” (AP, NYT, 2/27/67, 46)
William Littlewood, a former vice president of American Airlines and developer of the DC-3 aircraft, died at age 69. Recipient of numerous awards—including Wright Brothers Medal, Flight Safety Foundation Medal, and Guggenheim Medal—Littlewood had been a member of naca, Flight Safety Foundation, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory board of directors, U.K. Royal Aeronautical Society, and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute. (NYT, 12/5/67, 45; W Star, 12/5/67, B4)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Francis J. Sullivan and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Sullivan, Director of Electronics and Control Div., said that the development of technology for high-resolution, 60- to 120-in space telescopes for optical astronomy, communications, and other potential applications was a major OART effort. “Success in this research will provide the capability to study celestial objects which cannot be viewed from the ground because of atmospheric attenuation and will provide vastly improved resolution over that attainable through the earth’s atmosphere.” Sullivan said because environmental, structural, and control problems of large mirrors in space were almost insurmountable with conventional fabrication and alignment, unique approaches were being studied. One was 24-in-dia, three-segment mirror feasibility model in which distortion sensor, located in front of primary mirror, determined which segments were out of alignment and to what degree. Electronic circuitry then processed and used the alignment data to realign mirror surface segments with actuators located behind each segment. Dr. Kurzweg, Director of Research, said the jpl had developed a new mathematical approach for calculating energy requirements for Mars vehicles which provided, for the first time, a complete day-hy-day listing of the energies necessary for a round trip. Calculations had been completed for launching during the entire 1970-80 decade. “The calculated trajectories went from a circular parking orbit about the Earth to the vicinity of Mars, into a circular parking orbit about Mars for a stay time of 7 days, out of the circular parking orbit about Mars to the vicinity of the Earth, and into a circular parking orbit about the Earth. It was assumed that the one-way flight times for both the departure and return trajectories are the same.” Dr. Kurzweg said information was very important for “fast trade-off calculations for future advanced Mars missions. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
Noise problems arising from commercial jet aircraft operations, and the Government’s attack on these problems were described by ost Director Dr. Donald F. Hornig in appearance before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee [see Feb. 1]. He stated: “At the request of the Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport, Secretary McNamara, I assumed responsibility for defining and directing an interagency sonic boom program. Its goal is to determine the potential sources of difficulty or additional costs associated with commercial operation of supersonic transports.” ost, said Hornig, had framed “action program” with faa, NASA, and Depts. of Commerce and of Housing and Urban Development—responding to President Johnson’s Transportation Message of Mar. 2, 1966. He added: “. . . NASA’s aeronautics research program in the sonic boom problem areas is both broadly conceived and well defined to provide technical support to the FAA and to the aerospace industry in the national sst Development Program.” (Text)
In response to fcc inquiry on future communications in Atlantic area— currently served by two comsats and four cables—ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and at&t Vice President Richard R. Hough presented their proposals in separate letters to fcc Chairman Rosel H. Hyde. Hough, advocating a fifth underwater cable, said that although AT&T supported the idea of a global comsat system, all of the international carriers believed the cable project was “the right way to add to our capabilities at this time.” The best service, he said, could be provided by “a balanced, integrated network of both cables and satellites.” Charyk charged that the cable would not be economically feasible: “. . . when a new cable is laid to carry traffic that could otherwise be carried at no extra cost by satellite facilities which must be established in any case, the ultimate customer must bear the cable cost as an addition to the already committed costs of service.” As traffic was diverted from comsats to a cable, a greater share of satellite revenue requirement would have to be carried by routes not served by the cable, primarily less developed countries with smaller traffic streams. U.S., he said, was committed to develop the Intelsat system. To ensure that U.S. met this commitment, “the advanced [comsat] system must be in operation in the time frame we have proposed for INTELSAT iv. It is essential that a vigorous advanced satellite development progam be under way during 1968.” (Texts; Smith, NYT, 12/29/67, 43) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXCVIII into orbit with 281-km (175-mi) apogee, 265-km (165-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.1° inclination. Equipment and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc SSR, 12/30/67)
naa’s incentive fees for the Apollo Command Module (cm) destroyed in Jan. 27 fire would be reduced by NASA to $41 million, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told the press. He said information provided him showed “that amount is $15 million less than what North American’s estimated potential incentive earnings would have been if the accident had not occurred.” Senator Anderson said he believed the settlement was realistic and fair: “A stricter penalty would have served no purpose and could have adverse effects on the relationship between [nasa and naa] (Text)
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
nasa personnel changes: m/g James W. Humphreys (usaf) , recently returned from a Vietnam assignment as Chief of the Public Health Service Div., Agency for International Development (aid) , became Director of Space Medicine, omsf, replacing b/g Jack Bollerud (usaf), who had been Acting Director since the December 1965 death of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II. General Bollerud returned to duty with usaf. Jerome Lederer, vice president and technical director of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., and director of Comell-Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center, was appointed Director of Safety, omsf. Lederer would develop policies and procedures related to manned spaceflight systems safety; act as focal point for consideration of and decisions on matters related to system and flight safety; and provide continuing review and evaluation of safety provisions. m/g Charles R. Roderick, who retired May 31 from usaf where he was serving as Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, was named Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Harold Sims, retired career foreign service officer currently serving as mayor of Sparta, Tenn., and Gerald J. Lynch, president and chairman of the board of Menasco Manufacturing Co., were sworn in as consultants to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 67— 84, 67-138, 67-139, 67-140, 67-141)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller appeared before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight to submit Apollo project reprogramming plans presented to the Senate May 9. Dr. Seamans assured the Subcommittee that schedules could be met and urged that Congress continue to support NASA: “We have confidence in the ability of our technical and adrrdnistrative teams, both in government and industry, to meet the challenge before us. But that is not sufficient; the Congress, representing the people of the Nation, must
First live global telecast linking North America, Europe, Asia, Australia, and Africa would be carried on National Educational Television (net) June 25, net Vice President William Kobin announced. Designed as a live documentary to enable man to see earth as a single entity in space and time, two-hour telecast would examine such major problems as hunger and overpopulation. It would be transmitted to more than 30 nations via four comsats: ComSatCorp’s Early Bird, I and Intelsat II—B and two of U.S.S.R.’s Molniya I comsats. (Gent, NYT, 2/8/67, 63)
The time had come to “fix” the responsibility for the total results of U.S. technology, Michael Getler suggested in Aerospace Technology. There was no single group or agency to “link the broad spectrum of American technological development with social development. There is no single group with the expertise available to probe all forms of technology and its effects, to pump funds into a truly important new applied science not able to capture headlines, to speed the transfer of defense and space technology into other areas, and to put the special interest groups on the line for blockage of improvements within the state-of-the-art. There is no group directly responsible to the citizenry to develop and carry through legislation to try and save us from tomorrow’s smog and urban clutter; for we have not, by a long shot, run out of self-inflicted ills. . . .” Getler urged that the overall responsibility be given to Congress. “It is the Legislative branch of Government, properly augmented with a permanent staff of specialists, that is best equipped to serve as a responsive arbiter between the good life of our people, the promise of technology, and the pressure of die marketplace.” (Getler, Aero Tech, 8/14/67,62)
Ronnie J. Lagoe, 17-yr-old high school senior whose %-scale model , of NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft had made five successful soft-landings on earth from varying heights, was introduced at a New York news conference by Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President of Hughes Aircraft Co., manufacturer of Surveyor spacecraft. Lagoe built his 2-lb model—designated Surveyor-R (“for revised”)—with wood strips, foam rubber, bathtub calk, glue, ping-pong balls, cork fishing floats, a battery, and four tiny rockets. Total cost: $28.95. He described the 85-ft flight sequence following Surveyor-R’s launch from the top of a water tower: “After retro-fire, a marked decrease in spacecraft velocity was noted until retro-burnout occurred at 20 feet and the verniers burned alone. Complete counteraction of gravity was achieved at two feet, after which vernier shut-off occurred and the craft dropped to the surface.” Hughes presented Lagoe with a summer job at ksc, a free trip to its Culver City, Calif., plant, and a $5,000 college scholarship. (Wilford, NYT, 5/25/67, 43)
In testimony before House Committee on Interstate Commerce’s Transportation and Aeronautics Subcommittee, Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, urged passage of H.R. 3400 to allow Secretary of Transportation to prescribe aircraft noise abatement regulations. Rep. Wydler cited complaints from churches whose religious services had been interrupted; doctors whose patients’ mental and physical health had been impaired; schools whose classes had been disrupted; and individuals whose lives had been inhumanly intruded upon by jet aircraft noise. Passage of the bill was imperative, he said, because aircraft noise had become “something that dominates the lives of those who have to live with it to the point where it actually destroys the way in which they are living.” Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd told Subcommittee that dot was trying to find a solution to the problem, but he admitted his disbelief that “there will ever be such a thing as a quiet airplane. Despite our far longer experience with the problems of truck noise and railroad noise, we have not been able to produce quiet vehicles in those modes of transportation.” However, he believed that “we will be able, by technological and regulatory means, to reduce the impact of aircraft noise exposure for the majority of Americans who are . . . subject to excessive noise exposure.” He said bill was “the mechanism by which we can assure future aircraft are substantially quieter than our present generation [of aircraft].” (Transcript)
NASA FY 1968 operating plan was presented by Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reflecting accommodation of fund reductions by Congress during recent months— 20% for r&d programs other than Apollo, 50% for construction of facilities, and 7% for administrative operations. He reviewed decisions restructuring NASA effort at least through FY 1969. The first scheduled Apollo Applications flights of 1970—a “limited number with limited objectives”—would begin with a “precursor training mission for scientists-astronauts with certain orbital experiments, and then proceed with dual launch missions with the Orbited Workshop and the Apollo Telescope Mount.” Launch vehicle/spacecraft hardware for follow.-on Apollo Applications flights would depend on funding “some time after FY 1969,” because of stringent FY 1969 budgetary guidelines. Future planning for Uprated Saturn—acknowledging necessity for production termination after vehicle No; 216—included FY 1968-funded lead time items “to hold open the option of continued production ... at the rate of two per year.” Webb explained that he held open the option of definite termination of Uprated Saturn production, intending to “preserve competition among the companies involved and between solid, liquid, and, where applicable, nuclear propulsion systems.” To preserve competition would cost 83.5 million from FY 1968 funds. He announced NASA—dod discussions “to consider carefully future national requirements for large launch vehicles, including a possible new booster of the 100,000-pound in earth orbit class.” Webb stressed the need for planetary exploration utilizing both orbiters and landers in a long-term program: “We do not believe that it is the policy of the Nation or the intent of Congress that the United States abandon the field of planetary exploration.” Present program still had two Mars-Mariner 1969 flights; continuity depended on NASA’s current 8143.4-million allocation to lunar and planetary category which would serve as basis for reestablishing future programs in FY 1969 budget. Development of nerva I flight-qualified engine could proceed “with the amounts that we and the aec have available in FY 1968,” longer-range planning again dependent on “an affirmative decision” in the Administration’s FY 1969 budget for NASA. (Text)
nasa should prepare a list of priorities for its future programs to guide Congress in making any budget cuts required by the Vietnam war, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson (D—N. Mex.) told Baltimore Sun reporter Albert Sehlstedt, Jr. Senator Anderson insisted he was not necessarily predicting cuts in the FY 1968 budget, but observed that “something might have to give a little” while so much was being spent on the war. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 1/21/67)
President Johnson presented National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Trophy to Rep. George P. Miller (EX—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, in special White House ceremony. The Trophy, founded in 1958 to recognize outstanding national space leadership, was presented to President Johnson in 1966. (Off of Rep. Miller; CR, 3/9/67, H2408-9)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
Gerald J. Mossinghoff, Director of the Office of Legislative Planning at U.S. Patent Office, was named director of Congressional Liaison Div. in NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs, (nasa Release 67—297) Dr. Hilliard V. Paige, General Electric Co. Vice President and general manager of Missile and Space Div., compared role of the space program in stimulating technological development to that of World Wars I and II. World War I, he said, marked real beginning of American'aviation activities. World War II led to current U.S. leadership in production of jet aircraft. Space program was current counterpart of this stimulus, he noted, but program was declining because of crippling budget and program cuts. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) described his experiences living in Sealab II [see Aug. 28, 1965] and plans for a larger Sealab III in 1968. In addition to Sealab experiment, series of special vehicles would be tested, he said: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle (DSRV—1) to rescue men from disabled submarines resting on ocean floor; Deep Submergence Search Vehicles (dssv) to conduct research on ocean floor, collecting and surfacing small objects; Nuclear Powered Deep Submergence Research and Ocean Engineering Vehicle (NR—1) which would run along ocean floor on wheels; and Large Object Salvage System (loss) to develop a variety of tools, from surface craft with strong lifting ability to equipment enabling swimmers to operate effectively in deep water. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/6/67, 35; 12/24/67, E3; NY Academy of Sciences pio)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
United Aircraft Corp. vice president and chief scientist Perry W. Pratt received the American Society of Mechanical ^Engineers’ Gas Turbine Award for “his distinguished leadership and technical contributions in the development of aircraft turbojet and turbofan engines used widely throughout the world.” (United Release)
1967 Robert J. Collier Trophy was presented to James S. McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., by Vice President Humphrey in ceremony at Smithsonian Institution. Making the award on behalf of President Johnson, Mr. Humphrey said McDonnell had been selected because of his leadership in aeronautics and astronautics as demonstrated by the performance of the McDonnell Gemini spacecraft and the F-4 Phantom II jet fighter. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, “for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” ( naa News; AP, NYT, 5/25/67,81)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, in interview with Aerospace Management, said: “The Space Program got off the ground ten years ago on a surge of apprehension and sensationalism. This year it became very clear that public acceptance or rejection will be a key factor in shaping the U.S. objectives in space for the years ahead. Having ushered in the second decade of space exploration, both NASA and the aerospace industry should now review their ‘ledgers’ to make the best use of their achievements to date, as well as learn from the mistakes and false-starts of the past.” He predicted: “I have no doubts that before this century is over, man will set foot on the near planets [although] it seems more reasonable to me to first find out more about the other planets by means of automated robots [and] I will be disappointed if ... we don’t couple the great capabilities of the Saturn V vehicle with those of a Voyager spacecraft.” He added: “However, be they the merits of the Voyager concept or the potential benefits of Earth Resources Satellites, the public and Congress must be honestly convinced of their values if space efforts are to be supported.” (Karth, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 5—9)
Letter to President Johnson from Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, assessed U.S. space program after Apollo/Saturn flight of Nov. 9: U.S. had captured lead in space race with the U.S.S.R. Rep. Ryan urged the President to renounce the space race, and “to make a serious request for the beginning of far-ranging international cooperation to reduce the costs and increase the benefits of space exploration—to remove the wasteful duplication of two great nations.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee released report, Science, Technology, and Public Policy during the Eighty-Ninth Congress, January 1965 through December 1966. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), subcommittee chairman, emphasized: “Congress does indeed recognize the impact of science and technology on modem society and is moving expeditiously to meet its challenge and shape its potential on behalf of human welfare [and] ... is becoming aware of the difficulties and dangers which technologically applied science may carry in its genes—and is searching for effective means to counter them.” NSF Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth, in statement before Subcommittee, said: “In all honesty, it must be admitted that thus far there have been no broad, systematic, and intensive studies designed to develop an understanding of alternative policy structures and options open to the Nation as a whole and to assess the associated opportunities and risks, as well as the impact, which such policies and choices might have on the individual agencies, disciplines and the Nation’s goals.” Haworth referred to the major lack in the studies concerning long-range national needs. (Text)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
The House Committee on Government Operations in H.R. 613 urged dod to proceed with plans for an advanced communications satellite system that would eventually replace the present Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp). The Committee said it “would be a mistake” to lean too heavily on the idcsp because its limited channel capacity was already strained. Several possible system configurations were under study by dod. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 18)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, in keynote address to annual meeting of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Panel on Science and Technology, suggested that many of the potential perils of advancing technology might be avoided if a group of experts were impanelled every live years “to explore our technological future. . . . The values of this type of forecasting to policy judgments is obvious,” Rusk said. “In most cases a true technological innovation does not reach full bloom for some years—the first basic patent on the transistor was, after all, issued in 1930. . . .” He recommended that panel members be selected from the natural sciences, the social sciences, and industry. (Text)
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, defended the Mariner/Mars 1971 mission in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Responding to criticism by Committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) that information from the mission would arrive too late to contribute to the design of the 1973 Voyager spacecraft, Dr. Newell said: “. . . it is very important to recognize . . . that there are three areas of design involved. One is the hardware design. Two is software design, and three is design of the scientific mission. . . . The Mars 71 probe will be fully in time for us to use in the software design, in other words, setting the profile of the mission to get the spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto the surface, and will be fully involved in continuing design of the scientific experiments and observations. . . .” (Transcript, 433-5)
Effect of sonic boom on sst flight routes and sales prospects was discussed by Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd, FAA Administrator William F.	McKee, and Director of sst Development b/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf, Ret.) in May and June testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Transportation. Conditions under which supersonic flight would be permitted over populated land areas had still not been determined, Gen. Maxwell explained. “The available sonic boom data indicate that the present sst design may possibly be restricted from supersonic operations over populated land areas . . . [and we] have based our sst program decisions on the conservative assumption that this design will be operated primarily on water.” dot did not have to force the American public to tolerate sonic booms to make sst program an economic success, Secretary Boyd assured the Committee. “We are satisfied that we can have a . . . highly successful program, assuming the sonic boom is intolerable over populated areas. ... The only thing that is involved here is whether we sell more aircraft, not whether the program is a success. . . .” Even if sst were limited to subsonic flight over inhabited areas at least 300 aircraft could be sold initially, he said, and market studies indicated “that there is a possibility of going up to 1,200 aircraft by 1990.” (Transcript, 41, 294, 942)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
sst design refinements reflecting 1966 recommendations made by 240-man Government and airline evaluation team were announced by Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington. Prototype refinements were still to be reviewed by FAA and described in detail to the 26 airlines which had reserved sst deliveries. Changes included addition of canard surfaces, incorporation of direct-lift control, -lengthening fuselage by 12 ft, and provision of more convenience in passenger boarding and deplaning. Withington cited progress in component and subsystem testing and in wind-tunnel investigations. The first metal (titanium alloy billets) for airliner prototypes was under production. Major contractors were preparing for work on assemblies and Boeing was making ready facilities for construction of the two prototypes. A titanium fabrication facility would be completed as part of the Boeing Development Center and would include a furnace large enough for heat-treating sheets of titanium 70 ft long and 10 ft wide. The full-scale demonstration mockup, constructed in 1966, had recently been dismantled to make room for a dimensionally accurate engineering mockup to be constructed at Boeing Co. (Boeing Release)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testified in support of nasa’s FY 1968 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He reviewed 1966 accomplishments and discussed future space-flight activities: “We completed 22 missions during 1966 successfully out of 29 attempts, or a 76% success. This record is somewhat lower than the previous year, but it is marked by qualitative advances greater than any before. “The FY 1968 request represents the first true post-Apollo decisions. ... The combination of the 1971 Mariner flights and the initiation of a continuing, major Voyager program” represented effective translations into action of President’s Science Advisory Committee’s recommendation that planetary exploration be given a high priority in the post-Apollo period. “During FY 1968 we will be decreasing somewhat our application of manpower effort on the manned space flight programs with a considerable shift in effort from the Apollo to the Apollo Applications part of that activity. We will be increasing our total effort in space science and applications programs, particularly in the build-up of the Voyager program activity . . . [and devoting] more effort to our advanced research and technology activities. . . .” Emphasizing that he was “not prepared nor willing to state that a manned lunar landing cannot be achieved before 1970,” Dr. Seamans admitted there was a high probability that Apollo program would have to operate on a delayed schedule. “An important contributor to . . . success will be adequate resources and the flexibility to apply them when needed. . . . We cannot say today that the $2.6 billion requested for Apollo is not enough [but] we can say it is not too much. ... It cannot be reduced and still accomplish the objectives we have defined.” (Testimony; Transcript, 118)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
F-111B was “a very easy plane to fly” with outstanding low-speed qualities, V/Adm. T. F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Air), said in April 18 testimony released by the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Defense. Admiral Connolly’s description of the F—111 (formerly tfx), subject of increasing criticism since April 21 crash of usn test model, was described by Rep. George Andrews (D-Ala.) as “the most complimentary statement [about the F-lll] . . . which has been made before this committee.” Basing his views on his personal inflight observations, Admiral Connolly conceded that there was “a lot of work to do on the airplane,” including making configuration changes to improve pilot visibility. He asserted that when difficulties involving engine stall were overcome there should be no major problems and said that aircraft’s anticipated weight satisfied usn requirements. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 6/2/67, 23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences staff report released by Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) disputed theory that any nation would have a military advantage with orbiting nuclear weapons. Report, prepared “to provide information for . . . legislative evaluation” on the space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] submitted for Senate approval Feb. 7, noted: “Majority military opinion holds that orbital bombardment is not an effective strategic weapon as compared to land-based ballistic missiles. An effort to use space-based nuclear weapons would have the effect of a strategic warning, thus placing an aggressor in the position of being open to retaliation by strategic weapons.” (Text)
President Johnson signed $4.86-billion NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) into law. Noting that on Aug. 18 House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill, $516.6 million less than NASA had requested, the President said: “Under other circumstances I would have opposed such a cut. However, conditions have greatly changed since I submitted my January budget request. . . . “I recognize—as also must the Congress—that the reduction in funds recommended by the House Appropriations Committee will require the deferral and reduction of some desirable space projects. Yet, in the face of present circumstances, I join with the Congress and accept this reduction.” (PD, 8/28/67, 1192-3)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, an ibm vice president, told ieee meeting in New York that too many scientists and engineers—as prime movers of change—were not sufficiently attentive to the results of their discoveries and inventions. “Historically, scientists and engineers have underestimated or ignored the social and moral consequences of their work. Don’t continue to make that mistake,” he warned. Dr. Charles H. Townes, mit provost, received ieee’s 1967 Medal of Honor for his “significant contributions in the fields of quantum electronics which have led to the maser and the laser.” (Lieberman, NYT, 3/26/67, FI; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 97)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams outlined nasa’s supporting role in sst development at hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1965 NASA provided the faa with the services of 50 technical people for six weeks for the evaluation of industry-proposed airframe and engine designs. During final evaluations last fall, 75 professionals were provided for two months and two major facilities at Langley and Ames were operated 10 hours a day and 6 days a week during September. We are assisting FAA contractors by making available to them facilities such as wind tunnels and simulators and have helped solve specific problems growing out of detail design. The contractors used about 4100 hours of NASA wind tunnel time for each of the past two years.” NASA was carrying a major research responsibility as a member of a Federal team on the SST sonic boom program—including definition of sonic boom signatures and effects of sonic boom on structures, Dr. Adams said, and was also continuing its own study of materials suitable for sst structures. “In addition to supporting the faa on the present SST, we are continuing our general research program aimed at an improved second-generation supersonic transport.” (Testimony)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. presented to Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum historic liquid-propellant rocket engines made during World War II. Gifts included primitive rocket test stand known as ars Test Stand No. 2, used by members of original American Rocket Society (now aiaa) , on Dec. 10, 1938, to test first U.S. successful, fully regeneratively cooled rocket engine. Other Thiokol gifts included World War II liquid-propellant jet assist takeoff (jato) units for aircraft, and engines for Lark surface-to-air missile, usaf MX-774 missile, and Viking research rocket. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s decision to go ahead with “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm) system [see Sept. 18] was praised by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on floor of Senate: “I indicate my support of this decision [and] under present world circumstances, we have no choice but to go ahead with [abm] system.” (CR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, North American Aviation President J. Leland Atwood denied that pressures to meet 1970 lunar-landing goal had prompted naa engineers to take shortcuts in Apollo program. Terming the Apollo 204 Review Board’s study “a good and penetrating report,” Atwood conceded that deficiencies existed in the Apollo capsule, but disputed Board’s charge that “deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship, and quality control. . . .” naa’s Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy said that although an electrical arc “probably” caused the fire, there were “various other possibilities”—such as Astronaut Gus Grissom accidentally kicking loose a wire that could have later initiated the blaze. Under stern questioning by subcommittee members, however, Dr. McCarthy admitted that this theory was pure speculation. In response to charge by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that prevailing attitude prior to fire was not “just a feeling of over-confidence” but “real negligence” by naa and NASA, Atwood reasserted that the most serious error made by naa and NASA was classification of the AS-204 test as “non-hazardous.” Questioned about the reasoning behind designing to minimize fire hazard, Dr. McCarthy pointed out that naa had concentrated on eliminating possible ignition sources while it turned out that the amount and placement of flammable materials was crucial. He characterized this as a “grave error in judgment.” Atwood assured the Subcommittee that naa and NASA had “placed great stress” on the importance of quality and workmanship: “The procedures followed and the depth of inspection which have been employed far surpass those . . . used on any other program. The fact of the accident itself makes it obvious that we must do more than we have done, that we must—guided by the finding of the board—redouble our efforts to approach perfection. Already we have gone over every other design feature of the spacecraft to identify any other area of possible failures . . . [and] we have found none.” (ATT, 4/12/67, 34; W Star, 4/12/67, A6)
White House Office of Science and Technology (ost) had failed to move effectively in the direction of long-range planning and had been seriously hampered by a “thinly spread” staff, concluded report prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service and released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations. Presented as a background document for future congressional action or legislation, report reached no direct findings or conclusions but noted that during four years ost had been in existence its “most conspicuous operating characteristic has been the wide span of issues in which it has become involved. “But with the office numbering only seventeen to twenty professionals its staff must be thinly spread.” Although ost had not moved spontaneously in the direction of long-range planning, report said questions posed by various groups of Congress “at least imply a need for this policy planning, systems analysis capability, especially to deal with issues of transportation, waste management, water resources, and energy development.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying on NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 6470) before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, urged congressional approval for funding to begin program to develop Nerva II nuclear rocket engine. Estimated cost over 10 yrs would be $2 billion: $500 million would be needed to develop nuclear stage and $1 billion for ground testing. NASA’s decision to develop Nerva II was based primarily on “our own national objectives in space; what do we do in the future; now looking ahead to the late ’70s and ’80s, as a requirement for booster capability in this country. . . . However, we also must consider our capability in the world arena and, of course, specifically today we have to be cognizant the best that we can of the Russian capability and the Russian plans.” Dr. Seamans noted that Soviet Proton booster could launch 50,000 lbs into earth orbit, cornpared to 40,000-41,000-lb capability of Uprated Saturn I. “We have every reason to believe that in the [Soviet] program they recognized the same kind of needs that we recognized for our program and that they are moving on a broad front, including the development of very large boosters,” (Transcript, 1131-4)
