Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.) on Senate floor said: “President Johnson is properly called the principal architect of America’s space program. As Senator and Vice President he worked unceasingly to assure this country a role of leadership in the exploration of space. . . . Under President Johnson’s leadership in the Senate the Space Act was passed in 1958, creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . . setting up a charter to win for this country a preeminence in the peaceful exploration of space. NASA pulled together widely scattered efforts in space and built an organization unique in this country’s history. It has contributed to the technological competence so vital to modern industrial society.” (nasa LAR VII/108; CR, 10/10/68, S12423)
Explaining decision to develop flight-rated nerva engine at 75,000-lb rather than 200,000-lb thrust level, NASA Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee that lower level would be suitable for most missions in which nuclear rocket was significantly advantageous. It was “substantially off-optimum for manned planetary landing missions,” but with manned exploration delayed, “less emphasis is now properly placed upon that mission, and the 75,000-pound-thrust nerva class is appropriate. . . . The 75,000-pound-thrust nerva gives somewhat better payload performance for orbital operations missions which start from low Earth orbit and involve a single Saturn V launch,” but its use for manned planetary missions “entails a significant performance penalty.” Further development might be required “to extend operating time and to accommodate more extensive clustering and staging if such a mission were to be undertaken.” (Testimony)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, described progressive decline of LeRC funding from peak $389.2 million in FY 1965 to $242.4 million in FY 1967, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Dollar value of procurement had decreased, from $324.5 million in FY 1964 to $211.6 million in FY 1967, while workload was maintained and lead time reduced. Power usage had increased “but costs had declined significantly.” However in last several years, “funds available for maintenance had been less than those believed necessary for proper upkeep and repair.” In long run, Dr. Silverstein said, delays “may prove more costly to the Government.” (Testimony)
House passed, by 262-to-105 vote, NASA FY 1969 authorization bill (H.R. 15856) of $4,031 billion, including $3,383 billion for r&d, $45 million for construction of facilities, and $602 million for administrative operat-i.ons. NASA had requested $4.37 billion. House cut $142.4 million from Apollo Applications program—leaving $252.2 million, $186.4 million less than nasa had requested for orbiting workshop and lunar exploration. Administrative operations allocation was cut by $43.5 million, making total of almost $186-million reduction in $4,217-billion authorization recommended by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. During floor debate Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, answered Apollo Applications program critics’ charge that nasa’s Orbiting Workshop would duplicate usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, explaining that projects differed in nature and purpose, mol objectives were to develop, operate and evaluate specialized experiments and military equipment requiring manned space operations, and DOD would draw on NASA experience in systems involved in Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, mol was “example of utilization by another department ... of NASA-developed space technology.” (CR, 5/2/68, H3229—661; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/3/68, 1; Lannan, W Star, 5/3/68; Griffin, H Chron, 5/3/68; SBD, 5/3/68, 15; Aero Daily, 5/7/68)
U.S.S.R. was expected to make more successful launches than U.S. during 1968 for first time since 1957, with both nations emphasizing military goals, Howard Benedict of Associated Press wrote. In 1957,	U.S.S.R. had launched two Sputniks, U.S. had launched none. In 1958,	U.S. had launched five to U.S.S.R.’s one; thereafter, U.S. had maintained substantial edge, building to 73-46 margin in 1966. In 1967, U.S. had led by only one launch, 67—66. Through 1967, U.S. had had 400 successful launches, with 532 payloads orbited. U.S.S.R. had had 240 launches with 289 payloads. In 1968 to date, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 40 rockets with 40 payloads; U.S. had launched 22 rockets with 31 payloads, 23 fewer than in 1967, while U.S.S.R. launches had increased by five. Reasons for decline in U.S. launch rate were NASA budget cuts and improved instrumentation and data recovery in military launches (60% of U.S. firings). U.S. military payloads in 1968 numbered 22 to U.S.S.R.’s 24 out of total 40. Tracking experts had reported 16 of 1968 U.S.S.R. satellites on reconnaissance assignments, with 13 reentering after 8-day orbit, two after 12 days and one still aloft. Sole U.S.S.R. Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) test, Cosmos CCXVIII, had been launched and returned to earth in less than one orbit April 25. Drop from nine fobs tests in 1967 indicated U.S.S.R. might have perfected at least first stage in FOBS development. Neither U.S. nor U.S.S.R. had launched men into space in 1968 but experts listed Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII launchings April 15 as forerunners of manned lunar mission. In 1968, U.S.S.R. had launched nine scientific satellites, three for navigation, and two each for communications, weather, and deep space probes. U.S. had made two unmanned Apollo rocket and spacecraft tests, five scientific payloads, and one moon shot. (Huntsville Times, 8/5/68)
House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce approved bill to control aircraft noise levels and sonic boom. Committee, by voice vote, agreed on provisions empowering FAA to set standards for measurement and regulations for control (H.R. 1463; W Post, 5/17/68, 5)
National Academy of Engineering announced award of its third Founders Medal to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin, Honorary Vice President of Radio Corporation of America and technical consultant to RCA Laboratories, in recognition of his many contributions to engineering and to betterment of human society. Dr. Zworykin, known as “Father of Television” for invention of iconoscope, first practical picture transmission tube, was cited also for “his role in developing the first commercial electron microscope in the western hemisphere . . . promoting the cause of traffic safety through the imaginative concept of an automated ‘electronic highway,’ and . . . working ... to bring about a union of electronics and medicine.” Medal would be presented April 24 during nae’s 4th Annual Meeting, (nae Release, 2/20/68)
NASA management officials continued to testify on their programs, within NASA’s FY 1969 budget request, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said omsf’s $2.815-billion FY 1969 request was lowest request since FY 1963, $332.8 million below FY 1968, and “almost $700 million below the peak Manned Space Flight budget year, Fiscal Year 1966.” Dr. Mueller included $2,483 billion for R&D, $18.7 million for construction of facilities, and $313 million for administrative operations. Over 80% of total r&d report was committed to Apollo. “The program of Apollo and Apollo Applications Flights, with the development of the Saturn V Workshop and the Advanced Missions studies leading to a space station of longer duration and greater earth orbital capabilities, constitute a minimum effort to continue manned space flight into the early 1970s.” Dr. Mueller warned against failing “to capitalize on the investment in the Apollo Program” and said it was “economically prudent to proceed now with the Apollo Program and the definition study of the . . . long duration space station . . . keystone in the future of manned space flight.” NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Harold B. Finger, citing 27% decrease in procurement for first three months of FY 1968 below same period in 1967, predicted 94% of procurement dollars going to industry would decrease to less than 90% by end of FY 1969 as industry-developed systems came into NASA for testing and launch. Presenting $ 10-million Sustaining University program budget—equal to 1968 budget but one-third 1967’s $30 million—Finger stressed need for university contributions and combining universities’ “demonstrated competence in physical sciences with their social science strengths to deal with the total impact of the nation’s aerospace effort.” Finger submitted statement of Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, describing programs “to experimentally test and develop methods for bringing about the multiple use of the new knowledge gained as a result of NASA activities.” nasa Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly charged $7.8-million increase in FY 1969 administrative operations budget request (from $640.4-million budget for FY 1968) to cost of 1967 Pay Act and conversion to civil service of certain gsfc support services. He cited personnel reduction of 1,704 positions since freeze on hiring new employees on Aug. 24, 1967. (Testimony)
Juan T. Trippe, founder, Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer of Pan American World Airways, Inc., announced his retirement at annual meeting in New York. Board of Directors selected President Harold E. Gray, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and Senior Vice President Najeeb E. Halaby, President. Citing Trippe’s 41-yr service with PAA, New York Times termed him “last of the aviation pioneers” to retire. One of four who forged major U.S. trunk airlines in industry’s infancy, Trippe had led PAA to be first airline to fly across Pacific, first to fly across Atlantic, first to order and fly American-made jets, first to order Boeing 747, and first to order SSTs. New Chairman Gray, hired by PAA in 1929 as its 10th pilot, had made first scheduled transatlantic flight, in 1938. He had served as President since 1964. Halaby, pilot since age 17 and former faa Administrator, had joined airline as senior vice president in 1965. (Hammer, NYT, 5/8/68, 63; 5/12/68,16)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
Lawrence A. Hyland (right), Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., looks at Surveyor model with Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey at Smithsonian Institution. Vice President presented Hyland 1967 Robert /. Coffier Trophy (background) in Smithsonian ceremonies honoring Hughes Surveyor team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and General Dynamics Corp. for program which “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the moonP the frontiers of the unknown—is the test of a vital society, a nation that intends to meet the challenge of tomorrow.” (Text; AP, W Star, 5/8/68, A4; Aero Tech, 5/20/68,19)
Opening session of 3rd Eurospace U.S.-European Conference at Munich discussed disparity between U.S. and European space funding. Total spent on Western European space research in 1967 was $300 million, 0.005% of gross national product of cooperating countries; NASA budget was 14 times that amount. West German Minister for Scientific Research, Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, proposed merger of ELDO and ESRO, 10% increase in total funding, and possible cooperation with U.S. in developing launch vehicle lor use after 1975. International Space Research Committee Vice President Richard W. Porter urged increased cooperation with NASA, which already had concluded bilateral agreements with several countries for scientific satellite launchings, eight of which had proved successful thus far. Some 42 countries were working with U.S. on meteorological satellite programs; 11 were cooperating oil communications projects. There were 20 tracking stations in 11 countries cooperating in U.S. launching projects and 395 foreign technicians, engineers, and scientists had worked in U.S. space centers. European industrial sources expressed hope system could be evolved for joint U.S.-European work on projects. (InteraviaAirLetter, 6/19/68, 1)
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was selected by naa to receive Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics in 1967 as Hughes Surveyor program director. Trophy would be presented May 7. (naa Release; AP, W Post, 4/16/68, A3)
Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) wrote in Data he believed sonic boom problem would be eliminated, permitting transcontinental flight and realization of estimated 1,200 ssts in service by 1990. “No federal program since World War II had ever had the thorough analysis, careful examination and close scrutiny accorded the present SST plan.” (Data, 5/68, 8)
Within limited budget, nasa was “attempting increased emphasis on Astronomy” using manned spaceflight capabilities, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced studies and supporting R&T programs would be expanded in FY 1969 to lay “ground work for a major program in space astronomy.” Flight program in space physics was being “supported at reduced levels,” primarily because of OGO phaseout, but resources would be needed “to capitalize on analysis of data obtained.” Decline in data and experiments, despite output from Explorer and Pioneer programs, might be stemmed, but nasa “considered it much more important to use our requested resources to develop a program which will enable us to fly new experiments, to make new investigations, and to explore new regions of interplanetary space.” Development of two new Pioneer spacecraft would be initiated in FY 1969, to reach past Mars and toward Jupiter, with first launch proposed for 1973. (Testimony) *	nsf announced award of first nine grants under National Sea Grant College Program Act of 1966 to encourage development of national marine resources. Grants, which totaled nearly $2 million, included three to help higher education institutions develop broadly based major programs for increasing utilization of marine resources and six to support individual sea grant projects, (nsf Release 68—112)
Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of Marine Resources Council, told new American Oceanic Organization in Washington, D.C., “We are ready for the next step in Federal management of marine affairs—creation of an independent civilian operating agency.” Chairman of new group, Rep. George E. Shipley (D-Ill.), member of House Appropriations Committee, said, “I think that we will see the time that this country will spend as much in oceanography as we are spending in the space program.” (Corrigan, W Post, 11/17/68, Kl)
Dr. Gardiner L. Tucker, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Electronics & Information Systems), told Military Operations Subcommittee of House Committee on Government Operations dod would proceed with new phase of Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs), procuring more than three advanced synchronous satellites and developing over six new ground terminals. Funding of satellites, which would use very narrow-beam steerable antennas illuminating 1,000- to 2,000-mi-dia area of earth, would start in FY 1969. dscs satellites would be comparable to Intelsat IV series under consideration for commercial service. New dod phase represented technological advance over advanced dscs considered in 1967 but was less ambitious in cost and size, with cost range of $100—200 million, contrasted with earlier $500 million. Current system had 25 satellites in orbit and operational, each equipped with switch to turn it off after six years in orbit. Number of terminals had grown from original two in field and seven transportable to worldwide operational system with terminals near Washington, D.C., and in New Jersey, Colorado, California, Hawaii, Guam, Australia, Korea, Okinawa, Philippines, South Vietnam, Thailand, Ethiopia, and Western Germany, plus six shipboard terminals. Cooperative programs with Allies in satellite communications included procurement of two synchronous Skynet satellites for U.K. as part of Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) with first launch scheduled for mid-1969. Joint efforts were under way to ensure operability of U.S. and U.K. satellites and terminals, and work was under way to procure two Skynet satellites for NATO under program similar to that of U.K. First launch was planned for late 1969, with U.S. controlling satellite. U.S. had signed Memorandum of Understanding with six NATO countries establishing joint testing program utilizing Les V experimental satellite, launched July 1, 1967. (Transcript: dod Release 603—68; Johnson, Av Wk, 6/24/68)
NASA announced changes in Aerospace Safety Panel personnel: Dr. Charles D. Harrington, President of Douglas United Nuclear, Inc., was elected Chairman. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical) at MSFC and Special Assistant to Apollo Spacecraft Manager, resigned from panel to devote full time to these assignments. Newly named to panel were: Frank C. Di Luzio, President of Raynolds Electrical and Engineering Co., Inc., and Vice President of eg&g, Inc.; Gen. Orval Cook (usaf, Ret.); and Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Dr. William A. Mrazek, Assistant Director for Engineering and Chief Engineer for Industrial Operations at msfc, was named consultant, (nasa Release 68-98)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of House Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate: “Ten years from now nasa will be celebrating its 20th anniversary. I hope that the chairman of the Committee ... at that time will be able to stand here and congratulate the agency and its people for 20 years of accomplishment and say that the United States is still first in space and in aeronautics. But unless we are vigilant and supply the agency with the needed authorizations and appropriations, that statement will not be made.” (CR, 10/2/68, SI1844)
Ham, first chimpanzee successfully launched on space flight [Jan. 31, 1961], and now 11 yr old, was among five great apes at National Zoo who reacted positively to tuberculosis tests, according to zoo veterinarian, Dr. Clinton W. Gray. Animals were under treatment and expected to be fit for exhibiting again within 60 to 90 days. (Schaden, W Star, 11/6/68, B2; Elsberg, W News, 2/14/69, 5)
nas in The Mathematical Sciences: A Report said that before World War II U.S. was consumer of mathematical talent but now was “universally recognized as the leading producer.” Graduate education in mathematical sciences at major U.S. centers was “far superior to that in all but two or three centers in the rest of the world,” but shortage of college teachers was likely to worsen. Report recommended increased Federal support for basic research, including NASA programs, computer science, applied mathematics, graduate apprenticeships, and faculty improvement. (Text; Schwartz, NYT, 11/24/68, 74)
Bernhardt L. Dorman had resigned as nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs to return to Aerojet-General Corp., NASA announced. He would be succeeded Aug. 5 by Philip N. Whittaker, Vice President of IBM Federal Systems Div. (nasa Release 68—137)
The successful completion of the current phase of the automated exploration of the Moon and our planetary successes to date provide the capability, experience, and framework for the next step forward in the exploration of the planets,” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced Planetary Mission Technology (apmt) effort, begun in Fiscal Year 1968 at the conclusion of the Mariner Y, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor Programs, and deferral of Voyager was “directed at planning and technology for potential planetary missions in the early 1970’s.” Emphasis had shifted from automated to manned exploration and return of lunar samples. “Regardless of missions planned by the U.S.S.R. during the opportunities in 1969, 1971, and 1973,” Dr. Naugle said, NASA’s “systematic approach . . . will be meaningful and more likely to be complemented by the U.S.S.R. missions than duplicative.” (Testimony)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, said Nimbus B would be launched in meteorological flight program in spring 1968. Nimbus D continued on schedule for 1970 launch as major step in charting earth atmosphere with new techniques. Nimbus E and F were planned for 1971 and 1973. First of next-generation meteorological satellites (Tiros M) would be available for launch for essa in 1969, providing in single spacecraft both stored picture data for global use and local readout of cloud photos, day and night. Dr. Naugle foresaw “in more distant future the possibility that several economic applications of satellite technology can be combined on single, multiple purpose satellites, thus achieving economy through the sharing of many basic spacecraft systems.” (Testimony)
House Committee on Government Operations issued report urging immediate curtailment of Federal grants to foreign scientists, especially in developed countries, to conduct nonessential research. Committee said, despite balance of payments deficit, Government grants for foreign research projects amounted to $20 million yearly, more than $15 million in developed countries. Committee recommended limiting funds to projects urgently needed by U.S. until end of emergency. (H.R. 1578; AP, W Star, 6/24/68)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics its report Managing the Environment. Subcommittee recommended development of national policy for environment, including: use of environment for benefit of all mankind; maximized productivity consistent with continued usage into very long-term future; systematic management of applied science and technology; incentives to industry, land developers, and local governments; international agreement on projects with widespread or longterm effects; assessment of new and extended applications of science; avoidance of speculative statements and emotional appeals; and increased education and information program in ecological principles. (Text)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted into Congressional Record his report “Legislative History of Space Nuclear Propulsion for Fiscal Year 1969,” which confirmed “the continued vigorous support of the Congress for this space research and development activity” and that “appropriate agencies should proceed with the development of the NERVA—1 nuclear rocket engine.” Final Congressional action on aec and NASA FY 1969 authorizations strongly supported nuclear propulsion development, he said. NASA authorization had been $55 million for Nuclear Rockets Program. Joint Committee on Atomic Energy had recommended $69 million for aec Nuclear Space Propulsion Systems and strongly recommended program proceed. AEC had requested $72 million for Project Rover, including $49 million for development of NERVA I rocket engine. Final action of both Senate and House Appropriations Committees on Independent Offices bill and aec appropriations bill had restored funds cut by House earlier. It was clear, said Sen. Anderson, “that the view of the Congress is that the Nuclear Rockets Program for fiscal year 1969 is one of the most important and highest priority programs in NASA and should move forward as planned. . . .” Amount finally appropriated for NASA r&d for FY 1969 would not be less than $3.3703 billion, including $55 million for the Nuclear Rockets Program. “The conference committee on the aec appropriations . . . agreed to $53 million on the aec’s program in Reactor Development—Space Propulsion Systems, a figure more than halfway between the House lower figure [$31 million] and the Senate higher figure [$68 million].” (CR, 7/27/68, S9582—4; nasa LAR VII/81)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, had asked bob to place $20 million in FY 1969 nasa authorization for Earth Resources Observation Satellite (eros). White House budget-cutters had eliminated eros from new budget, George C. Wilson said in Washington Post. Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udall and NAS scientists also were expected to press for restoration of funds. NAS report to nasa would urge eros funding as “one of the potentially big pay-offs for the national space program.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/10/68, B7)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech associate prefessor of planetary science, told Space Science and Applications Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics it would be tragic if U.S. were to “ignore the challenge and the opportunity” of planetary exploration. He urged sustained exploration program competitive with U.S.S.R. “We need not always be first, but we must not always be second.” He saw “real possibility of Soviet Mars lander attempts as early as 1969” and other attempts at planetary firsts, (nasa Auth Hearings; Randal, W Star, 3/7/68, A12)
U.S patent No. 3,390,336 was issued to Dr. Michael J, DiToro, Vice President for Science of Cardion Electronics, for Adapticom, instrument that corrected multipath reception or time-spread responsible for fuzziness and consequent errors in high-speed radio and telephone communications and eliminated ghosts from facsimile transmission. (Jones, NYT, 6/15/68,49)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices and HUD that there would be no duplication of experiments on DOD’s Manned Orbital Laboratory (mol) and NASA’s Orbiting Workshop. They would operate in different orbits, nasc, Welsh said, was stressing “those types of space activities from which we can see relatively direct benefits to the general public.” (Transcript; Aero Daily, 4/23/68, 11-F)
NASA announced creation of Research and Technology Advisory Council to assist in planning and evaluation of research and technology for aeronautics and space. Council would assess relative importance of ongoing research, suggest additional work, and advise on methods for developing national resources. Headed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Head of mit Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and supported by committees representing seven major technology areas, Council included: Dr. David Altman, United Technology Center; Dr. Allen V. Astin, Director of National Bureau of Standards; Dr. Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of California School of Medicine; Dr. Howard W. Emmons, Harvard Univ.; Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of AFSC; Dr. Nicholas J. Hoff, Head of Stanford Univ. Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics; Dr. Hans W. Liepmann, Cal Tech; Dr. John G. Linvill, Head of Stanford Univ. Electrical Engineering Dept.; Matthias E. Lukens, Deputy Executive Director of Port of New York Authority; Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; Dr. Chauncey V. Starr, Dean of Univ. of California Engineering School; and Edward C. Wells, Vice President, Product and Development, Boeing Co. Dr. Allan E. Puckett of Hughes Aircraft Corp. accepted appointment later. (NASA Release 68-4; NASA oart)
Earth Resources Satellite System, report by Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was transmitted to committee and subcommittee, ers system “unquestionably presents NASA with . . . perhaps the best possible opportunity to achieve tangible economic returns from the substantial investment already made by the American taxpayer in the U.S. space program.” Pace of program to date had been “much too leisurely” and financial support, “inadequate.” Report recommended “NASA concentrate a much larger portion of its efforts and resources on this project” and “give the most serious consideration to the recommendation of the National Academy of Sciences’ summer study to the effect that funding for the applications satellite program should be at least doubled, perhaps tripled.” (Text)
Response from U.S.S.R. and other nations to proposal for international decade of ocean exploration in 1970s had been “quite favorable,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, said in report released by council. “I welcome the enthusiasm with which the Decade is being received. . . . We look forward to a continuation of this spirit of close collaboration, for the seas can, and must serve the interest of mankind.” (Text; ncmred Rpt, 5/68; Madden, NYT, 6/18/68,16)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member, introduced S. 2918, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee. Total authorization of $4.37 billion would provide r&d, $3,677 billion; construction of facilities, $45 million; and administrative operations, $648.2 million, (nasa LAR VII/8)
Press reported recently released testimony at February hearings of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Defense. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell had described Foxbat as only Soviet fighter aircraft “that we cannot match.” Undergoing late stages of testing, it had estimated mach 3 maximum speed, 70.000-	to 75,000-ft maximum altitude, 1,600-mi combat range without external fuel tanks, and 1,400-mph cruise speed at 50,000-ft altitude. U.S. observers believed fighter-bomber version could be operational in 1969 or 1970; advanced radar-equipped interceptor version with internally carried missiles could be in squadron service by 197Q or 1971. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, had testified that U.S. was not behind U.S.S.R. in aircraft development, while Gen. McConnell had said that F—X (fighter experimental), U.S. fighter in Foxbat class, was still being designed and was “a little late.” (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 6/11/68,1)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Special Studies Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Porter Hardy, Jr. (D-Va.), ordered NASA to make every effort to cut escalating costs of its June 16, 1967, contract with Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in assembly of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle. Contract, negotiated by NASA in drive to improve safety after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, had been listed tentatively as costing $20 million; NASA officials now placed cost of carrying work through 1968 at $73.4 million. (Transcript; UPI, W Post, 7/16/68, A6)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 15086, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee, (nasa LAR VII/9)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place 550-lb Italian eldo F—7 into polar orbit failed when technicians lost contact with payload shortly after launch. Satellite launched from Woomera Rocket Range by booster with U.K. Blue Streak 1st stage, French Coralie 2nd stage, and West German Astris 3rd stage stopped transmitting after abbreviated seven-second 3rd-stage burn and could not be tracked. (Reuters, NYT, 12/1/68, 11) During November: Milton Alberstadt reviewed 25-yr history of msfc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. U.S. Government built plant (dedicated Oct. 24, 1943) on Michoud sugar mill site during World War II to assemble Curtiss C—46 Caravan transports. After C-46 contract was canceled, “Flying Dutchman,” air-sea rescue boat carried under belly of Boeing B—17 bomber, was developed. Michoud plant was reactivated during Korean War by Chrysler Corp. to produce 810-hp engines for Patton tanks. It was selected by NASA in 1961 as site to build Saturn rocket to put man on moon. (Boeing Magazine, 11/68, 8—9)
Testimony on NASA’s FY 1969 Budget request was presented to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by three NASA Associate Administrators. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented ossa’s budget for “an austere program for the immediate future,” yet one that would make “effective use in the years ahead of the capabilities we have developed in the past decade” and that would advance scientific knowledge and useful applications. “New starts are at a minimum,” he said, “but if this budget request is approved, we can continue the most useful of our on-going programs, we can avoid abandoning the field of planetary exploration, and we can hold together teams and capabilities to meet future national needs. ...” Authorization request for ossa for 1969 was for $538.2 million, $14.7 million below FY 1968 operating plan, with “the decrease . . . primarily in the Lunar and Planetary Programs budget, reflecting the completion of the initial automated phase of lunar exploration and cancellation of Voyager.” Space applications budget request had increased for FY 1969 (to $112.2 million) because of “demonstrated value of communications and meteorological programs and the potential value of applying space technology on a global basis.” NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, described oart program as “the key to tomorrow’s leadership in aeronautics and space.” He explained: “. . . our FY 69 budget request for the R&D line items ... is $336,800,000, up 5.7 percent over FY 68. The increase is primarily due to increases in effort on aircraft technology [up to $10.1 million] and nuclear rockets [up $6 million], . . . Major changes also included more v/stol research, noise research for subsonic jets, and development of NERVA I nuclear rocket engine at thrust level of 75,000 lb. nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski presented FY 1969 budget request of $304.8 million for R&D and $21.8 million for construction of facilities and reported that “50 satellites by the end of 1968” would be supported by network while “some 16 new missions” would be launched in FY 1969. For FY 1969, “the great majority of funds requested will be directed toward operating and maintaining present network capability. Much of the existing equipment has been operated almost continuously for at least eight years and must be refurbished or replaced.” Construction of facilities budget would fund: two 210-ft-dia antennas for Spain and Australia; power generating plant for Fairbanks, Alaska, tracking station; and Sunblazer antenna. (Testimony)
aiaa announced Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of arc’s Space Science Div., would receive Space Science Award, including $500 honorarium, “for his personal contribution as planner, leader and individual experimenter in maj or space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” He had worked’ in magnetospheric physics and nuclear physics and was currently concentrating on interplanetary physics. He had been principal investigator on several NASA experiments and ALSEP. Award would be presented at ALVA 7th Aerospace Science Meeting in New York Jan. 20—22, 1969. Dr. Stanley G. Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol Engine Div., Rolls-Royce Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., had been selected to share $10,000 Goddard Award for their separate work in developing gas turbine engines. Goddard Award, named for late rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard, was awarded annually to “a person who has made a brilliant discovery or a series of outstanding contributions over a period of time, in the engineering science of propulsion or energy conversion.” Prof. Rene H. Miller, head of mit Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, would receive Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for “outstanding contributions” to rotary-wing aircraft. Dr. Robert D. Fletcher, usaf Air Weather Service’s Deputy Chief of Staff for Aerospace Sciences, would receive Robert M. Losey Award for “outstanding and dedicated leadership and service” for 30 yr to aeronautical meteorology, (aiaa Release; NASA Biog, 11/29/68; NYT, 12/31/68, 52)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski, testifying on FY 1969 budget before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee, cautioned: “The many actions we have taken to reduce operating costs have, however, lowered the level of support we provide to the flight projects. In our judgment, further reductions are not possible without reducing network reliability to the point of jeopardizing the success of flight missions.” (Testimony)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented nasa’s bioscience programs to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Biosatellite flights D and F, 30-day earth-orbiting missions to study effects of space environment on living organisms, were scheduled for second and fourth quarters of 1969 and 21-day flights C and E for 1970 and 1971. Flights would test reactions of central nervous system, cardiovascular system, metabolism, performance, and behavior of pigtailed monkey. Gas management system for two-gas atmosphere would be flown for first time in U.S. satellite. (Testimony)
Resignation of Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, announced May 21, became effective. He rejoined Avco Corp., where he had worked from 1955 to 1965, as Corporate Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Government Products and Services Group. (NYT, 7/2/68, 63)
Air Force, Academy announced selection of Gen. Carl A. Spaatz (usaf, Ret.) to receive its Thomas D. White Award, given annually for contribution to national defense and security. Gen. Spaatz was fighter pilot in World War I. During World War II he helped plan strategic bombing of Germany and commanded air forces in North Africa, U.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe, and final bombing operations against Japan. (Rocky Mountain News, 5/4/68, 13)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics decided on $153-million cut in NASA’s authorization request of $4.37 billion for FY 1969. Reductions included cut from $48.3 million to $11.7 million for nuclear rocket program [Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee had recommended cut of entire $48.3 million], $36.5 million from unmanned space program, and $60.3 million from request of $2.8 billion for manned space flight program. (AP, W Star, 3/2/68, A3; W Post, 3/2/68, A10; HR 1181, 3/19/68)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Survey of Views of Leading Industrial Executives on the National Space Program. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, had queried 750 U.S. senior executives; 449 had replied. Majority considered $5 billion annually for nasa funding to be “about right”; 54% favored maintaining goal of manned lunar landing in this decade; 96% ranked national defense high-priority assignment; 69% felt nasa had made “much” scientific and utilitarian contribution. In context of Vietnam War, 47% favored same level of funding for space program on basis of contribution to national security. (Text)
Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., received AIAA Structures and Materials Award for his “original, definitive, and continuous research leading to the use of random processes in aircraft gust loads design.” (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, Charles W. Harper, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, explained NASA’s increased emphasis on aeronautics. Air transportation “has grown to dominate the long range transportation systems” and “has created an industry of great importance to the economic strength of the nation,” showing $850 million in export value in first 10 mo of 1967, more than any other product, according to Dept, of Commerce. NASA planned to direct major effort at providing noise suppression, increasing aerodynamic and propulsion efficiency and advanced avionics, while avoiding “major new airport complexes” by increasing development efforts for v/stol aircraft. Harper presented FY 1969 aircraft technology budget: $91.3 million for r&d, $20.6 million for “other NASA support applicable to aeronautics,” and $54.5 million for administrative operations (AO) (for both OART and non-OART). He said, “A large part of the most fundamental aeronautics research is carried out by nasa scientists using nasa facilities. . . . Without this continued support the foundation of the whole program is in jeopardy and the research supported by R&D funds is much less effective.” (Testimony)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
Panel of scientists testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics symposium on unidentified flying objects (UFOs) in unanimous support of further, more detailed UFO research. Northwestern Univ. astronomer Dr. J. Allen Hynek said U.S. should seek U.N. cooperation in setting up “international clearing house” for scientifically respectable UFO reports because there was almost a total lack of quantitative data about the phenomenon. Cornell Univ. exobiologist Dr. Carl Sagan told Committee it was not inconceivable that there were other planets with civilizations and technologies more advanced than earth’s, but he cautioned against a widespread UFO investigation program which would require “some harder evidence than is now present,” thus being expensive. Computer Science Corp. mathematician and celestial mechanics specialist, Dr. Robert L. Baker, Jr., revealed space-based sensor system operated from Colorado Springs Air Defense Command Hq. had received several anomalous UFO alarms that had not been explained. Dr. James A. Harder, Univ. of California at Berkeley engineer, suggested that power which permitted UFOs to undertake their reportedly incredible maneuverings might depend on a theoretically possible “second gravitational field” interacting with electrical field in a manner corresponding to reaction between conventional electrical motors and generators. (Transcript; Lyons, NYT, 7/30/68, 10; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/68, A3)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
House Appropriations Committee cut $550.5 million from dod FY 1969 appropriations, including $85 million from usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. (CR, 7/18/68; SBD, 7/19/68, 71)
Aerospace sales reached record high of $30.1 billion in 1968, an increase of almost $3 billion over 1967, Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told Washington, D.C., meeting of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%, to record $6.4 billion; aerospace exports rose 32%, to $3 billion. Military space programs in 1968 rose 3%, from $1,088 billion in 1967 to $1,121 billion, reported AlA’s “1968 Aerospace Industry Review and Forecast,” which Harr released. N'onmilitary space sales declined 3.7%, from $4,202 billion in 1967 to $4,047 billion in 1968. Sales of products and services for use of aerospace technology in nonaerospace areas—such as marine science, water desalination, crime control, and rapid transit—increased from $2,579 billion to $2,726 billion. Harr predicted slight decline in total aerospace sales to about $29.6 billion during 1969 because of 25% drop in jet transport sales before deliveries of new high-capacity aircraft; continuing increase in helicopter, executive, and utility aircraft sales; modest increase in defense and nonaerospace sales; and decline in civil space sales. He noted that in third quarter of 1968 backlog of Government aerospace orders was less than that of other customers for first time since before World War II. (Text: aia Release 68—60; W Star, 12/19/68, A19)
Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., testified before House Committee on Armed Services on FY 1969 defense research, development, test, and evaluation program. “We have a strong technical-military position today only because we built a strong research and technology base in the past. . . .Yet there are some indications that the program is eroding.” The “net effect of continuing this trend will be a serious weakening of our long-term national security position.” Research and technology funding in FY 1968 was “about 70% of the FY 1964 level, a critical 30% reduction.” (Text; P SB, 6/9/68)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices that NASA was still uncertain as to exact levels at which a number of projects could be included in FY 1969 operating plan and that at House-passed $4.008-billion appropriations level NASA’s aeronautical and space activities would have to be sharply curtailed. “We will have to reduce and stretch out ongoing programs and eliminate or defer the work that would have enabled us to continue the research and development . . . looking toward a future resumption of tests and missions which will soon grind to a halt.” Because of reduced budget, Webb said, nasa would have to accept one-year gap in Saturn V production, discontinue production of Saturn IBs, delay initiation of nerva development, either severely limit all proposed planetary orbiter missions or eliminate 1971 or 1973 missions, and curtail work toward using space systems for direct economic benefits. If NASA budget were further reduced under Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968, requiring $6-billion reduction in Federal expenditures in FY 1969, result could be disastrous to goals of national space program. Although NASA would do everything possible to fulfill commitment to Apollo program and would continue on smaller scale programs of greatest and most immediate national importance, further budget cuts would require complete termination of Saturn production and cancellation of production of associated manned spacecraft; elimination of Titan-Mars 1973 missions and possible elimination of Mariner-Mars 1971 missions; and further delays, curtailments, and cancellations which might require more harsh steps such as canceling orders for hardware already under contract and mothballing entire installations. (Testimony; NASA LAR VII/65)
Dr. Finn J. Larsen, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “If our civil aviation is to continue its dramatic progress, the greatest single requirement is to accomplish . . . complete system engineering. The . . . planning must consider not only the aircraft in flight as a system, but also the entire problem of moving people from destination to destination,” requiring “planning and resources on a considerably larger scale than are now available.” NASA’s responsibility for U.S. aeronautical research “should continue.” DOD had used NASA research, augmenting it for defense as necessary, with “excellent coordination for many years.” Military R&D was specialized, but much was transferable to civil aviation. Long-term goals of smokeless combustors and silent aircraft would be of mutual benefit, sage air defense computer system had contributed to faa radar beacon system and new national standards. Much improved altimetry reporting came from dod development for high-performance jet aircraft. Common digitizer was joint dod—faa project, as was TPX—42 airport traffic control facility. Eleven aircraft carriers had pilot “hands-off” capability for blind landing. Microwave scanning-beam landing systems were in testing. Collision avoidance, v/sTOL, and cargo-handling R&D had civil application. (Text)
Test pilot Map William j. Knight (USAF} was named winner of Harmon International. Aviator s trophy. In photo, he inspects connection between, external tank and rocket-powered X—15 No. 2, which he flew to record 4£2Q mph Oct. 3, 1967. Two tanks supplied additional engine propellant for increased speed. On Oct. 24, 1968, NASA test pilot William H. Dana took X—15 No. 1 on last flight of research program. Philadelphia, Boeing Co, Vice President John M. Swihart announced abandonment of swing-wing design for SST in favor of fixed-delta-wing aircraft with four independently mounted engines under triangular tail. Final detailed design would be given to FAA by Jan. 15, 1969, deadline. New design differed from delta-winged Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet Tu-144 in wider wing span and horizontal tail which, according to Boeing Vice President in charge of SST H. W. Witbington, made possible superior control at low speeds and compensated for more drag encountered with sweep-back angle of wing. Aircraft cost would be same as swing-wing, $40 million. It would carry same number of passengers, 280 or more, at same maximum speed, 1,800 mph. (Witkin, NYT, 10/22/68, 77; dpi, W Post, 10/22/68, All; AP, W Star, 10/22/68, A3)	...	. Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received $5,000 AIAA Louis W.	Hill Space Transportation Award “for devising, developing and supervising significant space and satellite programs for military and civilian agencies of the United States Government.” arc Director H. Julian Allen was named Honorary Fellow of AIAA, highest membership award given by Institute. It was presented annually to two Americans and one foreign national. Other 1968 recipients were James S. McDonnell, Chairman of Board, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and England’s Sir Frank Whittle, often called father of jet engine, (aiaa Releases; arc Release 68—15; arc Astrogram)
On nationwide “Meet the Press” TV interview, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., commented on NASA budget cuts: “We’ve built up a fantastic technology [but] talented people are starting to leave. ... We should let it be known that we are in this for the future, not just one flight.” Cost of manned missions was justified in quest for knowledge not only outward, but earthward, too. Astronauts were “looking at portions of the earth that had never been documented before. A crew can see something and respond to it, on earth or the moon.” Fellow Apollo 7 crewman R. Walter Cunningham said never had Soviet crewmen “functioned in the same operational conditions as we.” U.S.S.R. was putting fewer higher trained persons in orbit, “mainly as biological specimens.” (AP, W Post, 11/11/68, A2; AP, B Sun, 11/11/68, A5)
U.S. patent No. 3,402,295 was issued to Robert W. Astheimer, Vice President of Barnes Engineering Co., for process by which aircraft pilot could spot clear air turbulence (cat) far enough ahead to avoid danger. To discover rise in temperature which marked cat, pilot would scan ahead with radiometer to detect significant heat radiation from carbon dioxide uniformly distributed through air. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 9/21/68,45)	' nonproliferation treaty by vote of 13 to 3 after three previous meetings failed to attract majority of members. Senate Democratic leaders expressed hope treaty could be brought to vote on Senate floor before mid-October Congressional adjournment. In formal statement after Committee approval, Vice President Humphrey, Democratic Presidential candidate, called upon Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon to support ratification. U.S.S.R.’s occupation of Czechoslovakia, Humphrey said, should not deter Senate approval of “crucial” treaty. It was not agreement between Washington and Moscow, but a treaty already signed by 81 nations and developed among many signers as well as the United Nations. (Sherman, W. Star, 9/17/68, A5; Unna, W. Post, 9/18/68, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/18/68,1; Furgurson, B Sun, 9/19/68, 1)
James C. Elms, Director of ERC, discussed “the NASA Biomedical Program in Perspective” before Third Annual Meeting of Assn, for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation in Houston. “Despite the rapid advance of biomedical techniques since World War II, the main thrust of the activities was directed toward studying sick individuals in a normal environment. The manned space program has provided the opportunity for intensive controlled study of a select group of normal and healthy individuals in an abnormal and stressful environment. By so doing, we have achieved a better definition of the range of normality of the healthy organism which, in turn, is useful in the study and understanding of disease.” Interaction of space and medicine had led to many medical applications of aerospace hardware. Application of electron probe microanalyzer—used for chemical analyses of microelectronic circuits—to study of red blood cells had led to unexpected clues in study of blood cancer. System to monitor heart rate, respiration, and galvanic skin response was being considered for use in measuring efficiency of dental anesthetics on children and in training teachers for retarded children. Accomplishments of bioelectronics research in interdisciplinary electronics environment included remote measuring technique for eyepointing direction, meaningful measurement of aerosol concentration and size distribution, and automatic tracking system to identify thresholds of mental alertness. (Text)
House Appropriations Committee struck all funds for sst development from Administration’s FY 1969 budget and asked return of $30-million carryover to Treasury. President Johnson had requested authorization of $223 million. Cut was unlikely to postpone development of project, which would be continued during FY 1969 entirely with carryover funds. First flight had been scheduled for first quarter, 1972. (CR, 6/27/68, H5766-7; Hoffman, W Post, 6/28/68, A3)
Arthur C. Clarke, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, told Los Altos Morning Forum proposed Federal cuts in NASA budget would curtail progress in “medicine, agriculture, weather forecasting, communication and other endeavors.” NAS^t budget now was “smaller than the amount American women spend oil cosmetics in a year.” (Anderson, San Jose Mercury, 5/23/68)
In Air Force and Space Digest interview General Electric Co. Vice President Gerhard Neumann, head of GE Aircraft Engine Group, said postponement of essential R&D during past several years had “mortgaged” nation’s techological future. He saw hazards in current DOD contracting policies which kept industry from taking “reasonable risks” because they imposed implacable performance guarantees. He blamed parsimonious funding on Vietnam War requirements and urged lost ground be regained as soon as priorities permitted. In era of R&D austerity, Neumann advocated “lot more” work in advanced-engine research by nasa. (AF/SD, 11/68, 58)
New Republic reported interview with Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist and assistant laboratory director of World War II Manhattan Project. Dr. Lapp said: “We are pushing our luck, gambling that everything will work perfectly” on Apollo 8 mission. He advised delay in program so that Apollo 9, configured to have relief-capability, would be on pad ready for launch should Apollo 8 “run into trouble.” Asked if U.S. could afford to delay Apollo 8, Dr. Lapp said, “The basic factor is not really technical. We are racing the Russians to the moon. A lot of people in NASA and in industry are hoping that a successful Apollo-8 orbiting of the moon—or even circumnavigation—will build up public support for an invigorated manned space program. It’s just one of the weighty techno-decisions facing Mr. Nixon. He is committed to funding out the Apollo program—but post-Apollo programs await his decision.” (AP, W Star, 12/9/68; W Post, 12/9/68, 3; New Republic, 12/14/68, 16-9)
Research on concepts for high lift capability for stol aircraft and special hover and speed requirements for VTOL aircraft would continue in FY 1969, nasa Director of Aeronautical Vehicles, oart, Albert J. Evans reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Aircraft noise program would pursue efforts to suppress noise by acoustic treatment of engine nacelles (with results expected from McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Aircraft Co. investigations by October 1969 and January 1970), by engine redesign (with construction of engine components in Quiet Research Engine Program initiated in FY 1969), and by operational techniques. Major NASA program in flight dynamics and propulsion in support of sst program would be continued. Phase III of Hypersonic Research Engine (hre) program, test of hre on X—15 in flight as well as on ground, would not be conducted because of X—15 program termination. Major emphasis in general-aviation technology would be on flight safety, with flight tests of “typical twin-engine vehicle” at frc in FY 1969. (Testimony)
Apollo and Apollo Applications, staff study released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, included statement by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Subcommittee Chairman: “. . . the general posture of the programs is good [but] the Apollo program, with its inherent complexity, has had and can be expected to have a variety of problems. Yet this study identifies the fact that confidence in the governmental-industrial team accomplishing this work is well placed.” Report found “that the NASA industry team is continuing to effectively employ its resources in the solution of those problems which currently face the program. NASA has indicated that, given the stretchout in the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident, nasa is not constrained by total funding for the Apollo program during [FT] 1968. The continued reduction in total effort in the Apollo program as the program passed its peak effort in fiscal year 1967 is beginning to cause dislocation in the contractor and nasa center effort to the extent that personnel that will be needed during the flight portion of the program may not be available in the event a major flight problem occurs. Timely support for the Apollo Applications program and other post-Apollo effort could have a major effect on minimizing this problem.” (Text)
Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wis.), Chairman of House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee, released Scientific Brain Drain from the Developing Countries (dated March 28). Immigration to U.S. of scientific manpower from developing countries had more than quadrupled in past 12 yr. Report, based on Subcommittee hearings held Jan. 23, said, “the long-sustained U.S. foreign aid program has devoted substantial sums and given high priority” to educating and training professional manpower. When these countries “suffer an emigration drain of the very skills and talents they are attempting to increase, an important part of the foreign aid program is undermined.” (Text; NYT, 3/28/68, 33)
Westinghouse Defense and Space Center engineer Paul J. Kiefer had received AIAA annual award for “outstanding contribution to aerospace sciences or technology” for overall mechanical design and development of Gemini rendezvous radar system and for development of lunar TV camera for use in Apollo series. (Westinghouse Release; AP, W Star, 7/5/68, A3)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut of $48.3 million from request for FY 1969 nerva program “would essentially wipe out the entire program. With the $11.7 million authorized by the House Committee [see March 1]—it is not clear that would even cover termination of the contracts. ... We would immediately have to start termination of not only the engine development, but also termination of the technology work. I feel that we would waste a very valuable investment.” Dr. Adams described “substantial progress” in OART programs in 1967: initial acoustic absorber tests showed reduction in jet transport noise; parawing (steerable parachute) showed promise for spacecraft and precise military landings; static firing of 260-in-dia solid rocket motor had reached 5.9-million-lb thrust in 80-sec test; NERVA had been successfully tested at full power 60 min; all major components of SNAP—8 nuclear turbo-generator system had completed 1,800 hr of endurance tests, one exceeding 13,000 hr; and new Beta cloth for astronaut clothing had passed wear and flammability tests. In “beneficial crossflow between engineering and life sciences,” he named development of garment to give physicians three-dimensional data on heart activity, new blood velocity meter, and sensor to measure blood pressure in heart—small enough to be threaded through hypodermic needle and derived from instruments developed for small flight models for wind-tunnel tests. (Transcript)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford asked House Committee on Armed Services to restore funds cut by Senate for compromise development program for Navy F— 111B aircraft. According to compromise plan, USN would continue tests on F—11 IB experimental models and exploratory work on alternate aircraft, VFX—1, until March 1969 and then decide whether to proceed with F—11 IB or to cancel program after first eight models and develop alternate. If VFX—1 were chosen, F—11 IBs already produced would provide sophisticated air defense until alternate aircraft became operational in 1973. dod had requested $425 million for 8 F—11 IBs and 60 Phoenix missiles and $30 million for R&D. on VFX—1. Senate instead had approved $170 million for VFX—31. (Testimony; Sheehan, NYT, 5/1/68, 4; upi, W Star, 5/1/68, A12) '
Edward J. Schmidt, Special Assistant to General Electric Co.’s Vice President for R&D, was sworn in by NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, as consultant to the Administrator in management operations as affected by scientific and technical information, (nasa Release 68—189)
NASA had asked its contractors to cut ksc personnel 10% in effort to save $40 million by July 1. Boeing Co. had already announced plans to reduce 4,400-man force to 4,000. Chrysler Corp. would keep 1,000 of its 1,200. Cutbacks were due to nasa budget cuts and affected only 2% of work force, (nasa pao; W Star, 10/11/68, A3)
Two-volume Review Board report, Status of Actions Taken on the Apollo 204, was submitted to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kasa Oversight Subcommittee by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. According to report, major changes made in Apollo project included: installing quickopening hatch; eliminating most combustible materials in cabin; remaking spacesuit, primarily of glass fiber instead of nylon; equipping and training launch pad workers for fire fighting; placing metal shielding over exposed electrical wiring; and replacing aluminum oxygen pipes with more-fire-resistant stainless steel pipes. NASA reported spacecraft had been modified by North American Rockwell Corp. so that it could use ordinary air or oxygen-enriched air, as well as 100% oxygen, while on launch pad. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 1/20/68, 1)
House Appropriations Committee released hearings on dod appropriations for FY 1969 which helped explain why Vietnam war had produced strain on President Johnson’s budget, usaf was now paying $2.4 million for single rescue helicopter; during World War II, each B—17 aircraft that had bombed Germany had cost $190,000 and each B—29 used over Japan had cost $635,000. Government had bought 200 World War II fighters for the $1.1 million it cost USAF for technical manuals for single type of aircraft in 1968. usn was spending $30,000 for single torpedo and $20.3 million for ammunition for battleship U.S.S. New Jersey to fire at Vietnam shore targets. It was requesting $51.8 million for one-year supply of aerial targets. Super Jolly helicopter which USAF was introducing in Vietnam was twice as expensive as predecessor, Jolly Green Giant, and could carry 60 passengers or 18,500-lb cargo at 195 knots. F—111 was being produced at $8 million each; C—5A, world’s largest aircraft, had a unit cost of $25 million, with USAF requesting 120 aircraft. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 6/30/68, 2)
President Johnson submitted $186.1-billion FY 1969 budget request to Congress, including $6.76-billion total space budget. Of this sum, NASA would receive $4.37 billion, smallest amount since 1963; dod space efforts, $2,216 billion; AEC space applications, $143 million; and ESSA satellite system, $30.6 million.	: NASA FY 1969 budget, $218 million less than for FY 1968, provided for $3,677 billion to be spent for R&D (down $233 million from FY 1968	and $557 million from FY 1967); $45 million for construction of facilities; and $648 million for administrative operations. Project Apollo would be kept on schedule, development of NERVA I would be continued, and launch plans would be made for two pioneer flights toward Jupiter and one Sunblazer probe. Research on Earth Resources Observation Satellite would continue, but development would be postponed, ogo program would be phased out after OGO—f. NASA’s $2.5-billion Voyager program would be replaced with a $500-million, four-mission Mars orbiter project. Although NASA’s $2.039-billion Apollo budget request accounted for 47% of total NASA budget, amount for Apollo was $517 million less than for FY 1968, reflecting declining expenditures as program neared its completion. Requested $439.6 million for Apollo Applications (aa) program was less than half of amount originally sought and necessitated cancellation of planned 14-day AAP—1A flight. Some $76.9 million—a $10.1-million increase over FY 1968—was allotted for NASA’s aeronautics program, with most of increase attributed to additional supporting research in subsonic aircraft technology. XB—70 and X—15 research programs would be phased out by December 1968. Space science and applications were allotted $538.2 million, with 18 major NASA launches and 13 non-NASA launches scheduled for 1968. Major portions of DOD space budget would be spent on mol—$600 million, compared with $431 million requested for FY 1968., Some $60.4 million was allocated for defense and tactical satellite communications programs, and $10.5 million for Vela nuclear test detection satellite program. AEC space budget—$11 million higher than for FY 1968—included $72 million for Project Rover, with $39 million for nerva system. Most of essa’s funds would be used for development of sensors and satellite system in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for warning services, faa’s request included $351 million for SST development, $251 million increase over FY 1968 and one of largest increases given to any domestic program. It was principal item in dot’s $449-million request for r&d. (Text; dod Budget Summary; W Post, 1/16/68, A5; AP, B Sun, 1/16/68, A3; McNamara Statement; dod Background Briefing; NASA Release, 1/29/68; W Star, 1/29/68, A7; Clark, NYT, 1/30/68, 16; Aero Tech, 2/12/68, 17-35) '
