In speech before Chicago Executive Club in Chicago, 111., Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said operation of military systems in space “to enhance the national defense” must be one objective of U.S. future space program to ensure “there will be no hlind reliance on good faith.” Vice President Agnew was also Chairman of nasc and of President’s Space Task Group. Two questions dominated speculation over national space policy, he said: Why space? And Why Mars? “Mars holds the greatest promise of a capability to sustain human life. It is a potential resource and reserve. More important for the present is the fact that the mind of America functions better when it focuses upon a clear target. Manned exploration of the Solar System is too nebulous to capture the public’s attention. A manned landing on Mars is as understandable a challenge to the citizen as it is to the scientist. It is a test that can be put in a time frame and its anticipation can be appreciated by all.” (Text)
Members of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics visited msfc for inspection tour and hearings. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) was ranking Representative. (msfc Release 69—72)
Role of ekc in electronics-related aeronautical R&D was described by ERC Director James C. Elms in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Center had continued research on electronic components and devices, especially application of microelectronics and large-scale integrated circuits to advanced avionics systems; on application of advanced technology to instrumentation for sensing and controlling aircraft motion and attitude; on optics and microwaves; on psychological instrumentations; on data processing; and on electrical power systems. erc had 14 programs in aeronautical R&D, including air traffic control, v/stol guidance, navigation and flight control, collision avoidance, use of navigational and communications satellites in aviation, support technology, remote detection of clear air turbulence, physiological monitoring, and NASA intercenter research in high-speed flight using YF—12 aircraft. (Testimony)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 11271, NASA FY 1970 authorization bill introduced May 14. (House Rpt 91—255)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced for himself and Rep. William Chappell (D-Fla.) HJ.R. 834 “to redesignate the area in the State of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as ‘Cape Canaveral.’ ” Measure was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 7/23/69, H6238)
Eastern Airlines, Inc., Vice President A. Scott Crossfield told Aero Club in Washington, D.C., that seven-week experiment with stol aircraft at Boston, Washington, and New York airports begun Sept. 1968 had been “unqualified success.” Airline’s engineers were drafting specifications for STOL aircraft to carry 125 passengers at 250 mph, capable of maneuvering at speeds of 70 mph. It could double landing capacity of airports by using taxiways and ends of unused runways. McDonnell Douglas version of French-designed Breguet 941 aircraft used by Eastern in experiments had used onboard computer-controlled system, “heart” of which was manufactured by Decca in England. It used existing navaids and was accurate within 25-ft altitude and 100-ft latitude. (Koprowski, W Post, 1/29/69, A8)
S. 705 was introduced in Senate by Smithsonian Institution regent Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and regents Sens. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.) and Hugh D. Scott (R-Pa.) to authorize $2 million for planning and land acquisition for world’s largest radioradar astronomical telescope. Proposed 440-ft “big dish” antenna would be enclosed in 550-ft geodesic dome and cost about $37 million. It would be made available to appropriate scientists everywhere. (CR, 1/28/69, S967—8; W Star, 4/1/69, Bl)
Astronaut Prank Borman repeated Apollo 8 reading from Genesis at White House service attended by President and family, Vice President, Cabinet members, Congressmen, and members of Joint Chiefs of Staff, and of diplomatic corps. During sermon, Dr. Paul S. Smith, President of Whittier College and member of Religious Society of Friends, said: “It was a philosopher . . . who, two thousand years ago, first recounted a voyage to the moon. Lucian called it The True History but confessed in the preface that he wrote ‘of things which are not and never could have been.’ It was a political satirist’s precautionary disclaimer because his real subject was the stupidity of human warfare. His lunar voyagers got caught up in internecine strife between the moonmen and the sunmen over the colonization of Venus! If there is something instructive in the thought, it may be the implication that after two millennia of philosophy men are still fighting over real estate and still dying in the name of philosophical abstractions, but that a voyage to the moon is just as feasible (though somewhat more expensive) as a trip to Timbuktu.” (Wiegers, W Post, 1/21/69, Bl; CR, 7/22/69, H6189—90)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 4046, FY 1970 nasa authorization bill, totaling $3,760 billion, in House. {CR, 1/17/69, H403)
NAS report to Congress, Technology: Processes of Assessment and Choice, was published by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Panel headed by Harvey Brooks of Harvard Univ. strongly urged creation of “constellation of organizations, with components located strategically within both political branches, that can create a focus and a forum for responsible technology-assessment activities throughout government and the private sector.” Such organizations “must be separated scrupulously from any responsibility for promoting or regulating technological applications.” (Text)
In Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, J. F. Ter Horst commented on designation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, as Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration Cabinet: “It’s highly unlikely that the Nixon Administration will merge civilian and military space programs—they were back in 1958 when he was Vice President. But if it becomes easier to sell Congress a space budget with a military label than with a civilian one, Mr. Nixon undoubtedly will move in that direction. If he does, he has an uncommonly qualified administrator in Seamans.” (P Bull, 1/11/69, 14)	_
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, nasc Chairman, discussed future of U.S. space program in Space Age News: “It is my personal belief that a vigorous space effort is essential to the welfare of this country, particularly since it has contributed so much to our international prestige, our national security and our economy. I can assure you that the President shares this view.” Through 11 yrs of space activity U.S. had “gained one of its most priceless resources—trained, experienced professionals capable of creating, managing, and operating a complete range of space systems dedicated to bringing the benefits of space within reach of all of us here on Earth.” U.S. had “just begun its space program. The success of the first decade indicates an enlarged effort in the decade to come.” (Space Age News, 12/69)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications published Future of the Bioscience Program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Report concluded bioscientific experimentation on man and animals in first decade of space flight had been “relatively meager.” Scientific research on manned flight had been “minimal” and had not included biomedical experimentation of kind done in Biosatellite program. More research was urgently needed on biological influence of zero gravity and effects of change or elimination of rhythmic daily periodicity of animal and plant life on earth. Space technology now permitted advanced scientific research on these and related biological factors. While professors exchanged scientific theories freely, NASA representatives inclined toward “protecting jurisdiction authority and extending organizational power within the framework of their agency.” Complete information exchange should prevail, especially in bioscience, “which eventually may affect human life.” “Rivalry” between science and engineering was “real.” In NASA, science was “used” but “rarely accepted in its own right by the engineering management.” While knowledge from 14-day missions was adequate to proceed with planning of 28-day aap mission, it was inadequate to proceed safely with proposed 56-day flight or longer planetary flights without monitoring astronauts on 28-day mission in experiments “beyond any yet undertaken in manned flight.” Further biosatellite exploration with primates and instruments was “merited if not indeed prescribed.” Final evaluation of Biosatellite 111 would determine new mechanisms and improved monitoring of test mammals to be programmed. Subcommittee endorsed proposal of Dr. W. Ross Adey, NASA’s principal investigator for Biosatellite III, that basic measurements be required on all flight crews and recommended reinstitution of biosatellite experiments with animals in earth orbit, extension of bioscience research to planets when technologically feasible, uprating of science role as mission objective, and nasa and Congress delegation of “highest relative priority” to “bioscience programs which offer the most immediate return to the taxpayers through . . . medicine and physiology.” Subcommittee further recommended NASA examine and implement “to fullest practicable extent” recommendations of President’s Scientific Advisory Panel for “new level of biomedical research capability,” that OMSF conduct biomedical experiments on astronauts during 28-day aap missions, and that NASA’s scientific investigations be planned “with close and continued participation of the academic research institutions.” (Text)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 12307, Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which provided $3,696 billion for NASA—$63,544 million below original budget, $18,544 million below revised budget, $298,290 million below 1969 appropriation, and $269,394 million below total authorizations approved by House. Bill provided $3 billion for NASA r&d, $53,233 million for construction of facilities, and $643,750 million for research and program management. With unobligated carryover from 1969 of $117,473 million, total $3,117 billion would be available for obligation in 1970. H.R. 12307 also provided $418 million for nsf—$79 million below amount originally budgeted but $18 million above FY 1969 appropriation. It provided $500,000 for nasc, $24,000 below budget estimate. (Text; Committee Rpt 91—316)
Lee R. Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, testifying on FY 1970 budget request before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described extravehicular activity (eva) planned for first lunar landing. Emerging on lunar surface, astronaut would acquire and seal bagful of surface material and place it in spacesuit pocket, inspect lm, and with geological tools, fill large sample container. Location would be photographed before and after sampling. Passive seismometer would be emplaced to measure “moonquakes” and permit estimates of moon’s internal structure for comparison with that of earth. Instrument, operated on solar power, would record and transmit lunar data to earth for about one year. Laser retroreflector would be emplaced to permit measurement of earth-to-moon distance and monitoring of distance variation. Measurements would be repeated several times daily for year or more and precise times determined by atomic clock. From data on relative motion of moon and earth and of each about own center of gravity, scientists could refine “knowledge of size and shape of the Moon, detect small movements that may occur between the Earth’s continents, and perhaps even test gravitational theories.” If time permitted, second sample return container would be filled more selectively, with greater effort to document and to pack samples individually. (Testimony)
Apollo Program Management: Staff Study was submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. It identified key concepts contributing to successful evolution of NASA-industry management team and areas where additional studies would be useful in application of its expertise. Key factors included clear definition of primary objective, monitoring and auditing systems that allowed vertical and horizontal information flow, refinement in program-control techniques using incentive contracts, correlation and definition of multiple-program interfaces by use of systems-oriented staff groups, real-time and flexible management reporting system, and balance between governmental in-house capability and industrial capability. (Text)
U.K.’s Institute for Strategic Studies predicted U.S.S.R. would overtake U.S. in ICBM production by mid-1969 but U.S. would retain overall lead in nuclear weapons because of greater submarine and air forces. U.S. international role in 1970s could become smallest since pre-World War II. (upi, W Star, 4/11/69, A12)
President Nixon’s amendments to proposed FY 1970 space budget would support post-Apollo manned flight at expense of unmanned planetary space flight, William J. Normyle wrote in Aviation Week & Space Technology. In effect, NASA had received “almost all it wanted for planning post-Apollo manned lunar exploration.” Argument was expected in House Committee on Science and Astronautics over relative apportionment. (Av Wk, 4/21/69, 16—7)
President Nixon announced Ruben F. Mettler, Executive Vice President of trw Inc., would be Chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Science Policy [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1376)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would head $4.5-million summer day camp program for youth to be administered by National Collegiate Athletic Assn, under hew contract. (Text)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics report Engineering Management of Design and Construction of Facilities of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Report concluded that closer economic scrutiny of design and construction management at NASA executive level could “yield dividends in more efficient management and lower costs at the field centers.” Organization of Office of Facilities was “progressive step.” Cost accounting of administrative expenditures needed to be improved and engineering management costs should be clearly identified for all projects at all centers. (Text) Because of anomaly which required excessive fuel to maintain stable spin condition, apogee-kick motor was fired on first apogee instead of second and spacecraft had to be biased so it would drift from position over India to intended station over area west of Ecuador. Maneuver successfully placed Ats V into near-synchronous orbit with 22,927-mi (36,889.5-km) apogee, 22,221-mi (35,753.6-km) perigee, 1,464.0-min period, 2.7° inclination, and 6.9° per day westward drift. Active nutation control was overpowered by unidentified force that caused spacecraft to go into flat spin, preventing ejection of motor case without possibility of damage to spacecraft. Controllers were investigating alternatives—stopping spacecraft spin, restoring spacecraft to normal spin mode, or minimizing ejection hazard—which could be executed Aug. 25 when spacecraft became visible to Rosman, N.C., ground station. Spacecraft was not in danger thermally or electronically and was expected to become stable and operational after successful ejection of kick motor. Ats V was fifth in series of seven ATS satellites designed to investigate and flight-test technological developments common to number of satellite applications and useful to satellites operating in stationary orbits, conduct carefully instrumented gravity-gradient experiments for basic design information, and flight-test experiments peculiar to orbits of various missions. Ats I (launched Dec. 6, 1966) had exceeded test objectives and was still operating satisfactorily. Ats II (launched April 5, 1967), though judged a failure because of eccentric orbit, had transmitted some useful data before being turned off Oct. 23, 1967. Ats III (launched Nov. 5, 1967) had operated successfully and transmitted color photos of earth. Ats IV (launched Aug. 10, 1968) had remained in parking orbit when Centaur failed to complete second burn and had reentered Oct. 17, 1968. ats program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1970 authorization request, outlined goals in space and aeronautics toward which U.S. should move in next decade: “First—We should do all we can to understand and put into early use the promise of space for people here on earth. We should increase our scientific knowledge of the vital earth-sun relationship and study the earth itself from space. We should develop and experiment with new and improved practical applications of satellites, particularly in earth resources. We should continue to foster prompt introduction into the economy of space applications and technology. “Second—We should follow up the first Apollo landing with a sound program of manned lunar exploration. “Third—We should proceed with the development and experimental operation of a permanent U.S. space station in earth orbit. “Fourth—We should move out steadily in the exploration of deeper space, exploring the planets with unmanned probes and the sun, stars, and galaxies from orbital observatories outside the atmosphere. “Fifth—We should provide the technology for developing the full potential of U.S. civil and military aeronautics. “Sixth—We should maintain a strong momentum of broad technological advance in all aerospace disciplines.” Although nasa’s 1970 budget was “ ‘holding’ budget,” Dr. Paine said request did include funds for starting three principal new programs: Earth Resources Technology Satellite Program, with start of erts A and b development; nerva flight-weight engine development, postponed from 1969; and series of planetary explorers for future flights to Venus and Mars. In period of “retrenchment and declining resources,” FY 1969 operating budget was $762 million below FY 1968 budget and over $1 billion below FY 1967. Nationwide employment on nasa work had decreased from earlier peak of 420,000 to 270,000 at end of FY 1968, to about 215,000 at end of FY 1969, and under FY 1970 budget to about 190,000. (Testimony)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology voted increase of $11.8 million over $818.8-million NASA request for research. {CR, 3/26/69, D233)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc, issued statement on Administration’s attitude toward space program: “In response to those who would denigrate our space effort, I think it is clear that this Administration has already demonstrated its belief in the strength and potential of America’s space program.” Administration was taking steps to “evaluate the costs and alternatives available to us in extending the program once man has been placed on the moon and returns.” (AP, W Post, 5/22/69, A5)
Between 750,000 and 1 million persons crowded Brevard County, Fla., to witness launch of Apollo 11, including 5,000 dignitaries headed by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and former President Lyndon B. Johnson. The Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy and 40 representatives of Poor People’s Campaign watched launch from bleacher seats with 10,000 guests including families of Apollo program personnel, while other representatives marched outside ksc. Paris Match had brought 105 European businessmen. Some 3,100 press members were at special stand. As Apollo spacecraft lifted from launch pad there was some applause, but most spectators stared in silence until Saturn V rocket disappeared overhead. Afterward many were caught in monumental traffic jams. Banana River, five miles south of Launch Complex 39, was clogged with several thousand boats registered from New England to Texas. (Greider, W Post, 7/17/69, Al; Weinraub, NYT, 7/17/69, 21; Lyons, NYT, 7/17/69, 21)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), introduced S. 1941, NASA authorization bill, similar to H.R. 10251 [see April 17]. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (Text; CR, 4/25/69, S4118)
North American Rockwell Corp. consolidated its Rocketdyne Div. and Atomics International Div. into new Power Systems Divs. headed by Jay D. Wethe, Vice President of Aerospace and Systems Group, (nar Release N—14)
Science magazine published letter from Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, clarifying his views on cost effectiveness evaluation of Earth Resources Satellite system. He reiterated opinion he stated in Dec. 1968 Earth Resources Satellite System report: “Precise determination of cost effectiveness at this early stage ... is not possible. . . . The magnitude of the economic benefits simply cannot be calculated in the absence of the type of data which the system is designed to produce.” Conclusions of studies already completed had constituted “strong evidence that precision was not possible. Yet, I am reassured by the fact that all such studies . . . have concluded that the potential economic benefits will exceed the costs of such a system by a substantial margin and some predict that benefits will someday .be measured in billions of dollars annually. It is my personal conviction that an operational ers system will ultimately prove highly cost-effective.” Karth said he considered it “nasa’s responsibility to experiment with new space systems that appear to have potential, and to conduct the necessary research and development which will lead to a firm foundation for a subsequent determination as to whether operational systems should be built. In this context, I believe cost effectiveness is not an appropriate standard to apply in advance to NASA’s experimental work, though it is certainly applicable when the time comes to decide whether to go forward with an operational system.” (Science, 5/30/69, 1009)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced President’s Council on Youth Opportunity and NASA would explain mechanics of scheduled July . Apollo 11 lunar landing to high school and junior high school pupils in 50 cities under summer program to be held in city streets, playgrounds, and classrooms. (W Star, 5/12/69, A3)
First notables to arrive at Cape Kennedy on eve of Apollo 11 launch included former President and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy. Johnsons arrived in military aircraft assigned by President Nixon, to attend luncheon honoring James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator. Abernathy led 25 poor southern families to protest Federal funding priorities. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, met group of 150 poor people outside KSC gate where Abernathy requested 40 vip passes to launch, asked Dr. Paine to join fight against poverty, and urged that NASA technology be converted to finding new ways to feed poor. Dr. Paine agreed to admit members of group to launch and pledged to do what he could to adapt space-developed food concentrates to aid undernourished. “It will be a lot harder to solve the problems of hunger and poverty than it is to send men to the moon.” But, “if it were possible for us not to push that button tomorrow and solve the problems you are talking about, we would not push the button.” He said space program and science could be used to help solve poverty problems. “I want you to hitch your wagon to our rocket and tell the people the NASA program is an example of what this country can do.” The poor people said they would pray for Apollo 11 astronauts. By evening 500,000 tourists had arrived in Brevard County, site of ksc, with total one million expected by early morning. Air traffic had quadrupled, with 10 local airfields handling over 1,200 small aircraft, and 200 private jets. Aircraft were to bring Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, over 200 Congressmen, 60 ambassadors, 19 governors, 40 mayors, and other public figures July 16. More than 1,000 police struggled to control road traffic, and hordes settled to sleep on beaches from which they could see illuminated spacecraft on launch pad. (Weinraub, NYT, 7/16/69, 22; Greider, TV Post, 7/16/69)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson ended as President Richard M. Nixon was sworn in as President of U.S. Johnson had served U.S. space program continuously since Sputnik l in October 1957, first on Capitol Hill as Chairman of Select and then permanent Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. As Vice President under late President Kennedy, he had served as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, post held by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey during Johnson Administration. (EH)
nasa announced appointment of Robert N. Lindley, Vice President Program General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Corp., as Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Ann)
Sperry Rand Corp. announced election of former nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Board of Directors. He had been vice president of company’s Sperry Gyroscope Div. in 1943. (Sperry Rand Release 2/6/69; sbd, 2/11/69, 140)
In interview published by New York Times, Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington said sst cost, quoted at $40 million, would climb to $50 million or $60 million if inflation continued at current rate. He did not expect increase to cut heavily into sales. Under current forecast, Boeing would have to raise “about $2-billion to go into production, and that’s assuming we get 50 per cent progress payments [half of the purchase price] in the 1973—74 period. I’m not so sure we’ll be able to do this.” (Lindsey, NYT, 10/17/69)
Izvestia published article by Soviet space scientist Alexander Koval, Vice President of International Astronomical Commission. It was “high time” that space knowledge was used for advancement of communications, meteorology, geodesy, and navigation. Since space exploration was not cheap, simpler and more reliable experiments must be tried before complex and expensive ones. Three practical applications of space research were industrial use of high vacuum and absolute cold, industrial use of rocketry innovations, and putting “production-technical complexes” in space. (fV Post, 10/15/69, A21)
Roger Lewis, President of General Dynamics Corp., announced appointment of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as General Dynamics Vice President, effective immediately. Dr. Mueller’s resignation from NASA would be effective Dec. 10. (General Dynamics Release 1491)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics accepted subcommittee reports on H.R. 10251, FY 1970 NASA authorization [see April 17] and added $258 million to amounts requested by President Nixon. Committee would meet again April 29. (CR, 4/23/69, D302; Lannan, W Star, 4/24/69)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told House: “. . . I do not at this time wish to commit ourselves to a specific time period for setting sail for Mars. I believe that there are many tasks that can be accomplished that will ultimately provide that capability, but will be less costly and will be necessary in meeting short term objectives.” He urged priority attention to intermediate steps and balanced program “that fully exploits the great potential of unmanned spacecraft, while at the same time maintaining a vigorous manned flight program.” He advocated continuation of lunar exploration to obtain “experience of operating a base for science and exploration on another heavenly body”; manned earth-orbital operations leading to long-term space station supported by low-cost shuttle rocket; greater emphasis on applications satellites that “have the greatest potential for economic return in the near term”; larger funding for unmanned planetary exploration, “an area in which the U.S. may soon be overshadowed by the Soviet Union”; continued nerva development because “improved propulsion is a key to space leadership”; and “special emphasis on ers satellites, “which promise to yield so much ... to agriculture and industry.” (Text; CR, 8/11/69, H7251-4)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
House Appropriations Committee approved full $95.9 million requested by President Nixon for continued sst development. (CR, 11/13/69, D1065; AP, B Sun, 11/14/69) At 42nd scientific session of American Heart Assn, in Dallas, Tex., Dutch scientist Dr. A. C. Arntzenius described application of jet propulsion principle—for every movement in one direction, there is an equal opposite movement—in experiments to increase blood pumped by animal heart without increasing heart action. With research team from medical faculty of Rotterdam he had strapped piglets and dogs to “frictionless” table that slid in synchronization with animal heartbeat. Movement made it unnecessary for ventricle to expend energy to accelerate blood as it left heart. When blood started toward animal’s head, table was moved in direction of its feet, forcing blood in opposite direction without adding to demands on heart, (tipi, W Star, 11/23/69, All; Am Heart Assn pio)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, summarized recent NASA efforts to improve international cooperation in space. He had visited major European capitals and Canada and hoped to visit Australia and Japan, to explain “planning for U.S. space activities in the next decades.” Foreign space authorities had been invited to “sponsor their own industrial participation in the nasa conference on space shuttle concepts” held in October. “Additional mechanisms are being developed to permit foreign space interests to keep in touch with and even contribute to our studies over the next year, especially in the space shuttle and station programs.” In letters to President Mstislav V. Keldysh and Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences Dr. Paine had invited Soviet proposals for experiments on U.S. spacecraft, offered use of laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts, invited Soviet proposals for lunar sample analysis, invited Soviet scientists to Viking Mars 1973 conference, offered to discuss coordination of planetary programs, and reiterated U-S. readiness “to meet anytime, any place, to consider any possibilities for cooperation or coordination between us.” There had been “no substantial response.” (CR, 1/21/70, S259)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Science, Technology, and Public Policy During the Ninetieth Congress. Report covered 1967— 1968, giving details behind 94 public laws passed that authorized, funded, or otherwise affected R&D in U.S. and 45 additional bills on which Congress took legislative action. It included reviews of U.S. policy for science and technology by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and by nsf for United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. Both reviews showed pluralistic nature of U.S. public policy for science, built up by laws, executive orders, and other expressions of policy as they occurred. (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
Wall Street brokerage houses were watching effect of Apollo 11 success on stocks as market resumed trading after July 21 holiday. Some firms believed lunar landing would generate enthusiasm, although its impact would be restrained by uncertainties over surtax extension, House committee vote to cut oil depletion allowance (major tax benefit of petroleum industry), and apparent standoff at Vietnam peace conference. (upi, W Star, 7/22/69, C7)
Testifying before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Joseph B. Mahon, NASA’s Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, said NASA planned to use Titan IIIC and Titan Centaur to carry out high-velocity Viking mission in FY 1970. They would provide capability for both orbital and lander scientific experimentation and would expand launch window. After proof test flight in 1972 of integrated Improved Centaur and Titan III, configuration would be flown in support of 1973 Viking mission and other planetary missions, as well as earth synchronous missions using 4,000- to 8,000-lb spacecraft. Titan IIIC also would be used on two synchronous-altitude missions, ats—f and ats—G. (Transcript)
Apollo 10 commander Thomas P. Stafford received Flying Tiger Pilot Trophy, presented every two years by Flying Tigers, group of World War II veterans. Trophy was presented during 27th reunion in Ojai, Calif. (AP, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight voted to add $230.5 million to $2.212-billion authorization requested by NASA for manned space flight in FY 1970. Of raise, $168 million was earmarked for development of scientific payloads for six manned lunar landings between 1970 and 1973 and $66 million for space flight operations to cover flying men in earth orbit for month at a time, in 1970 onward. Flights were to be forerunners of orbiting space stations. (CR, 3/26/69, D233; Committee member)
Richmond, Va., News-Leader editorial approved Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s calling for flight to Mars by end of century [see July 16]: “One day, man will go beyond the planets, to other solar systems; right now . . . that is not within our technological reach. But Mars is, and so are the other planets. The moon is in earth’s, and man’s, own crib. Plans and commitments should be made—now—for man to take grown-up strides in the real world of space.” (R News-Leader, 7/18/69)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was among persons inside mit Instrumentation Laboratory when students from mit and other Boston, Mass., campuses demonstrated against laboratory’s defense work and were confronted by police. Later Dr. Bisplinghoff said: “The university has set as policy a deliberate movement from Department of Defense and space research to a different mix: more and more research relevant to societal problems. It’s going to take a considerable time to make the transition, however, and if we are going to continue on the same scale of operations . . . we’re going to need lots of time and new money.” It would be up to Congress to change emphasis, not mit. Instrumentation Laboratory, meanwhile, would honor commitments to dod, including work on Poseidon missile. (Nordheimer, NYT, 11/9/69, 61)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced President Nixon had nominated John H. Shaffer, Vice President of trw Inc., as Federal Aviation Administrator. Shaffer would replace Acting faa Administrator, David D. Thomas, who would remain as Deputy Administrator. (dot Release 2469)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development transmitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Centralization of Federal Science Activities. Report, prepared by Library of Congress Science Policy Research Div., described centralization and potential organization of Federal science activities, summarized arguments for and against centralization, examined major functions of Federal Government in dealing with science and technology and present organization, and presented historical summary of evolution of Federal organization for science and of proposals for reorganization and consolidation. (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
In his last State of the Union message, President Johnson told Joint Session of Congress:	. . if the Nation’s problems are continuing, so are this Nation’s assets. Our economy, the democratic system, our sense of exploration, symbolized most recently by the wonderful flight of the Apollo 8, in which all Americans took great pride, the good common sense and sound judgment of the American people, and their essential love of justice.” Quest for durable peace “has absorbed every Administration since the end of World War II. It has required us to seek a limitation of arms races not only among the superpowers, but among the smaller nations as well. We have joined in the test ban treaty of 1963, the outer space treaty of 1967, and the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons in 1968.” {PD, 1/20/69, 60—8)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), as Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had forced NASA to pay $5,522 for usaf jet to transport 32 committee members and wives to Aug. 13 Apollo 11 state dinner in Los Angeles, Rowland Evans and Robert Novak said in Washington Post. NASA also had to pay $19,342 for chartered commercial jet for space officials and $2,800 for Aug. 12 Houston luncheon, and White House was charging agency with most of estimated $75,000 cost of state dinner. (W Post, 8/17/69, B7)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published A Study of Technology Assessment: Report of the Committee on Public Engineering Policy, National Academy of Engineering. Report recommended establishment of technology assessment task force of members of public and private organizations with knowledge of subject under assessment, including behavioral and political scientists. (Text)
NASA named Brian M. Duff, Vice President for Communications of National Urban Coalition, as Public Affairs Officer for msc. He would succeed Paul Haney who was named Special Assistant to Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, NASA Hq. Duff had been Director of Special Events in NASA Office of Public Affairs before going to National Urban Coalition. In new position, Haney would coordinate development of news media materials, with concentration on Apollo manned lunar landing. Haney later told press he had been ordered to new position because of personal differences with Scheer. “I’m definitely uncertain whether to go and have consulted a lawyer,” he said. Scheer said on April 23 transfer was not personal matter but “case of using two very good people where they can best serve our needs.” (nasa Release 69—59; H Chron, 4/22—23/69; H Post, 4/23/69, 1; W Post, 4/23/69, A3)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
Spencer M. Beresford, former special counsel of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was appointed NASA General Counsel succeeding Paul G. Dembling, new NASA Deputy Associate Administrator [see Sept. 10]. (nasa Release 69—173)
Report on aviation safety for 1968 was submitted to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce by Joseph J. O’Connell, Jr., Chairman of National Transportation Safety Board. For all scheduled air carrier services there had been one fatal accident for about every 500,000 hrs, or for every 100,000 transcontinental flights. One passenger had been lost for every 370 million passenger miles flown. Number of fatalities in scheduled domestic and international passenger service had been second worst of decade; but accident rates, fatal and nonfatal, continued downward for total scheduled air carriers. In general aviation, rate for fatal accidents per hours flown had increased but remained below rates of 1965 and before and was third best in decade. Total number of fatal accidents—692, killing 1,374 persons— was highest in history. (Text; NYT, 2/9/69, 94)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
Proposed Nixon Administration program of low-budget oceanic and marine science activities was announced in Washington, D.C., by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. Program sought establishment of coastal zone management program, modest grants for state planning and regulatory mechanisms, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, currently under consideration by Congress and Ash Commission on Federal Reorganization. Program also proposed coastal laboratories for regional problems, pilot project of lake restoration, International Decade of Ocean Exploration, and accelerated program of Arctic research. (Lannan, W Star, 10/19/69, A12)
Dr, Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, resigned as president of aiaa. Letter of resignation said, “It is not in the best interest of either the Air Force or the aiaa for me to continue with aiaa responsibility.” aiaa board of directors elected Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., to replace Dr. Seamans, (aiaa Release)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, introduced S. 539, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,760 billion. (CR, 1/22/69, S659—60)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.R. 10251, new NASA FY 1970 authorization bill totaling $3,716 billion in line with President Nixon’s April 15 amended budget request. Bill was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (Text; CR, 4/17/69, H2806)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said at press conference following tour of October I: nasa launched Boreas, European Space Research Organization satellite, to study the aurora borealis and polar atmosphere. In the photo the spacecraft teas prepared for launch on a four-stage Scout booster from the Western Test Range. jpl:	, the cities may benefit more from what’s happening right here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory than they do from what’s happening in some community action agency. Now, I’m not downgrading the need to work closely with people . . . but I think it would be a desperate mistake ... to adopt an attitude that we do not challenge the unknown, we do not move forward simply because we can’t predict what we’re going to find.” Columbus “didn’t find what he went for but he found something even better. Maybe that applies to the situation with regard to the ultimate goal . . . about landing a man on Mars. . . . we may do something a lot better.” In reply to question, he said: “We will never reach a point where we’ll have enough money for . . . the problems of the cities and of the population. . . . we could spend every resource we have and forego any scientific exploration and forget the need to research and develop new techniques. ... I suppose you come down to the final determination that you’ve got to put some of your effort in the future and not all of it in the present. And I don’t think the lack of a focus in the space program would be a benefit at all to the future of the cities and the problems you mention.” (Transcript)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, former Assistant Secretary of Defense, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise nasa senior officials on scientific and engineering aspects of agency programs and review and advise on work of President’s Space Task Group and nasa— dod cooperation on space shuttle. Before joining NASA Dr. Fubini had been Vice President and Group Executive at ibm. (nasa Release 69-85)
NASA announced selection of Chester M. Lee as Apollo Mission Director, succeeding George H. Hage, who had been elected vice president for product development with Boeing Co. Lee, retired USN captain who had served in Polaris missile program and in Directorate of Research and Engineering in Office of Secretary of Defense, had been Assistant Apollo Mission Director since August 1966. (nasa Release 69—122)
Pentagon sources estimated U.S.S.R. was spending equivalent of $60 billion in 1969 on national defense and space efforts, while U.S. was spending $85.2 billion, of which $29 billion was for Vietnam war. Figures left U.S.S.R. $4 billion ahead of U.S. in spending on weapon and space technology. Between 1965 and 1969, Soviet spending on offensive and defensive strategic forces increased by 40% but amount spent on intercontinental missiles and surface-to-air missile defense systems rose by 75%. (Kelly, W Star, 2/12/69, D4)
nasa advocated “balanced, broad-based Planetary Exploration Program” as “feasible and practical” part of U.S. space program, Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Basic goals were to increase understanding of origin and evolution of solar system and life in solar system and understanding of dynamic processes shaping man’s terrestrial environment—“increasing our understanding of the planet Earth, how it has evolved, and how it may evolve in the future through a comparative study of the other planets in the solar system.” Approach would be broad-based exploration of several planets—• Jupiter, Mercury, Venus—over period of time, combined with direct measurements of Mars surface in orbital and lander missions. Pioneer F and G spacecraft (planned for launch in 1972 and 1973) and new cooperative project with West Germany, Helios, would open “new era” in solar system exploration, studying effects of radial distance on interplanetary medium close to sun. (Testimony)
Total $21.35-billion investment “in the development and demonstration of a national manned lunar landing capability” was detailed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “At the time of its establishment, the national goal of a manned lunar landing and return in this decade represented the most difficult technological endeavor ever to challenge the American nation. During this period, senior NASA officials in testimony before the Congress estimated the cost ... at between $20 and $40 billion.” Estimate was refined to approximately $19.5 billion in March 1964, with assumption “there would be a timely initiation of a follow-on program which would bear a portion of the relatively fixed cost required to develop and sustain this national capability.” Estimates then and annual reassessments had reflected total program cost, including cost of initial lunar landing. Lunar objective “was not simply an end in itself but, rather, provided the focus for the effort to attain space supremacy for whatever the national interest required.” In March 1966 NASA had furnished estimate of $22,718 billion based on assumption that there would not be timely initiation of follow-on program. In April 1969 NASA furnished estimate of $23,877 billion, which would still be valid if negative assumption had materialized. “But with the success of Apollo 11, we have the opportunity to utilize this demonstrated capability in a more meaningful way. By improving payloads and modifying spacecraft to increase lunar surface systems, we can enhance significantly the return of scientific data from both lunar orbit and the lunar surface.” NASA had met national commitment “at a cost nearer the lower end of the range of estimates” despite “unpredictable substantial inflationary conditions.” Actual cost accrued through July 31, 1969, was $21.35 billion, of which $2 billion was value of flight hardware available for future flights. Capital assets included were approximately $2.8 billion and were “of continuing national value.” Apollo was “triumph in management as well as in technology and engineering which united government, industry and universities in a common peaceful undertaking. At least one-half million people worked on the manned lunar landing program . . . during the eight years from its announcement to its initial success.” (Text)
