House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns from Space Investment (H. Rpt. 91-1446): Space Research “already has produced an extremely broad range of concrete benefits, not only to the American citizenry but to the people of many nations. The flow of ‘hard benefits’ has grown from a trickle to a stream, and it is widening to a river, as expanding technology uncovers more and more ways of improving man’s mode of existence.” Report cited tangible benefits in business, medicine, transportation, construction, new fabrics, and new materials. Future benefits “of even greater impact” included use of satellites for more efficient management of earth’s natural resources, use of satellites in crime detection, and possible development of hospitals in space “which would offer gravity-free treatment to patients with heart ailments.” Illustrations, based on existing or impending technology, were the “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, Government, the medical profession, and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (Text)
Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice President of British Interplanetary Society, told press in London that U.S.S.R. had been testing satellite designed to destroy U.S. military satellites. Claim, he said, was substantiated by studies from Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnbor-ough. Cosmos CCCLXXIII (launched Oct. 20) had been a target; Cosmos CCCLXXIV (launched Oct. 23) had been orbited to same altitude as Cosmos CCCLXXIII and then exploded, apparently on ground command. Six large fragments had been identified. Gatland said objective could have been to destroy Cosmos CCCLXXIII with the fragments or to use radiation from a nuclear explosion to make it inoperable. Cosmos CCCLXXVflaunched Oct. 30) had been test of same system. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/70, A2; W Star, 11/3/70)
NASA announced appointment of Dale D. Myers, Vice President and General Manager of North American Rockwell Corp.’sJSpace Shuttle Program, as NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 12. Myers would succeed Dr. George E. Mueller, who left NASA Dec. 10, 1969. (NASA Release 70-4)
Achievement described as “first artificial synthesis of a living cell” was reported by State Univ. of New York at Buffalo in letter to press signed by Dr. Raymond H. Ewell, Vice President for Research, and Dr. James F. Danielli, Director of Center for Theoretical Biology, who had led experimenters. Amoebas had been partly dismembered and then reassembled, using components from other amoebas. Reconstituted amoebas had reproduced themselves and were indistinguishable from normal amoebas. Work opened “new era for artificial life synthesis, now being explored” and helped clear way for “synthesis of new micro-organisms, new egg cells and an organism capable of living on Mars.” New York Times said officials at NASA, which was supporting the work, had described experiment as “exciting” and “a big step.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/13/70, 1)
Sixty-second anniversary of Wright brothers’ first successful flight. At ceremonies in Kitty Hawk, N.C.—sponsored by naa, Air Force Assn., and First Flight Society—portraits of aviation pioneers Igor I.	Sikorsky and Wiley Post were added to Kitty Hawk’s First Flight Shrine. Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio, honored Robert E. Gross, founder of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; l/G Ira C. Baker, Eighth Air Force Commander during World War II; Alexander P. de Seversky, military aviation expert; and Juan T. Trippe, founder of Pan American World Airways. At annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Aero Club of Washington, Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy was presented to C. R. Smith, former President of American Airlines and Secretary of Commerce under President Lyndon B. Johnson, (naa News, 1/71, 1; Varbor-ough, W Star, 12/16/70, A18; Flatley, W Star; 12/18/70, C5)
Transition of World War II aircraft industry into 1970 aerospace industry was traced in Air Force magazine by Karl G. Harr, Jr., aia President. Increased performance had increased complexity. Average 1944 combat aircraft had carried 454 kg (Vi ton) of avionic gear; 1948-1950 counterpart needed three to five times as much. Weapon revolution did not signify end of manned aircraft era; it brought forth “new family of aircraft of substantially improved capability.” First operational “barely supersonic” 1954 fighter had been followed by succession of more advanced fighters. “The complexity curve took a sharp upward turn, taking the cost curve with it,” with corollary decline in numbers of aircraft produced. Fewer aircraft were needed because of individual aircraft’s superior performance. With advent of supersonic aircraft production, guided missile output became significant portion of industry workload. Big push had come in 1954 when missile procurement topped billion-dollar level for first time. “Undoubtedly, the space program was the dominant influence in history’s most explosive decade of technological advance. There were two primary contributing factors: breadth and acceleration.” Breadth of program required continual probing of new research frontiers across spectrum of almost every scientific and technological discipline. “The acceleration of effort imposed by the lunar-landing timetable necessitated a forcing of technology, compressing into one decade the normal advance of several.” (AF, 9/70, 84-8)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,630 billion, as introduced March 17. (CR, 3/19/70, D262; H Rpt 91-929)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President F. A. Cleveland received $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for 1970 aiaa Wright Brothers Lecture at aiaa Aircraft Design and Operations Meeting in Los Angeles. He delivered lecture, “Size Effects in Conventional Aircraft Design,” during meeting, (aiaa Release; aiaa PIO)
nae President Eric A. Walker announced election of 51 engineers to NAE membership. They included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for “contributions to the proposal, formulation, and management of Project Apollo”; Gerhard Neumann, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. Aircraft Engine Group, for “contributions to the development of variable stator compressors and high by-pass turbofan engines for jet aircraft”; Kendall Perkins, Corporate Vice President, Engineering and Research, of McDonnell Douglas Corp., for “contributions to aerospace technology, and engineering management in the design of aircraft and spacecraft”; and Dr. Paul Rosenberg, President of Paul Rosenberg Associates, for “pioneering contributions to space pho-togrammetric systems, radar prediction techniques, information storage and retrieval, and the kinematics of human spine motion.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 4/70, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before House Committee: Tracking networks had supported 101 manned and unmanned missions in addition to Apollo 11 in 1969. Meeting basic requirements of flight projects when budget was at “minimum level” had required significant reductions in overall network capability. Planned improvements had been deferred in FY 1969 for second year and, for first time, sustaining equipment items had been deferred. FY 1971 request of $299.3 million—$298.0 million for R&D and $1.3 million for construction—included MSFN equipment to support Apollo Applications program while continuing alsep support. Satellite Network reductions in FY 1969 had terminated or greatly reduced support of several in-orbit spacecraft still capable of transmitting valuable scientific data. Remaining workload of some 45 satellites! continued to require around-the-clock bperationsjatimostlnet-work stations. Many satellites already aloft would require support in FY 1971, as would 10 new spacecraft scheduled for launch. FY 1971 equipment replacement program was critical. Network could support only portion of spacecraft passes and reliability was essential. Continued support from dsn overseas facilities would be needed to support four on-going Pioneer missions and Mariner VI and VII. Major increase in workload in late FY 1971 with launch of dual Mariner ’71 mission would require substantial preparatory engineering effort, as would multimission capability for future programs of Pioneer F and G, Mariner/Mercury ’73, and Helios. (Testimony)
aiaa announced reelection of Dr. Ronald Smelt as aiaa President and of Dr. John C. Houbolt as Vice President-Technical and election of eight new Directors: Dr. Mac C. Adams, Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Avco Government Products Group and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; A. Scott Crossfield, Division Vice President for Flight Research and Development for Eastern Air Lines; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director; Carlos C. Wood, Division Vice President of United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div.; Edward N. Hall, Assistant Chief Scientist for United Aircraft Corp.’s Corporate Technical Staff; Dr. Walter T. Olsen, LeRC Assistant Director; Alan Y. Pope, Director of Aerothermodynamics for San-dia Corp.; and Charles W. Duffy, Jr., Director of Personnel for Boeing Co.’s Commercial Airplane Div., sst Branch, (aiaa Release)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed to press in Washington, D.C., that he had proposed George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for post of NASA Administrator being vacated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine on Sept. 15. Rep. Fulton said he had made recommendation in telegram to President Nixon July 31. (Lan-nan, W Star, 8/31/70, Al)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine’s resignation as NASA Administrator became effective. He was honored at Bolling afb reception and testimonial dinner given by Dr. George M. Low, who would be Acting Administrator until appointment of successor. Dr. Paine told guests he believed requirements of U.S. space program “are not understood at the highest level of our official life” and said he was confident NASA budget would be approved despite President’s Aug. 11 veto of Independent Offices and HUD appropriations bill. U.S., he said, “must be the first nation to put in the first skylab and space stations. We must look to the post-dog-sled era of lunar exploration and develop a more permanent type of lunar exploration.” Dr. Paine warned that NASA must “face the reality that in the 70s the Soviet Union will attempt to overtake us. ... We will be tested against a strong and vigorous Soviet program.” U.S. had “held out the olive branch.. .but if the cold war is extended into space, then NASA will be ready to meet any threat that may develop in space.” According to Washington Evening Star, it was first time Dr. Paine had publicly cited threat of Soviet military supremacy in space. Later, in interview following dinner, Dr. Paine said he meant NASA’s charge was to keep U.S. in forefront of space technology and to be ready to hand that technology to dod if required. He believed defense against icbm might yet be space-based. If so, NASA should be in technologically superior position because of space station, shuttle, and other concepts. (W Star, 9/16/ 70, B8, C7)
Edgar M. Cortnght, LaRC Director and Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized report of Review Board before House Committee on Science and Astronautics and commented: “Total Apollo system of ground complexes, launch vehicle, and spacecraft constitutes the most ambitious and demanding engineering development ever undertaken by man. For these missions to succeed, both men and equipment must perform to near perfection. That this system has already resulted in two successful lunar surface explorations is a tribute to those men and women who conceived, designed, built, and flew it. Perfection is not only difficult to achieve, but difficult to maintain. The imperfections in Apollo 13 constituted a near disaster, averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and the ground control team which supported them. The Board feels that the Apollo accident holds important lessons which, when applied to future missions, will contribute to the safety and effectiveness of manned space flight.” (Testimony)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford attended dedication ceremony of Stafford Field, small airfield in Stafford’s hometown, Weatherford, Okla. Airfield was Weatherford’s memorial to Stafford who had piloted two Gemini missions. At dedication Vice President said: “While Stafford Field may not be equivalent in size to the giant airports of this country and the world, it. . .symbolizes the best of American traditions. . .harnessing that pioneering spirit of old.” (WPost, 4/27/70, A4; Text)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics transmitted to parent committee The National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies: A Recommendation for Centralization of Federal Science Responsibilities. Report, result of 10-mo study by subcommittee, recommended immediate establishment of National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) to consolidate Federal responsibilities for basic research and graduate education, niras would be independent agency below cabinet level with administrator appointed by President subject to Senate confirmation, nsf, whose charter was basis for niras, would be distributed in new centralized agency, with education programs at undergraduate level or below transferred to hew Office of Education. Basic research programs determined to be no longer relevant to individual agency missions would be considered for transfer to niras. Committee also recommended increase of OST staff with director given Cabinet status and responsibilities extended. (Text)
Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail D. Millionshchikov said at second national Convocation on Challenge of Building Peace in New York that exchange of experience in space between U.S. and U.S.S.R. would be “very fruitful.” It was “very dangerous to make a race ... because the lives of human beings are at stake.” Astronaut Frank Borman, chairman of panel discussion, suggested “Soviet-American committee to chart the exploration of the solar system, a group to develop and formulate policy and interchange of ideas, both in the manned and unmanned fields.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 4/30/70)
Boeing Co. would lay off some 18 000 persons in Puget Sound area during 1970, company Vice President Lowell P. Michelwait said in Seattle. Company employed 101 500 in peak year 1968. Nationwide force declined by 25 500 during 1969. Boeing employment in Seattle area was 80 000 and would drop to 62 000. Figures indicated 40% drop in work force in 2 1/2 yrs. Decline was attributed to slower commercial aircraft sales, failure to win new Government contracts, reduced Government spending, completion of current Government contracts, and increased productivity in 747 jet airliner assembly lines. (AP, NYT, 1/14/70)
Appointment of John P. Olsen, Assistant to Senior Vice President of U.S. Smelting, Refining and Mining Co., as Deputy Under Secretary of Transportation was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. He would succeed Charles D. Baker, who had been appointed Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Policy and International Affairs, effective April 28. (dotRelease 8970)
President Nixon, in White House ceremony, presented Atomic Pioneers Award to Dr. Vannevar Bush for his ‘‘exceptional contributions to the national security as Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in marshalling the resources of American science for national defense during World War II and for his pioneering leadership as a Presidential advisor in fostering the establishment of new Federal agencies, including the National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission, which have made possible the unprecedented growth of scientific research and development in the last two decades.” President also presented Award to Dr. James B. Conant for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in overseeing the successful development of weapons systems, including the atomic bomb, during World War II and for his pioneering leadership in the nation’s atomic energy program after the war as Chairman of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Research and Development Board and as a member of General Advisory Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission.” President presented third Atomic Pioneers Award to l/g Leslie R. Groves (USA-Ret) for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army, in developing the world’s first nuclear weapons during World War II, and for his pioneering efforts in establishing administrative patterns adopted by the Atomic Energy Commission in effecting the use of atomic energy for military and peaceful purposes.” (PD, 3/2/70, 279-80)
Formation of Convair Aerospace Div. and Electro Dynamic Div. was announced by Roger Lewis, General Dynamics Corp. President. Both new divisions would report to Dr. George E. Mueller, former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight who had joined General Dynamics as Senior Vice President in December 1969. (General Dynamics Release 1537)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 3374, $3.333billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. [See Feb. 2.] (Text)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Article by Dr. Ralph E. Lapp in New Republic criticized space transportation system and NASA participation in Feb. 4-6 classified conference at Patrick afb at which system was discussed. System, although NASA budget item, was “Air Force finesse to pave the way fora space-bomber or interceptor,” and “could rival the Safeguard abm as a waste of money,” Lapp declared. (New Republic, 2/21/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 16595, NSF FY 1971 authorization bill, after adding $27.6 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $500 million. (CR, 3/24/70, D283; Boffey, Science, 4/3/70,95-7)
Dr. W. D. McElroy, NSF Director, called for reevaluation of U.S. science and technology policies in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. He proposed smooth transition between science and its applications by ensuring continued support of basic science by mission-oriented agencies; raising level of support for academic science from 18% to 35% or 40% of total Federal expenditure; elimination of conflict between “big science” (high-energy physics, etc.) and “little science” (projects of equal importance but smaller scale); long-term, level funding for science to avoid periodic ups and downs; Government sponsoring and funding of research on national problems to avoid competition with “normal” flow of research; and system of priorities with built-in “safeguards to hedge against imprudent judgments.” (Testimony)
Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to fill seat on House Committee on Ways and Means. (CR, 4/30/70, H3719-20)
Dr. Theodore P. Wright, Civil Aeronautics Administrator from 1944 to 1948 and former Vice President and Director of Engineering with Curtiss-WrightCorp., died in Ithaca, N.Y., at age 75. (Bachinski, W Post, 8/24/70, C4)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
Soviet Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev (right) and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov (center right), who established a manned-flight endurance record in their 18-day Soyuz IX mission June 2-19, were welcomed at Washington National Airport by Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left), and Neil A. Armstrong, Cosmonauts would tour U.S. gineers unemployed “and this number could easily double next year.1’ Major concern was “that in the future a new shortage of scientists and engineers will arise, based on the growing disenchantment with the unstable labor market for such skills,” Implications were clear: “We are losing the capability to react to a national crisis, should the need arise; we are losing the capability to undertake an Apollo-like adventure, should we in the future desire to do so; and we are losing a capability that today provides an inflow of dollars that exceeds the net positive balance or payments.” Cost of U.S. space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—decrease of $2.5 billion since 1966. In terms of Federal budget, $3.4 billion represented 1.7% or $17 for every person in U.S. “At the same time we are spending $400 per person for our domestic programs. ... In fact, this year’s increase in our expenditures for domestic programs was more than twice the NASA budget." Cancellation of entire space program would not significantly affect Federal spending on domestic programs. “But without the space program, without the capabilities it represents, what would become of the ‘scientific and technological lead’ this generation of Americans gave so much of themselves and their resources to achieve?” (Text)
Public exhibit of lunar samples by nasa was described by George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Special Ad Hoc Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Even with a reasonable allowance for overlap in our attendance figures for individuals who may have seen exhibits more than once, these figures indicate that over six and a half million people in the United States have seen a lunar sample.” Public displays had been accompanied by exhibit and supporting material so that viewers “come away.. .with some appreciation of its broader meaning.” nasa believed “exhibits at 15 major science museums to date, with 41 more planned for the coming year, in addition to the exhibit accompanying the Apollo 11 capsule to all 50 state capitals and the Smithsonian exhibit are especially effective.” (CR, 8/7/70, E7445-6)	_
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
House Committee on Appropriations approved H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.197-billion NASA appropriation—$136 million less than $3.333-billion NASA budget estimate. Appropriation provided $2,500 billion for r&d, $18.3 million for construction of facilities, and $678.7 million for research and program management. Report recommended postponement of Apollo 14 mission until 1971 “to give ample time for study, report, and correction of the Apollo 13 problems.” Bill also allocated $497 million to nsf—$16 million less than nsf budget estimate of $513 million. (House Rpt 91-1060; Subcom on Independ Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe testified on DOT action in President Nixon’s program against air piracy, before House Committee on Ways and Means. As first step, dot had urged ICAO to establish basic principles for effective sanctions: State in which hijacked aircraft landed was obligated to permit passengers and crew to continue journey and to return aircraft and cargo to owners. State to which hijacker fled was obligated to extradite or prosecute hijacker. Multilateral sanctions should be taken against states that failed to fulfill obligations. U.S. had urged ICAO to draft international convention providing legal basis for effective sanctions. To finance program of placing armed Government employees on U.S. carriers and extension of surveillance equipment at airports, dot had submitted $28-million FY 1971 budget amendment to Senate Appropriations Committee. Agency proposed costs of program be borne by 0.5% increase in 8% ticket tax on domestic airfares and increase of $2 in $3 head tax paid by passengers on international flights. (Text)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
Rep. Bertram L. Podell (D-N.Y.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He would take seat on House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (NASA LAR IX/\ 30)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The National Space Program—Present and Future, compilation of papers prepared for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Papers represented attitudes of Government, aerospace industry, and academic community on objectives of national space program during next decade and funding level needed to support program. Statements had been prepared for hearings, originally scheduled for September and October 1970, that had been canceled because of press of legislative business and ‘‘uncertain status of the NASA appropriation measure” for FY 1971 because of Presidential veto. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had urged that “new initiatives proposed for the 1970s represent not only a space program that will maintain our Nation’s leadership, but also an opportunity to utilize resources which will otherwise remain idle or grossly underemployed. In this sense the ‘real cost’ to the society of NASA’s programs for the 1970s is very low and the cost-benefit of these programs correspondingly high.” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, Vice president and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former NASA Administrator, said in statement that U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussion on common spacecraft docking had been “excellent step forward” in space programming. “The United States, Western Europe, Australia, Canada, and Japan should also work more closely together in the forefront of space science and technology, eliminating duplicative projects and obsolescent developments for purely nationalistic purposes. Space activities are inherently global; they challenge us to develop new international institutions as advanced as our technologies. Attractive new international arrangements should also be established for the developing nations to help them take full advantage for new application opportunities.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, urged vigorous space program with space shuttle as “cornerstone.” Answers to question “Why go to the moon?” would not be found in budget books and cost-benefit analyses but “in the hearts and minds of men, who, responding to a mystical, metaphysical imperative, join hands and reach out to the stars.” Committee found “clear consensus. . .that a vigorous aeronautics and space effort is in the National interest, since it sets the pace for the country’s technological advancement. There is also general agreement that a revitalized space program, given strong direction and adequate funding, is needed for the United States to retain its technological preeminence in the decades ahead.” (Text)
nae announced election of retired General Electric Co. Vice President Clarence H. Linder as first full-time nae President and Dr. Chauncey Starr of ucla as Vice President. Dr. Thomas C. Kava-nagh of Praeger-Kavanagh-Waterbury and of Madigan-Hyland was reelected Treasurer and J. H. Mulligan, Jr., Secretary. Among those elected to Council were Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, and Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, NASA consultant, (nae Release; nae Bridge, 6/70,1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviation and Space Trophy for 1969 to Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) for “extraordinary and brilliant piloting feat” while testing NASA HL-10
Appointment of Apollo 8 commander Frank Borman as Vice President of Eastern Airlines was announced by ea Vice President and Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. Borman would assume new duties after completing course for executives at Harvard Univ. (ea Release)
L/G Leslie R. Groves (USA, Ret.), former member of Army Corps of Engineers and head of Manhattan Project that developed atomic bomb, died of heart attack at age 73. Gen. Groves, who had described first atomic test in his 1962 book Now It Can Be Told, had been awarded USA’s Distinguished Service medal for his contributions to the project and to shortening World War II. He had also supervised construction of numerous dod facilities—including Pentagon and laboratories at Oak Ridge, Tenn.; Hanford, Wash.; and Los Alamos, N. Mex.—before his retirement from USA in 1948. (Ward, WPost, 7/15/70, C8)
NASA Hq. briefing explained to university administrators effects of NASA budget cuts on funds for educating space scientists. Termination tof sustaining university program in FY 1971 would eliminate more than 200 predoctoral training grants which had been funded at $4.18 million. Funding for multidisciplinary research grants also would end. Students would not be cut off immediately, since grants had been step-funded and would be reduced over three years. NASA Assistant Administrator for University Affairs F. B. Smith said other agencies might assume funding of some grants, since university r&d funding in total Federal budget would increase by $114 million during FY 1971. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, said increase would not compensate for leveling off of r&d budgets in past few years nor for effects of inflation. He noted Government support for graduate students was declining generally and said Government did not need as many scientists as previously. Total $21 million would be cut by NASA in contracts and grants to universities. In ossa, university R&D grants in bioscience would be cut by 30%. Cuts would eliminate a high-energy astronomical observatory. oart would experience 30% cut in university r&d, chiefly affecting electronics and space vehicles research, omsf contracts with mit for Apollo program would be reduced by $2 million. University grants and contracts which survived would be reoriented in FY 1971, with emphasis on what universities could do for NASA. (nasa Off of Univ Aff.; Gruchow, Science, 2/20/70, 1107)
House Appropriations Committee favorably reported H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. Bill provided $2,565 billion for r&d, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $679 million for research and program management. It replaced H.R. 17548, vetoed by President Nixon Aug. 11. NASA appropriation was unchanged. (CR, 11/19/70, D1194; H Rpt 91-1616)
Shrinking profits and widespread attacks on military programs were making 1970s “age of uncertainty” for U.S. defense industry, Max Lehrer, Vice President of rca Defense Electronics Products Div., said in speech before Philadelphia Chapter of Federal Government Accountants Assn. Logistic Management Institute study had shown tax profits for defense firms had dropped from 5.1% average in 1959 to 3.9% in 1968, while profits for comparable nondefense companies over same period rose from 8.9% to 9.4%. (Text)
NASA-Indian Space Research Organization project to broadcast TV from satellite to 5000 small Indian villages had been postponed from 1972 to 1974 because of NASA budget cuts, New York Times reported. Postponement, which also meant year’s delay in launch of India’s first comsat, had been announced in New Delhi by five-man NASA team headed by Dr. Richard B. Marsten, NASA Director of Communications Programs. Team was visiting India for consultations. Launch of Indian comsat depended on data gathered from educational TV experiment. (Schanberg, NYT, 7/27/70, 7)
Charles W. Harper, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics), discussed NASA’s role in development of anticollision systems for aircraft before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Government Activities. It appeared “impractical” to force small general-aviation aircraft “to avoid controlled airspace or to carry the expensive equipment and undergo the intensive training necessary to place them under positive control of the atc [air traffic control] system. For these reasons, faa has asked NASA to investigate the possibility of developing inexpensive, lightweight equipment for small aircraft which would augment significantly the collision avoidance probability when the pilot is flying on the see-and-be-seen principle. .. NASA program was guided by FAA’s Collision Prevention Advisory Group, of which NASA was member, and by NASA Research and Technology Advisory Committee’s Subcommittee on Aircraft Operating Problems, of which faa was member. Both groups included representatives of industry and other Government agencies. (Testimony)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Toward a Science Policy for the United States. Report summarized hearings held during July, August, and September and recommended that Federal Government establish national policy for support and furtherance of science and technology. Report further recommended that ost be separated from direct administrative connections with President’s Science Adviser or President’s Science Advisory Committee; OST submit annual report to President and Congress reviewing status of r&d in U.S. and recommending r&d program for following year; National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) be inaugurated; and Congress seek centralized Senate jurisdiction over science and technology and establish Office of Technology Assessment. Report also recommended, pending establishment of niras, responsibility for basic research be centered in NSF, which should provide one third of all Federal support; ost develop criteria for support of basic research by mission-oriented agencies; Office of Management and Budget develop “stable funding” procedure for basic research; and niras, when established, emphasize science education. Smithsonian Institution should have responsibility for science-information system, with backup from ost’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information. NAS and nae should assist in explaining to public science and technology’s role in solving major problems (Text)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified in NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Our most serious problem in recent years has been our inability to hire newly graduated scientists, engineers and administrative professionals in sufficient numbers. The average age of NASA employees is now increasing 8/10 of a year each year. While we were able to hire 965 graduating college students in 1966, the number dropped to 738 in 1967, 567 in 1968, 253 in 1969, and an estimated 180 in 1970.” NASA Civil Service staffing would decline from 31 350 at end of FY 1970 to 30550 at end of FY 1971. Of this reduction, 600 would result from phasing out of erc employees. Total of 200 would be reduced at manned space flight centers and NASA Hq. (Testimony)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, oart, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on role of nuclear rockets in future space transportation. Potential for reuse of nuclear stage provided additional prospects for spaceflight economy. Nuclear rocket would be in-space link between earth-to-orbit transportation system and operations at moon and in distant earth orbits. NASA budget request for $38 million for program in FY 1971, however, could “be viewed as maintaining progress in only the most important longest-lead-time development activities in nerva.” Progress made in “early, critical years, will permit later development activities. . .to proceed smoothly.” Effort was essential to meet major milestones: first ground test of series of nerva flight reactors in 1973 and first ground test of series of nerva flight engines in 1974. (Testimony)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 15695, FY 1971 NASA authorization with amendments that added $297.8 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $3,333 billion. New authorization total of $3,631 billion included addition of $144.9 million to Apollo budget request, for total Apollo allocation of $1.1 billion, and $155 million for space flight operations, making total of $670.2 million in that category. (H Rpt 91-929; CR, 3/12/70, D225; W Post, 3/13/70, A10)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, opened testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1971 authorization: “Apollo 11 and 12 demonstrated that we can fly across a quarter of a million miles [400 000 km] of space, land with precision, carry out research and exploration, and return safely to earth. We met our commitments for the decade of the sixties. Now we must chart a new course for the next decade in space. The Congress again shares with the Administration the responsibility for continuing progress and leadership in space and aeronautics. At the same time, NASA is going through a difficult period of redirection, and austere budget goals must be met. This is therefore a time of great challenge. But I firmly believe that with your support we can continue to forge ahead in space exploration, in science, in applications, and in aerospace technology. The program which we will lay before you, although austere, provides for balanced progress toward the challenging goals for the 1970’s and the decades to follow.” NASA budget as it came from President included “major reduction in space program,” to achieve balanced U.S. budget in “time of inflation.” By reducing operating base, making selective cut-backs, and deferring new starts NASA had developed program permitting progress toward SpaceTask Group’s Option II goals, but at reduced pace, [see Jan. 13 and Feb. 2], Dr. Paine noted it was significant that, “in a sharply reduced total budget, we have been able to increase our space applications efforts. Our aeronautics effort will also continue to be strengthened.” He urged Committee to keep in mind that proposed program “could not be conducted in the face of further cuts.” NASA had no plans to fly astronauts in space between last Apollo flight in 1974 and the time space shuttle would be operative in late 1970s. “Any significant reduction in our FY 1971 request will further extend this gap in American manned space flight, and reduce other important programs.” (Testimony)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
Selection of Harrison A. Storms, NR Aerospace Div. Vice President, as recipient of 1970 Aircraft Design Award was announced by aiaa. He would receive $500 honorarium sponsored by Northrop Corp. for “direction of the engineering effort that led to the design and development of the XB-70 aircraft” at July 21 AIAA meeting in Los Angeles, (aiaa Release)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on oart’s FY 1971 program. Primary objective of v/STOL program was “research needed for the development of advanced rotorcraft which will offer hovering capability and low-noise operations for inner-city operations plus the cruise flight efficiency necessary for inner-city to outlying airport service. Experience with conventional helicopters shows that this service is desired but that it falls short of economic success. If the gap can be closed by improved technology, then the way will be clear for rapid development of this type of travel service. To this end, we are working on several advanced rotor concepts.” LaRC v/stol Transition Research Wind Tunnel would be operational in late 1970. Facility would study effect of down flow from rotors on fuselage and tail, high-lift flaps for stol air transport applications, and effect of jet-lift engine exhaust on aerodynamic and propulsion characteristics of vtol fighter configurations. (Testimony) Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., oart, testifying on human factors program, told Committee: “No seriously limiting effects have been noted in cardiovascular function during the relatively brief manned space flight to date. However, longer duration exposure to weightlessness and the absence of hydrostatic stresses of earth gravity may cause deterioration in cardiovascular reactivity.” (Testimony) Charles W. Harper, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, testified before House Committee on NASA’s v/stol technology: “In the past few years NASA has focused its research increasingly toward the objective of enabling development of several types of v/stol aircraft, each directed at a single important mission. These include an advanced rotor type with airplane-like cruise capability for those missions where vertical takeoff and landing is mandatory, a small and agile stol aircraft with modest cruise performance and capable of operating easily out of 1500' [460-m] runways having minimum site preparation and a large stol aircraft having jet transport type cruise performance while also operating easily out of well prepared 1500' [460-m] stol ports. In addition to this more focused activity, the v/stol program contains broader research objectives leading eventually to multimission v/stol aircraft satisfying this growing transportation mode most effectively.” (Testimony) Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Director of Research, oart, testified on NASA basic research programs: NASA-supported research had developed new approach permitting for first time step-by-step numerical calculation of growth of disturbances in atmospheric shear flows, which should contribute to detection and avoidance of clear-air turbulence by jet aircraft. First steps had been taken to apply fluid physics knowledge to atmospheric pollution from airborne and ground sources, testing pollutant action in models of city streets. New research programs would apply knowledge of fluid dynamics to noise abatement studies. Establishment of direct relationship between surface structure and electrical characteristics of germanium surface during oxidation had increased knowledge of oxygen’s role in device performance and should increase efficiency in electronic devices. Special attention was being given to evaluation of alloys at the high temperatures of supersonic speeds and to evaluation of rigid polymeric foams as lightweight structural materials for aircraft. (Testimony)
Communist China’s first satellite was believpd to have been planned by U.S.-trained scientist Tsien Hsueh-shen, Wall Street Journal said. Former MIT and Cal Tech scientist had been high-ranking Pentagon adviser during World War II and had left U.S. in 1955 after having been named in deportation order charging him with being Communist Party member. (WSJ, 4/27/70)
House passed by 229 votes to 105 H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization, after agreeing to recommit bill to House Committee on Science and Astronautics with instructions to reduce Apollo program funding by $14.5 million and space flight operations funding by $15.5 million. Action brought authorization total to $3,601 billion, $30 million below $3,631 billion reported by House Committee on Science and Astronautics on March 12, but $268 million more than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. (CR, 4/23/70, H3377-23)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
NASA budget cutbacks would not substantially affect jpl, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press following conference with jpl leadership teams in Pasadena, Calif. “Our cutbacks will fall most heavily upon the manned space flight program.” Some 16 000 aerospace employees would be cut from Governmental payroll throughout California, Dr. Paine said. (Pottage, Glendale Ledger, 2/5/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Fairchild Hiller Corp. Vice President Edward G. Uhl told stockholders at annual meeting that company had filed protest with NASA. U.S. Comptroller General, and President Nixon over April 8 NASA award of $50 000 000 contract to General Electric Co. for design and manufacture of experimental commercial spacecraft, according to Washington Evening Star. Fairchild Hiller General Counsel John F. Dea-ly said company was protesting on four points: GE submitted proposal six days after deadline and made technical changes contrary to NASA regulations; GE’s cost savings were not genuine savings to Government; NASA’s selection procedure on contracts was not adequate; and Fairchild Hiller was not given fair and proper evaluation of its technical innovations for spacecraft. (Harris, W Star, 4/23/70, D9)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics submitted to Congress Issues and Directions for Aeronautical Research and Development, report of Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Report recommended that U.S. establish national aeronautics and aviation policy emphasizing aeronautical r&d, Government-industry roles be clarified, and dot be statutory member of nasc. Report found reason for concern over maintenance of long-term U.S. leadership in aeronautics and aviation. Technological r&d base needed to be rebuilt and existing technology should be used more fruitfully. (Text)
Lunar samples returned by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XVI (launched Sept. 12) contained less titanium and zirconium oxide and more ferric oxide than Apollo 11 samples, Soviet Academy of Sciences Vice President Aleksander Vinogradov was quoted as saying. Luna and Apollo samples “have an equally high content of space originated inert gases” but in overall composition the Luna XVI samples more closely resembed those from Apollo 12. Luna XVI material was fragmented basaltic type containing 70 chemical elements; granularity of soil increased with depth. Spherical, glazed formations of congealed droplets similar to those found by Apollo crews were present. Specific heat of lunar soil did not depend on density, Vinogradov said, and, “on the average, corresponds to terrestrial rocks, while heat conductivity is characterized by extremely low values, considerably below those of the best heat-insulating materials on Earth.... It may be assumed that the general course of differentiation of the substance of the Earth and of the Moon and probably of other planets of the terrestrial type proceeded by similar routes, although reached different stages of development.” (SBD, 11/3/70,8-9)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Director of OST and Presidential Science Adviser, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development on need for adequate Federal science policy: “Science and technology policy.. .must be formulated on an evolutionary basis, continuously under review and subject to change with changing conditions. It must be a policy that can be implemented both by the Aministration and by Congress and one which will be supported by the public.” Policy should provide “strong base of science” and “mechanisms for using science and technology to meet changing problems of national concern.” It should “recognize that policies and events wholly outside the field of science and technology may strongly influence our r&d expenditure level.” Dr. DuBridge told Subcommittee some of nation’s “most valuable and productive research projects” had been lost because of FY 1970 amendment to dod appropriation bill which banned defense-financed studies unless they had direct relation to military missions. (Testimony; Cohn, WPost, 7/9/70, A7)	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics had tentatively approved funding of $6.5-million project to convert antenna 300-m (1000-ft) wide at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico to radar 2000 times more sensitive than any in existence, New York Times reported. Modification of world’s largest radiotelescope would enable telescope to map features on Venus down to mile in width. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/70)
Election of Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, as a Vice President and his appointment as Group Executive, Power Generation Group, were announced by General Electric Co. Both positions were effective Sept. 15, date on which Dr. Paine’s resignation from NASA would become effective. (GE Release)
Examination of Federal science policy was essential, Dr. Philip Handler, nas President, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. “Substantial changes are being made in the organization of some arms of the executive branch of government that deal with science; the Mansfield Amendment which limits the manner in which research-supporting funds may be utilized by the Department of Defense has begun to influence. , .behavior of other agencies of the government as well; federal funding for fundamental studies has remained essentially plateaued in absolute dollars for four consecutive fiscal years while, in constant dollars, such funding has declined by perhaps 25%.”. NASA appropriation “has been reduced significantly and one frequently hears that federal military and space expenditures for R&D are to be reduced for some years to come; the nation seems determined to mitigate the damage which has been done to our natural environment, but flounders in the attempt; our nation is engaged in the painful exercise of assessing and reassembling our priorities; and our country now seems uncertain in what light, and with what resolution, it should view the pace of future scientific progress. Our national apparatus for the conduct of research and scholarship is not yet dismantled, but it is falling into shambles. Morale of the scientific community is lower than at any time since World War II. Yet, new fields of scientific exploration and application clamor for attention and funding.” U.S. lead in science ‘‘is in jeopardy.” Loss of lead “bodes ill for our future national security and for the vigor of our economy.” (Testimony)
