nasa Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on research and program management (r&pm) budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization: FY 1972 request was 821 million less than in FY 1971, primarily because of continuing reduction in permanent positions. Request of $697.4 million was based on further reduction of Government personnel of 1500 positions, lowering employment to 28 350—total reduction of 6971 positions from 1967 peak and lowest level since 1963. Cut of “some 20 percent in the 1967—72 period is by a considerable margin the greatest, proportionately, to be made by any Government agency in the period.” Of total NASA force, scientists and engineers made up 44.8%, technicians 26.7%, administrative personnel 13.9%, and clerical 14.6%. Hiring restrictions had reduced number of new college graduates added to work force and raised average age to 41.3, with rate of 8/10 a year each year, endangering health and vigor of NASA. “In the past decade, the aerospace industry, overall as well as that portion serving NASA, has passed through a substantial perturbation. Contractor employment climbed to a high peak, then dropped drastically. The current estimate for industry employment on NASA work at the end of this year and next is about 108,000—less than one-third of what it was at the peak of the space program. But with the major reductions in the space program over the last several years, this is how it must be.” Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, testified on NASA management of its new technology as “a repository of national resources”: Some 20 000 technical contributions had been disclosed by NASA contractors, 3500 in past year. Another 4000 had been reported by NASA employees from inhouse projects. Contributions reported were evaluated, defined, and published for use by others. Allocations for FY 1972 were increased over previous year as NASA began to work with innovative events of early stages of 1970s R&D programs. (Transcript)
NSF published Unemployment Rates for Scientists, Spring 1971. Rate was 2.6% in 1971, jumping from 1.5% in 1970. National unemployment rate for all workers for first quarter 1971 averaged 6.5%. Doctorates experienced 1.4% unemployment rate in 1971 and 0.9% in 1970, while nondoctorate scientists were reported at 3.5% rate in 1971 and 2.9% in 1970. Defense and space constituted largest areas of activity, with 11% and 4% of unemployed. Approximately 45% of 1971 unemployed scientists reported last science-related job had been supported to some degree by Government funds, (nsf Highlights, 7/2/71, 1)	_	_	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 11484, bill permitting sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 11/2/71, D1109; H Rpt 92-600)
Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway Plaza in Houston, Tex. (nasa Release 71—110)
nasa announced resignation of Ronald J. Philips, Director of Office of Technology Utilization, effective July 3. He would become Senior Vice President of technology application program sponsored jointly by International City Management Assn., National League of Cities, U.S. Conference of Mayors, and Ford Foundation, (nasa Release 71—117)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified in FY 1972 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . true boundaries of our ecological system have not been determined, but they certainly extend to the known dimensions of the universe. The forces and laws which affect the most distant star are directly relevant to the problems of energy generation and control on Earth. Mankind is just beginning to grasp the fact that all natural systems are intimately related and interdependent” and man must learn “to manage wisely what he can, and to live in equilibrium with what is beyond his control. It is to these ends . . . that we have structured the nation’s continuing space activities in science and applications.” Most significant new astronomy program element was heao, “designed to unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” There was evidence that in pulsars and quasars “a whole new regime of power generation exists and operates at levels that cannot be explained by modem nuclear physics.” Understanding these energy processes might lead to harnessing of powers “heretofore unimaginable.” Both planetary and lunar exploration should provide clues to earth’s past and future, to factors that caused long-period environmental changes and how to control them. Earth observations program also was addressed to fundamental problems of environmental and ecological management. Satellites could see, record, and transmit information on causes and effects in global air-ocean-earth interactions. Trend in U.S. space science and applications had been decreasing budget and launch rates; ossa had had to “cut back ongoing projects, dispense with backup payloads, stretch launch schedules and mission intervals, and defer promising new projects,” but had “preserved a steady momentum and a balanced program thrust wherever possible.” High level of productivity in science, exploration, and applications had been possible “because of the background in technology, in engineering, in conceptual thinking that was built up earlier.” But many valuable and important missions had been deferred into future, “a future we expect will permit us to revolutionize the way space is explored and used.” Key feature of this revolution would he reusable space shuttle “that makes access to space for man and machines an economical, routine excursion rather than the difficult task it presents now.” (Transcript)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
Subcommittee on nasa Oversight transmitted report Review of Recent Launch Failures to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee had held hearings June 15-17 on failure of Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to place Ats 4 in planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968, and failure to orbit oao-b Nov. 30, 1970, and Mariner 8 May 8, Subcommittee concluded that NASA’s decision not to attempt recovery program for unsuccessful Mariner 8 mission using proof-test model “seems justified” on grounds Mariner 9 (launched May 30) had been conceived as backup mission for Mariner 8 from beginning; to alter Atlas-Centaur for different project would have been “challenging;” and proof-test model could better be used as Mariner 9 backup, if necessary, or in 1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking projects. While NASA’s backup mission and recovery policies after failures “seem to have been sound in the past,” decision not to have OAO-B recovery program “appears ... to have been an unwise exception.” To forego oao-b goals “which have occupied the talents and efforts of many scientists and engineers for more than a decade in order to initiate new astronomical experiments [heao Project] in different portions of the magnetic spectrum strikes the Committee as a decision of questionable merit.” Committee recommended future use of prototype spacecraft that could be reengineered and launched as part of flight program to extract full value from expensive hardware. Manufacturing and quality control procedures in Centaur program could be improved. “It is quite clear that a great deal can and should be done short of ‘man-rating’ Centaur, which would significantly improve its reliability.” Centaur stage problems “seem serious enough to justify . . . broad scale, independent examination by disinterested experts” so that Centaur, “which figures so importantly in the space program of the next decade, can be utilized with renewed confidence.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns From Space Investment. Report updated and expanded study of tangible benefits and practical returns from space investment based on material from Government, industry, and press—including extensive NASA research in technology utilization at Committee’s request. Committee concluded that illustrations in report were “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, science, government, the medical profession and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (H Rpt 92-748)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
Development of lift-distribution system to alleviate stress problems in C—5A aircraft by spreading aerodynamic loads through wings rather than concentrating stress on small areas was announced by Lockheed-Georgia Co. Vice President Robert B. Ormsby. Modification could be installed during regular modification and inspection periods and would not affect aircraft’s handling. (AP, W Post, 12/12/71, A3)
Dr. Clarence L. Johnson, Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., received NAE’s sixth Founders Medal for designing advanced aircraft and for experimental and theoretical investigations in aerospace sciences. Dr. Johnson was best known for his work in designing Hudson bomber, Constellation and Superconstellation transports, P-38, T-33 trainer, F-90, JetStar, U-2, Warning Star, YF-12A, and SR-71. (nae Release, 7/13/71; nae Bridge, 7/71,1)
U.S. faced no dire threat from current “numbers or accuracy” of Soviet SS—9 missiles, but must extend its own antimissile system as “bargaining chip” with U.S.S.R. at salt, Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard said in testimony before House Committee on Foreign Relations’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. {NYT, 7/14/71, 7)
Appointment of John P. Donnelly, Vice President for Corporate Communications of Whittaker Corp., as nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs effective Aug. 15, was announced by nasa. He would be responsible for development and direction of public affairs activities, including public information, public services, and educational programs. Acting Public Affairs chief since resignation of Julian W. Scheer March 22 had been Alfred P. Alibrando, Director, Public Affairs Div. (nasa Release 71-137; nasa Ann, 2/23/71)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 3981, $3.271-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill authorized appropriations of $2,518 billion for r&d, $56.3 million for construction of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. (CR, 2/9/71, H588; NASA LAR X/ll)
Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force and later leading test pilot in U.S., died in New York at age 83. He had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)
D. J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of Space Div., told Ninth International Symposium on Space Technology and Science in Tokyo that U.S. did not have monopoly on earth resources programs. “All of us heed the ingenuity of the entire world on how to utilize this technology, so I encourage your expanding participation and cooperation.” (GE Reprint)
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress, including total science r&d budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for NASA new obligation^ authority (noa) of $3,271 billion (1.4% of total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 noa of $3,298 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3,152 billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,518 billion would go for r&d, $56.3 million for construction, of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million— reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19—would be partially offset by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbited systems and experiments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,286 billion, down $144.6 million from FY 1971. Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4 million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million), and space telescope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites, was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5 million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972, included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS. Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million, stol technology program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971. nerva rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to $9.9 million. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to $264 million. dod’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 2]. Budget also included $370 million for B-l intercontinental bomber, up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for lamps antisubmarine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air defense aircraft system (awacs), up from $87 million, $47 million for usaf AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman III program, up from $720 million in FY 1971. aec funding for nerva and space electric power would decrease from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million. Increase of $437 million in total dot FY 1972 budget of $7.8 billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit spending, dot funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY 1971 to $54 million. These funds also would he used for pollution reduction from Coast Guard installations, noa of $235 million was requested for sst prototype program, up from $210 million in FY 1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; bob Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; aiaa release 71—2; CR, 1/29/71, H265; ddr&e Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Washington, D.C., that cutback in funding for nerva development in nasa FY 1972 budget was gross error reflecting on management capability of NASA. Cutting program funding to $30 million would mean virtual halt in work on nerva. (AP, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 2/9/71)
President Nixon approved H.R. 7109, $3.384-billion NASA FY 1972 authorization bill that became P.L. 92-68. Total authorization was $84 million above budget request of $3,300 billion and $86 million above FY 1971 new obligational authority (noa) of $3,298 billion. Bill authorized for R&D $2,603 billion, increase of $85.5 million over budget request of $2,518 billion and decrease of $90 million from FY 1971 authorization of $2,693 billion; for construction of facilities, $58.4 million, up $2.1 million from budget request of $56.3 million and $24 million above FY 1971 authorization of $34.5 million; and for research and program management, $723 million, down $4 million from budget request of $727 million but $40 million above $683.3 million authorized in FY 1971. Bill included $29.3-million budget amendment to cover Federal pay increases. It added $30 million to budget request for Skylab and Space Shuttle programs, $43 million for nuclear power and propulsion, $2.5 million for earth resources survey, and $12.5 million for aeronautical research and technology. It reduced requested authorization for lunar and planetary exploration by $10 million. (PD, 8/9/71, 1136; NASA Budget Off; A&A 1970)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, submitted to Senate resolutions authorizing printing of Committee reports International Cooperation in Outer Space: A Symposium and Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70 as Senate documents. (CR, 5/13/71, S6844-5)
ComSatCorp announced election of John L. Martin, Jr., as Assistant Vice President for Domestic and Aeronautical Satellite Systems. (ComSat Corp Release 71-11)
Portrait of Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer, was unveiled by artist Peter Stevens and Mrs. Goddard and presented to Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif., Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, by National Space Club. Ceremonies were held in Committee’s main hearing room, where portrait would hang. (NSC News Letter, 11/23/71)
First flight model LRV was formally' delivered to NASA in ceremony at Boeing Co.’s Space Center at Kent, Wash. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msec Director, accepted first of three flight models from Boeing Co. Group Vice President for Aerospace 0. C. Boileau. Model would be shipped to arrive at ksc March 15 for final checks and installation aboard Apollo 15 lm. Delivery would be two weeks before April 1 contract delivery date, (nasa Release 71—38; Boeing Release 3/10/71)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had announced “voluntary” early retirement of Lockheed-California Div. President Charles S. Wagner, Senior Vice President Dudley E. Browne, and Corporate Vice President for Manufacturing W. A. Pulver, Wall Street Journal reported. Browne would remain a director and member of board’s executive and finance committees. (WSJ, 11/2/71, 16)
Mrs. Irene Bolam, named in book Amelia Earhart Lives as being missing aviatrix Amelia Earhart, filed $1.5-million libel suit against authors Joseph Klass and Joseph Gervais. Mrs. Bolam claimed book damaged her reputation by depicting her as bigamist, spy, and traitor. Book claimed Amelia Earhart had disappeared in 1937 while flying U.S. spy mission, was captured by Japanese, and might have been World War II Japanese propagandist Tokyo Rose, (upi, W Post, 9/1/71, D5)
House Committee on Armed Services’ subcommittee investigating Dec. 30, 1970,	crash of usn F—14 Tomcat fighter aircraft during test flight at Grumman facility in Calverton, N.Y., received communication from identified source containing 13 allegations of defects and deficiencies in F—14A design, manufacture, testing, and administrative controls. Rep. F. Edward Hebert (D-La.), as Chairman of investigation subcommittee, ordered full inquiry into charges. (Subcom Rpt, 12/20/71)
William M. Magruder, Director of sst Development for dot, told press in Washington, D.C., that Ataka and Co. of Japan had suggested it could obtain financing of $500 million or more from major Japanese industrial concerns to resurrect SST program. In return Ataka would become 50% partner in enterprise. On May 23, however, Ataru Takizawa, Vice President of Ataka and Co., said in Tokyo there was no truth to report that his firm made exploratory proposal to revive U.S. sst program. (Aug, W Star, 5/22/11% AP, W Post, 5/23/71)
Senate adopted S.R. 15, modifying Senate rules on total number of Senators assigned to certain standing committees. Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was set at 11 members. Senate also adopted S.R. 16, electing majority members of Senate Committees. Members elected to Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) ; Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.); Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.); and Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.). (CR, 1/28/71, S406)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, introduced S. 720, $3.271-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill, identical to House bill introduced Feb. 9 (CR, 2/10/71, S1193)
Willis H. Shapley, nasa Associate Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Foreign Affairs’ Subcommittee on Africa on operation of NASA tracking station in South Africa. Subcommittee was investigating U.S. business involvement in South Africa. NASA station was manned, staffed, and operated by South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (csir). “Committed as we have been to attaining the important national objectives entrusted to us, we have thought of our stations overseas essentially in terms of their efficiency in supporting our flight missions. We have monitored station operations mainly from the standpoint of technical effectiveness and sound financial management. While we have recognized that human factors can have a direct bearing on performance, we are limited in our ability to control these factors, particularly in societies where statutes and practices differ markedly from our own.” NASA wished “to do all we can to see that the NASA station in South Africa reflects to the greatest degree that local circumstances permit, the practices and ideals which govern employment at our domestic facilities.” (Testimony)
George H. Stoner, Senior Vice President of Boeing Co,, died in Seattle at age 53. Stoner had previously worked on pilotless aircraft and Saturn programs and was to have received NASA’s highest industry award for his role in development of Saturn V booster. (AP, NYT, 3/2/71, 39) During February: Opportunity for participating in post-Apollo program had resulted in deep division of opinion among European countries, Dr. Peter Stubbs reported in Technology Review. “. . . never has so much furore been generated on the basis of so little hard fact. But politics have taken over the scene to the almost entire exclusion of rational procedures.” France and West Germany had not forgiven U.K. for “welshing on them over the—by U.S. standards archaic!— Europa launcher.” There was fear that without independent launch vehicle for commercial satellites, Europe could not compete on fair terms with U.S. “Beneath the European tussle of threat and counterthreat . . . run deeper waters: France’s desire for her own telecommunications satellite system to propagandize former African colonies; West Germany’s urge to become a fully fledged space power; the British Government’s intense anxiety to enter the Common Market— even possibly, in part, by blackmailing its way in over the space program.” esro had built competency “which should not be allowed to go by the board simply because a bunch of politicians can’t decide to what proper purpose it should be put.” (Tech, Rev, 2/71, 14)
U.S. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of moon and planets, development of space meteorology, and space applications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three working groups representing NASA, and Soviet Academy of Sciences would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration. U.S. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and noaa’s Director of National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R. participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services, U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, (nasa Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-biIlion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During 1970 otda supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary, and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact, the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data, msfn was still supporting experiments left on moon by Apollo 12 and 14 missions. After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continuously monitoring 16 alsep experiments. Satellite network provided tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some 40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s scientific and applications satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign countries. dsn supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
Director Lee R. Scherer of jiasa’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office received Soviet lunar samples from Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in exchange for Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Participating in the ceremony at the Academy in Moscow were (left to right) Dr. Paid W. Cast, Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Division; Scherer; Prof. Vinogradov; interpreter Igor Pochitalin; and Soviet Academician Boris Petrov. services at Central Systems Engineering Office, and $10 million to Sperry Rand Corp. for services at Astrionics Laboratory. (NASA Release 71-102) June 10; U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged lunar samples in Moscow ceremony to mark expansion of cooperation in space. Lee R, Scherer, Director of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, presented three grains (0.10 oz) of Apollo 11 and three grams of Apollo 12 lunar material to Academician Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and received three grams of Soviet Luna 16 samples in return. Scherer said, “Although the quantity of material is small, its significance is very great.” U.S. Embassy in Moscow released statement saying exchange provided opportunity for scientists of both countries to benefit from study of material from lunar areas to which they would not otherwise have access. “The exchange of lunar samples exemplifies the desire of nasa, as stated in the agreement of January 21, to expand cooperation in space research and exploration. The U.S. Government looks forward to the broadening and deepening of this cooperation.” (nasa Release 71-103; Shabad, NYTS 6/11/71, 10)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C. He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing to serve as astronaut. Washington Post obituary said he had fought hard for programs to keep U.S. from “dropping out of the space race.” (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
Vice President Spiro T, Agnew told workers at Ksc after Apollo 14 launch that days of declining space budget were past and “we’re going forward together not just to the moon but I’m certain that the American program will continue and press forward into the reaches of interplanetary space.” (AP, W Star, 2/11/71, A7)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) introduced S. 1805, “to provide relocation assistance, training assistance, and interest supplements to adversely affected workers separated from their employment because of the termination of defense and space contracts.” (CR, 5/6/71, S6341)
House agreed to H.R. 461 electing Rep. Mendel J. Davis (D-S.C.) to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 6/3/71, H4628)
Louis H. Brennwald, former Vice President of Northrop Aircraft Corp. in charge of Puerto Rico operations, became Director of Administration for Ames Research Center, (arc Astrogram, 9/2/l\, 1; ARC pro)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Albert C. Hall, Vice President for Engineering and Research with Martin Marietta Corp., to be Assistant Secretary of Defense (Administration). Hall would succeed Robert F. Froehlke, who had become Secretary of the Armv July 1. (PD, 10/25/71, 1430, 1441; usa pio)
President Nixon presented National Medal of Science to nine scientists in White House ceremony. Recipients, announced Jan. 27, included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. {PD, 5/24/71, 784)
Boeing Co. Vice President for Industrial Relations Lowell P. Mickelwait said company would lay off about 7000 workers and disband sst program as result of Senate’s rejection of SST financing. Plans were in anticipation of notice of sst program termination from dot. Of workers to be laid off within seven weeks of notice, 4500 were force working directly on sst production. Others were clerical and office workers. Mickelwait said Seattle-area work force could drop to 26 500 or remain as high as 31 000 after sst program cancellation. Estimate of 29 000 workers was “reasonable.” (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71, Al)
NASA announced appointment of Harry W. Johnson, Vice President for Engineering in Gates Learjet Corp.’s Aircraft Div., as Director of oart’s Aeronautical Propulsion Div. (nasa Release 71-19)
John P. Donnelly, former Vice President for Corporate Communications for Whittaker Corp., became NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Appointment had been announced July 23. (NASA Activities, 8/15/71, 135)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972	HUD-space-science appropriations bill which contained $3,272 billion NASA appropriation. Committee recommended reduction in Apollo program funding from $612.2 million requested to $610.2 million; increase in Skylab funding from $535.4 million to $550.4 million to provide rescue capability; additional $5 million over estimate for stol development, to total $115 million; deferment of $20 million proposed for space shuttle facilities; and reduction of $6.6 million in $726.6 million requested for research and program management. (H Rpt 92-305)
Soviet progress in science and technology was discussed in Sovetskaya Rossiya article by M. D. Millionschikov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “In recent years there has been an immense improvement in the development of astronomy and astrophysics. Our science has made discoveries of fundamental significance and has shifted considerably the limits of phenomena in the universe known to man. Research into the nature of powerful sources of radiowaves discovered some years ago has led to the conclusion that the objects noted are located almost on the edge of the observable area of the universe at a distance of 5 billion light years. The power of radiation exceeds all currently known scales. In order to explain the colossal energy they radiate from the standpoint of the most powerful known mechanism for emitting energy—thermonuclear synthesis—it is necessary to suppose that its source must be simultaneous thermonuclear explosion of a mass equivalent to a hundred million stars the size of the sun.” (fbis-Sov-71-134, 6/30/71, LI)
Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill. NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational, nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had complied with NASA’s request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion that ... if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is possible.” (Proceedings)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill. Bill added $163 million to Administration’s requested $3,271 billion, including additional $45 million for Skylab and $25 million for space shuttle, $39.9 million for nerva engine, and $25 million for aeronautical research and technology. Bill provided $2,668 billion for r&d, increase of $150 million over requested $2,518 billion; $58.6 million for construction of facilities, up $2.3 million from $56.3-million request; and $706.9 million for research and program management, increase of $9.5 million over requested $697.4 million. (H Rpt 92—143)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Portrait of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, third nasa Administrator (1969-1970) was unveiled in nasa Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Paine; and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Portrait, by artist William Draper, would hang at NASA Hq. (Transcript)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences published Statements by Presidents of the United States on International Cooperation in Space—A Chronology: October 1957—August 1971 (Sen. Doc. 92-40). Statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon had been compiled by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian. In letter of transmittal to Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Committee Staff Director James J. Gehrig said statements revealed “unanimous agreement that space research and exploration should be an international undertaking.” (Text)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) resigned from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to take seat on House Ways and Means Committee. (Off of Rep Karth)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen received National Transportation Award of silver bowl from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Award was for Boeing’s construction of 747 jumbo jet aircraft. (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71)
NASA oart officials testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on FY 1972 NASA authorization. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said aeronautics was largest part of OART program for first time. In military aviation, “work is under way at the Centers in support of the F-14 for the Navy. . . . Over a dozen wind tunnels and simulators . . . are used in this support. We are helping the usaf with . . . the F—15, their new B—1 bomber and we plan to assist” with the A—X. One ARC facility was on indefinite loan to USA. “In all, we use over a third of our available facility time to support military needs. Research on transonic aerodynamics, the NASA supercritical airfoil, fly-by-wire flight controls, spin stabilization, and advanced structures using beryllium or composites are some of the areas where NASA is making research contributions to meet military requirements in the future.” In civil aviation effort, OART was providing DOT with assistance on sst. arc was assisting faa in certification studies of Concorde and sst. arc flight simulator for advanced aircraft was “proving to be the most useful facility available in the free world for studying airworthiness standards for supersonic transports.” NASA and DOT were completing joint study of “relationships between the benefits that accrue to the Nation from aviation and the level of R&D effort. The study displays the ways in which civil aviation can affect regional development, population distribution, [and] land use, and contribute to many other social and economic goals of the Nation.” Problems under study included aircraft noise, air pollution from aircraft engine emissions, and aeronautical operating problems “such as approach and landing safety, delays, congestion, and community noise caused by operation of aircraft.” oart Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. had established joint stol operating problems experiments program with dot and faa, and Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. “to study man’s role in advanced aeronautical systems ... as an operator, as a passenger, and as a member of the community exposed to air operations.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), described improvements in aircraft materials and structural design: “I have been particularly impressed with the progress of the composite materials. The potential of boron and carbon fibers imbedded in an epoxy resin matrix to provide high strength, low weight structures has been discussed with you for several years. This year the testing of special glass fibers has revealed the possibility that low cost, stiff composites may be fabricated with much greater strengths than previously thought possible. Composites are finding application both as a replacement for metallic components and by augmenting metal strengths using selective reinforcement. In the forthcoming year we propose to construct several airplane components of primary structure for installation and flight demonstration. We believe that these new materials will find widespread use in the industry when the technical risk has been demonstrated to be acceptable.” Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Systems Office, reported on progress of nerva program: “Through the systematic engineering design process . . . design concepts to be incorporated in nerva were formulated, requirements were specified, and a baseline engine design has been established. The design provides a thrust level of 75 000 lbs [ 334 000 newtons], and a specific impulse of 825 seconds. High reliability and safety in operation are provided through the use of redundancy in critical areas and conservative design approaches. The endurance goal for the reusable system is 10 hours, coupled with the ability to undergo 60 start-and-stop cycles, and the key fuel element technology continued to make good progress toward that goal.” (Transcript)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
President Nixon approved H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3.298-billion NASA FY 1972 appropriation and $619 million nsf appropriation. Bill became P.L. 92—78. NASA total included $2,523 billion for r&d, $52.7 million for construction of facilities, and $722.6 million for research and program management. Bill appropriated $39 million for NERVA program, $13 million for space shuttle main engine test facilities, and $5.5 million for space shuttle thermal-protection facilities. President also signed H.R. 9667, $2.9-billion dot FY 1972 appropriations bill that included $58.5 million to repay airlines for money they invested in sst but eliminated funding for sst program. Bill became P.L. 92-96. (PD, 8/16/71, 1157; NASA Budget Off; H Rpt 92-377)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 5529 “to authorize the coinage of 50-cent pieces to commemorate the Apollo 11 lunar landing and to establish the Apollo Lunar Landing Commemorative Trust Fund.” Measure was referred to House Committee on Banking and Currency. (CR, 3/3/71, H1254)
Bruce N. Torell was elected President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. at regular meeting of board of directors. Torell would succeed Bernard A. Schmickrath, who was elected a vice president. Changes would be effective July 1. (p&w Eagle, 7/71, 2)
Rep. Joel T. Broyhill (R-Va.) introduced H.R. 10065 “to redesignate the Washington National Airport as ‘Neil Armstrong Airport.’ ” Bill was referred to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (CR, 7/26/71, H7164)
President Nixon announced recipients of 1970 National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering. Recipients included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Dr. Mueller received award for “his many individual contributions to the design of the Apollo System, including the planning and interpretation of a large array of advanced experiments necessary to insure the success of this venture into a new and little known environment.” Other recipients were: Dr. Richard D. Brauer, professor of mathematics, Harvard Univ.; Dr. Robert H. Dicke, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; Barbara McClintock, Carnegie Institution of Washington geneticist; Dr. Albert B. Sabin, president of Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovoth, Israel; Dr. Allan R. Sandage, Cal Tech astronomer; John C. Slater, professor of physics and chemistry, Univ. of Florida; Dr. John A. Wheeler, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; and Dr. Saul Winstein, deceased, formerly professor of chemistry at ucla. (PD, 2/1/71,124)
NAE announced election of 29 U.S. engineers to NAE, bringing total membership to 356. New members included l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Commander of samso; Joseph F. Shea, Senior Vice President and General Manager of Raytheon Co. Equipment Div.; and Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nae Release)
House Committee on Appropriations by vote of 26 to 15 approved full $290 million requested by DOT for continued SST development. (CR, 3/15/71, D164; AP, NYT, 3/16/71, 62)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science in support of nasa FY 1972 budget request: “We have recently settled on a single set of performance characteristics for the preliminary design of the two-stage fully reusable [space] shuttle. Alternate approaches are also still under study. We expect to be in a position to make decisions this summer on how we will proceed with airframe design or development in FY 1972. The $100 million recommended in the FY 1972 budget will support, in addition to the engine development, either continued intensive design studies and related efforts or the initiation of airframe development.” Dr. Low noted “tremendous interest in exploration during Apollo 11, when an estimated 107 million people in the U.S. watched our first manned lunar landing mission; and we saw it again last month, when 104 million watched Apollo 14.” (Text)
