Need for national technology policy was urged in Science article by Dr. J. E. Goldman, Senior Vice President for Research and Development of Xerox Corp. As U.S. began to channel technical efforts toward programs of social significance, “we must remember one of the important lessons of our recent past; the history of the space program ... is a lesson in the mastery of the institutional technique necessary to bring together the segments of the intellectual, industrial, and technological community needed to fulfill goals in a timely fashion. If we choose to ignore this, if we set aside the space program’s experience as nothing more than a $20-billion waste, then by our irrationality we will endanger the ultimate achievement of such important societal objectives as better housing and the renewal of our inner cities.” (Science, 9/22/72, 1078-80) September 23:	Washington Post reported that U.S.—U.S.S.R. environmental protection committee established by May 23 treaty would permit placement by both nations of seismic devices on each other’s territories. Purpose would be to predict earthquakes but Post said devices also could detect underground nuclear tests and distinguish them from earthquakes. If used for test detection, “devices could close the last possible gap in an extremely controversial field.” U.S. had maintained that underground tests could not be banned because of inability to monitor adherence to ban by both sides. Post said cursory check of Dept, of Defense and Arms Control and Disarmament Agency sources had yielded “no one who knew that the pact contained this provision.” (Berger, W Post, 9/23/72) September 25:	NASA was instrumenting areas in five national parks to monitor any adverse effects of sonic boom generated by test flights of two YF—12 aircraft being operated by NASA, (frc, Flight Operations; Av Wh, 9/25/72, 11)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
v/a Charles E. Weakley (usn, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 66. He had retired in 1967 as commander of Atlantic Fleet’s antisubmarine warfare force and had held NASA post since 1968. Adm. Weakley had received Legion of Merit and Bronze Star. During World War II he had devised random-screen method of protecting merchant convoys in experiment with early sonar. (W Star & News, 12/26/72, A6)
First fighter squadrons of Navy F-14 jet fighters would be formed “sometime this fall,” Grumman Corp. Vice President Michael Pelehach said at meeting of Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Woodbury, N.Y. Eleven test F-14 prototypes had logged 400 flights and nearly 1000 hrs. (NYT, 6/7/72, 11)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, $50 million above NASA budget request of $3,379 billion. Bill, reported to House April 11, allocated $2,651 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $700.8 million for research and program management. NASA budget request of $163.4 million for aeronautical research and technology was increased $48.5 million to $211.9 million. In House report, Committee scored previous cut in funding for aeronautics and recommended increase to support 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation by expediting solution of “major problems in aviation today: noise pollution and safety.” Bill allocated $41 million of the increase (for $50-million total) toward R&D to retrofit civil aviation fleet with noise reduction modifications and $7.5-million increase (for $24.7-million total) for aviation safety. Of safety funds, $3.8 million was for technology to modify civil aircraft to use Federal Aviation Administration’s new microwave landing system by 1978, $700 000 for turbulence research, and $3 million for research on aircraft collision avoidance. Bill increased NASA budget request for technology utilization from $4 million to $5.5 million. Of increase, $1.2 million was to be spent in applying NASA technology to problems in urban structures, fire safety, transportation systems, and energy conversion and $300 000 for applications engineering products and patent licensing. Committee deleted $4 million from $59.6-million NASA request for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and restored $4 million deleted by Office of Management and Budget for Earth Observation Satellite (eos), follow-on development to Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts). Committee said it was expressing concern that NASA placed “higher priority upon certain expensive scientific projects . . . than it does upon space applications project which Congress considers most important.” Committee considered level of funding for space applications “inadequate” and urged “a substantial increase in the budget for fiscal year 1974.” (H Rpt 92-926; Com Off)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at closing session of term, elected to defer action on S.R. 193, bill passed by Senate July 21 to return Cape Kennedy to original name of Cape Canaveral, and on similar House bill originated by Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-FIa.), in 1971. (O Sen, 10/1/72)
Science commented on June 6 defeat of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) as candidate for reelection to Congress: Since 1961, when Miller became Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Apollo program has reached fruition and starts have been made on Skylab and the shuttle. Miller was NASA’s foremost advocate in the House and took pride in announcing every latest achievement of the space program.” Miller’s committee had been “influential in having NASA expand its investment in . . . scientific satellites.” Science cited Miller’s age, 81, as “decisive factor” in his loss of election. (Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former nasa Administrator, delivered 1972 Tizard Memorial Lecture at Westminster School in London. Discussing man’s future in space, Dr. Paine evaluated role of applications satellites: Their “great economic and social value” was apparent “although their full potential is not yet appreciated. Men on every continent regularly use these services today; shares can be bought in the enterprises that provide them. We must not, however, overlook the equal value of the new information about the earth’s origin, history, environment, and destiny that our more basic lunar and planetary scientific programs are providing. Already studies of radiative energy transport in the atmosphere of Mars have contributed to terrestrial meteorology; lunar geological surveys have provided new clues to the early formation and structure of earth. The line between science and application in this rapidly advancing area is continually shifting and new scientific understanding of such questions as the origin of the Ice Ages might be of incalculable human importance.” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on decrease in research and program management (r&pm) budget in House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on FY 1973 NASA authorization: Requested $700.8 million was decrease of $26.5 million from FY 1972. Ceiling of 26 850 was proposed for Civil Service component of nasa in-house work force, 1500 lower than original 1972 ceiling—bringing total reduction since 1968 peak to 8300 positions, or 25%. NASA had planned to achieve 1973 ceiling by normal attrition, but rate of attrition was running 22% lower than required and Center directors had been instructed to use reduction-in-force procedures as necessary to reach ceilings. Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz testified that under FY 1973 authorization bill all NASA facility projects would be presented for approval and funding under full disclosure concept. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), Director of Facilities in Office of Administration, entered prepared statement detailing $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities and explained $8 million request for facility planning and design within that total. First $3.5 million was for “regular recurrent” requirements and $4.5 million for “special” requirements. Of the $4.5, $3.75 million was for space shuttle facilities, including preliminary engineering reports for larger 1974 and 1975 programs. Second portion was for large aeronautical facility —$750 000 for design of full-scale subsonic wind tunnel that would ultimately cost $150 million to $200 million if approved, with total design cost of $7 million to $10 million. Requested FY 1973 funds would complete design on drive section of tunnel. Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology George W. Cherry described FY 1973 disbursements for aeronautics: Important part dealt with reduction of jet aircraft noise, with $28.5 million requested for research and technology to continue this work. Roughly one half was for research and technology attacking noise generation and noise propagation; $12.4 million'was for programs for near-term relief from jet aircraft noise. Of the $12.4 million, $9 million was requested for engine-modification development program and $3.4 million for development of operational procedures for noise abatement. Cherry presented audiovisual demonstration of effectiveness of engine modifications and operational procedures. (Transcript)
m/g Don R. Ostrander (usaf, Ret.), former NASA Director of Launch Vehicles, died at Andrews Air Force Base hospital, Md., of cancer at age 58. He had retired from Air Force as Vice-Commander of Ballistics System Division in 1965 and became Vice President for Planning, Bell Aero Systems Corp., until 1971. Gen. Ostrander had been appointed to NASA position in 1959. (W Post, 10/28/72, B10; Rosholt, Administrative History of NASA) October 26—27:	California newspapers reported reaction at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to news of renaming facility for retiring California Congressman H. Allen Smith (D-Calif.) [see Oct. 3 and Oct. 21]. News had come as surprise to officials, who had refused to comment. JPL engineer Charles D. Hepburn had said that several engineers deplored renaming of facility for political office holder when there were many great local scientists who had contributed to space program. Hepburn had said it was “insult to technology .... Our work has to do with the physical universe, not with the meanderings of a political career.” (LA Times, 10/26/72; Pasadena Star-News, 10/27/72) October 27: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 13 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information needed for the operative weather forecast service.” Orbital parameters: 891-km (553.6-mi) apogee, 866-km (538.1-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; fbis-Sov, 10/30/72, LI; SBD, 10/30/72, 266)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
Aviation pioneers to be enshrined in Aviation Hall of Fame at Dayton, Ohio, Dec. 15 were listed by Aviation Week & Space Technology: l/g Claire L. Chennault of World War II Flying Tigers; Leroy,R. Grumman, aircraft designer and manufacturer; James H. Kindelberger, aircraft executive; and Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev died in Moscow at age 84. During 50-yr career Tupolev and associates had pioneered design of 120 different aircraft from 35-hp ANT-1 in 1920s to Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport scheduled for service in 1975. He had been regarded as originator of all-metal aircraft, which he first designed in early 1920s. In 1934 he had built huge eight-engine aircraft with 63-m (207-ft) wingspan. Aircraft, named Maxim Gorky after Russian author, actually flew, but was demolished in 1935 crash. Tupolev, one of most decorated Soviet citizens, had won three Stalin Prizes and one Lenin Prize and was three-time Hero of Socialist Labor—highest Soviet civilian honor. He had been imprisoned in 1936 for allegedly divulging Soviet aviation secrets to Germany. During three years of forced labor he designed Tu-2 dive bomber which was flown by U.S.S.R. in World War II. Among postwar airliners designed by Tupolev design bureau were Tu-134 medium-range, 80-passenger transport and Tu-154, three-engine, 150-passenger transport scheduled to replace Tu-104 on Soviet domestic routes. (NYT, 12/24/72, 42) December 24:	NASA released Apollo 17 photos including one of best full-disc photos of earth taken from space. Photo, taken Dec. 7 as Apollo 17 spacecraft headed toward moon, showed earth from North Africa and Arabia to Antarctic polar icecap. (Photo 12-H-1578; NASA pio)
House Committee on Public Works favorably reported H.R. 16645, bill to amend Public Buildings Act of 1959 to provide for construction of Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Bicentennial Civic Center in District of Columbia. Committee in Report recommended honoring certain members of Congress by naming public works buildings for them, including renaming Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., “H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory.” New name would honor Rep. H. Allen Smith (R-Calif.), who would be retiring after 16 yrs in House. Laboratory was operated by Cal Tech for NASA. (H Rpt 92-1410)
H.R. 12824, $3.379-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, was introduced by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/1/72, H556)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight held hearing on policies and procedures governing disposal of real property under NASA Administrator’s control. Purpose was to determine whether legislation should be enacted to require formal reports to Congress on real estate disposed. General Services Administration surveys had determined that certain lands at Wallops Station, Langley Research Center, and Lewis Research Center were excess to NASA needs. Congress had not previously been apprised of plans for property’s disposal by gsa. Subcommittee heard testimony of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz. GSA was surveying LeRc’s Plum Brook Station, Wallops Station, LaRC, and Marshall Space Flight Center. Final decisions had not been made. (Transcript)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Officials of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast) testified during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology’s final hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. William H. Woodward, Director of Space Propulsion and Power, cited importance of isotope power systems to NASA planetary program: “The ability of nuclear electric power systems to operate for long periods . . . without consideration to distance from the sun is the primary feature which makes nuclear systems mandatory for outer planet missions. This self-contained energy input characteristic also provides a relative insensitivity to the operating environments encountered and this capability may be important on many missions, e.g., lander missions on planetary surfaces or missions which encounter high natural radiation fields.” Power requirements of most missions could be satisfied with low-level isotope power systems using radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). “Currently, rtg’s are scheduled for flight on the Pioneer Jupiter Flyby and the Mars Viking Lander missions and in addition, are planned for use in future outer planet programs.” Associate Administrator for oast Roy P. Jackson testified that solar energy could prove important energy resource. National Science Foundation’s rann (Research Applicable to National Needs) program had budgeted $4 million for solar energy investigations in FY 1973. Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Interior, and NASA were conducting inhouse studies. Solar Energy Subcommittee had been established by Federal Council on Science and Technology Committee on Energy Research and Development Goals to assess benefits to recommend r&d funds and programs. Subcommittee was first time solar energy had been considered at this level of national planning. NASA was evaluating concept for generating electric power from solar cells in space and transmitting power to earth via microwave beam, which would deliver more concentrated solar energy than naturally received on earth’s surface. Collecting in space also could be continuous, rather than having to stop at night or in cloudy weather. Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, described oast manpower problems and methods to alleviate them. Though oast manpower applied to aeronautics had increased 90% since 1966, manpower for all other efforts had decreased by 56%. Growth in aeronautics could not be provided continuously by transferring personnel from space projects. “In the short term we will continue to meet the increased need for aeronautics manpower by retraining and reassignment of personnel at the Research Centers. For the Ions: term we have initiated a program to encourage the training of students interested in aeronautical sciences. ... we are continuing the cooperative NASA/university graduate research and study program begun in FY 1971 where faculty and students are working with the Research Centers.” R.	D. Ginter, Director of Technology Applications, testified on NASA and National Science Foundation cooperation in applications: nsf’s rann program contained “two broad areas of mutual interest: Advanced Technology Applications and Environmental Systems Resources. One of our senior people has been assigned to focus this effort, coordinate task selection, and provide program management. During the next year we intend to expand our problem definition activity and prepare specific proposals for NSF consideration.” (Transcript)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight met for briefing by NASA on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. Officials—Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Arnold Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; and Glynn S:'Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager—presented chronology of major events leading to mission, preliminary mission description, description of hardware elements, and data on management of engineering phase and of real-time operation. (Transcript)
Atomic Energy Commission named its Los Alamos, N. Mex., Meson Physics Facility for Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), member of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, and celebrated “Clinton P. Anderson Day” with ceremonies in Los Alamos. History of space and nuclear rocket programs was recounted by AEC Commissioner James T. Ramey in welcoming speech: “Senator Anderson with some help from the Chairman of the aec almost had the Joint Committee and AEC responsible for the emerging space program after Sputnik.” Joint Committee “held one of the first series of hearings on the development of rocket technology for outer space. These hearings represented one of the times . . . that Senator Anderson . . . and Admiral [Lewis L.] Strauss of the aec were in entire public agreement on a project. Senator Anderson was thinking of putting space under the Joint Committee and Admiral Strauss was interested in the space development program being under aec. Their mutual interest was short-lived, however, since the then Senate Majority Leader Lyndon [B.] Johnson apparently had different ideas on this subject!” (aec Release P—95; Text) April 9:	Americans were wondering why U.S. spent “$40 billion” to land on moon rather than on programs for social action, Jeffrey St. John commented in Los Angeles Times article. “The fact remains, however, that long before the landing of Apollo 11 public funds for social problems on earth had risen far beyond the annual space budgets. In 1972, the federal government has earmarked $100 billion for social action programs, as opposed to $3.2 billion for space. The ratio of expenditures for space and social action programs during the 15 years of the space effort has been roughly 11 to 1 in favor of social action.” Lunar landing had been “triumph of 400,000 scientists, engineers, and technologists and the sophisticated expertise of 20,000 private companies, large and small.” Apollo had been “clear-cut example of a successful government venture” but on earth Government had “made a mess of the social landscape.” Compounding irrationality was refusal of liberals to understand why “space program succeeded, largely as a private endeavor coordinated by government, and why social problems grow worse under government’s guidance.” To accomplish lunar mission, space program participants had needed two crucial elements: “intellectual freedom” to analyze a problem correctly and “strict observance of natural laws.” In social problemsolving, intellectual freedom was abandoned for political expediency that played one pressure group against another and “there is a continual violation of certain immutable natural laws. Namely, the refusal of the social planners to believe the slums and poverty can be the products of an absence of individual initiative and enterprise.” (LA Times, 4/9/72)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Personal telephone call from Mrs. Rose P. Kennedy, mother of late President John F. Kennedy, to Rep. Thomas P. O’Neill, Jr. (D-Mass.), had helped kill bill to change name of Cape Kennedy back to Cape Canaveral, Miami Herald reported. Paper said Rep. O’Neill had asked Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, to block bill. O’Neill aide had admitted congressman had asked Miller to block bill, but had denied that O’Neill had acted on Mrs. Kennedy’s behalf. (M Her, 10/4/72)
Retirement ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., honored l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command. Gen. O’Neill, who was succeeded by l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, received Oak Leaf Cluster to Air Force Distinguished Service Medal from AFSC Commander, Gen. George S. Brown, (afsc Newsreview, 10/72, 4) During August: House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space published U.S.—U.S.S.R. Cooperative Agreements. Report of June hearings to explore scope of scientific and technical agreements signed during May 22-30 summit meeting in Moscow included texts of agreements and comments of experts. Dr. Philip Handler, National Academy of Sciences President, had said of space cooperation agreement: “The symbolism of the proposed link-up in space may prove to be the most significant aspect of the venture.” Agreement was “symbolic of a mutual awareness that the planet earth is a small and fragile spaceship, that all men are its fellow passengers, and that the fate of the people of all nations is essentially a common fate.” Subcommittee had concluded: “While a gradual amelioration of fundamental political conflicts and disagreements is the most that can be reasonably hoped for, the genuine cooperative spirit that has made these agreements possible opens the door to more effective communication and deeper understanding between the world’s two predominant powers that could have the most profound effect on the future of mankind.” (Committee Print)
Sir James M. Lighthill, Research Professor of Royal Society of London, was presented in Moscow with two capsules containing lunar rock samples brought from moon by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (launched Sept. 12, 1970). In making presentation Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy of Sciences expressed hope that gift would “facilitate a further development of contacts between Soviet and British scientists.” (SF, 12/72, 459)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
NASA anounced retirement of Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective July 1 when he would become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries. Dr. von Braun had joined NASA in 1960 when Army Ballistic Missile Agency development team which he headed was transferred to NASA and formed nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Born in Germany, Dr. von Braun became director of German army portion of Peenemuende Rocket Center. Near end of World War II he led group of scientists to West, surrendering to allies. In 1945 he went to U.S. under contract to U.S. Army to direct high-altitude firings of V—2 long-range ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range. As Director of Development Operations Div. of abma, Dr. von Braun led development of Pershing Army missile and Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile, whose nosecone reentry test vehicle Jupiter-C was used to launch first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (Jan. 31, 1958). Dr. von Braun was msfc Director from July 1960 to February 1970, when he assumed his current position. He had received numerous awards and honors, including Dept, of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, British Interplanetary Society Gold Medal, Herman Oberth Award, NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership, Galabert International Astronautical Prize, NASA Distinguished Service Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Man of the Year Award, and Associated Press Man of the Year in Science Award. Dr. von Braun said he would leave NASA “with a deep feeling of gratitude for the wonderful and unique opportunities the agency has given me during the last 12 years . . . [and] with the knowledge that NASA has enough well thought out plans to keep it moving ahead for many years to come.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said Dr. von Braun’s retirement was “a source of regret to all of us. ... For more than a quarter of a century, he has served the United States as a leader in space rocket development. His efforts first put the United States in space” with Explorer 1 and as director of msfc “he directed the development of the world’s most powerful rocket, the Saturn V. All of us at NASA will miss the daily stimulation of his presence, but we are confident that we will continue to have the benefit of his inspiration and counsel in the continuing exploration and use of space.” (nasa Release 72—113; NASA biographical data)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Space Shuttle-—Skylab: Manned Space Flight in the 1970’s, status report prepared by Committee staff at request of Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague, from information from NASA space flight Centers and key industrial contractors. Conclusions on Skylab program were that program was within projected costs; bulk of equipment and systems were meeting design requirements in performance and reliability; and, despite some problems in procuring and integrating experiments, schedules were being met and no flight delays or significant cost increases were anticipated. Serious consideration was recommended for several options: possibility of flying backup Skylab B in 1974-1976 period; possible revisits to Skylab A after first three flights; and use of remaining Saturn IB launch vehicles in earth resources and applications flights after Skylab A program, during 1974-1978 period. Conclusions on space shuttle program were: Sufficient technology existed to undertake development of fully reusable, low-operation-cost, earth-orbital shuttle. Number of design possibilities had been studied, covering range of development costs. Regardless of design chosen, as development costs were reduced, system recurring operating costs increased. In addition to reducing cost of near-space operations by order of magnitude, shuttle offered many opportunities for increased flexibility of earth resource surveys and management, space manufacturing, and short-term rapid-response laboratory facilities. And shuttle could also be used to improve national security position. (Text)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Effect of 1972 elections on congressional committees dealing with science and environment was discussed in Science article. Chairmen of both House and Senate space committees had been replaced. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, was retiring at age 77 after 31-year career in Congress. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had been defeated in Democratic primary and would leave Congress at age 81 after serving in House since 1945. Rep. Earle Cabell (D-Tex.), member of Science and Astronautics Committee, was defeated in the general election. He was to have been one of six House members of congressional board to oversee new Office of Technology Assessment. Board also lost prospective member with defeat of Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). (Walsh, Science, 11/17/72, 25-6) November 18:	NASA and Boston Univ. Dept, of Astronomy sponsored symposium “Life Beyond Earth and the Human Mind” at Boston Univ. Panel Chairman Richard Berendzen, Boston Univ. astronomer, had said symposium was being held because recent findings in astronomy, biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics had indicated high probability of existence of extraterrestrial life. Many scientists believed that “within the next few decades some form of communication will be achieved with intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe.” Panelists were anthropologist Dr. Ashley Montagu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology physicist Dr. Philip Morrison, Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Dean Krister Stendahl of Harvard Divinity School, and Dr. George Wald of Harvard Univ., winner of 1967 Nobel Prize for medicine and researcher in biochemical evolution. Dr. Sagan said human technology had reached stage where man could detect another civilization as advanced as his. “Most optimistic estimate of civilizations in our galaxy is one million, which means one per many hundred thousand stars.” Searching stars one by one could take hundreds of years. Dr. Montagu said that “some other forms of life are probably more intelligent than we, which can explain why they haven’t contacted us.” Dean Stendahl said discovery of life elsewhere would teach mem that God’s domain is larger and would give man better idea of his place in it. Contacting other beings might help man to stop viewing God in his own image. Dr. Wald said he was convinced that life existed elsewhere in galaxy but he doubted man would ever contact it. Dr. Morrison predicted man would receive and verify message from another civilization. Message would be technical, scientifically coded communication received over many months or years. NASA filmed symposium to produce educational film. (NASA Release 72-213; Leary, W Post, 11/24/72, CIO)
Boeing Co. Board made executive changes: President T. A. Wilson was elected Board Chairman, succeeding William A. Allen, whose retirement would become effective Sept. 30. Senior Vice President Malcolm T.	Stamper was elected President and member of Board. Wilson would retain responsibilities of Chief Executive. Charles M. Pigott was elected to Board. (WSJ, 10/3/72, 13)
Cutbacks in NASA budget would necessitate dismissal of some 40 civil service employees at Kennedy Space Center during March, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, announced. Cutback was part of NASA-wide work force reduction. Similar reduction might be required in 1973. {Today, 3/2/72)
Dr. Harlow Shapley, one of world’s leading astronomers, died in Boulder, Colo., at age 86 after long illness. He had been director of Harvard College Observatory from 1921 to 1952 and astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory, Calif., from 1914 to 1921. At Mount Wilson Dr. Shapley had used variable stars and globular star clusters to fix position of solar system at some 30 000 light years from center of Milky Way galaxy. Previously earth and sun had been supposed near center of Milky Way galaxy. Finding had had immense scientific value and import for religious thought and philosophy. After World War II, Dr. Shapley shifted attention from scientific pursuits to public affairs. He had condemned cold war of 1940s and championed peaceful coexistence among nations of world. His advocacy of U.S.-U.S.S.R. friendship had led to his censure by House Un-American Activities Committee. Before retirement in 1952, Dr. Shapley had received 18 honorary degrees, many awards—including Pope Pius XI Prize in 1941—and had published more than 500 writings. (Weil, W Post, 10/21/72, B6; NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics released For the Benefit of All Mankind: The Practical Returns from Space Investment. Updated report of spinoff dividends from space exploration covered application of space technology to communications, weather forecasting, business and industry, management, agriculture, environment, aeronautics, education, medicine, home and marketplace, and municipal and urban affairs and in foreign countries. Committee concluded that dividends were “fallout of ingenious application of space flight experience.” Dividends already paid, “coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on our space investment for the benefit of mankind.” (H Rpt 92-1452)
Lewis Research Center scientists Dr. John V. Dugan, Jr., and Dr. Herman Mark told meeting of Northeast Ohio Congressional Council in Cleveland that space scientists and engineers dismissed because of aerospace recession should be hired for expanded programs to solve environmental and other societal problems. The LeRC scientists were invited by Rep. John F. Seiberling, Jr. (D-Ohio), to testify before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (McCann, Cl PD, 9/23/72)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, discussed spinoff of nasa biomedical research in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Ames Research Center (arc) was evaluating changes in lung tissue of coal miners in collaboration with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare to pinpoint possible damage to astronauts’ lungs from particulate contaminants in atmosphere. Study results suggested “cell destruction can be induced by release of intracellular digestive enzymes into the cell cytoplasm following penetration of the cells by particles, in the case of coal miners, silicates.” Joint NASA and TJ.S. Bureau of Mines program would develop carbon monoxide detecting system, arc and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture would develop hydroponic system for spacecraft to accelerate plant growth under space flight conditions. “The medical information needed to assure man’s safe journey into and return from space has led to the development of many items of information and equipment of great value to terrestrial medicine.” NASA life sciences program “exemplifies the success which can be achieved by combining the special talents of Government, industry, and university scientists.” Dr. Berry also reported there had been “no findings in the manned space flights to date by the United States or U.S.S.R. that would preclude the commitment of man to longer duration missions. Therefore ... we feel confident in committing man to a 28-day mission.” Apollo 16 and 17 and Skylab experiments would study physiological response of body before commitment to 56-day Skylab mission. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Advanced Missions in omsf, testified on space shuttle orbital systems and advanced missions definition and planning: In areas of payloads, research and applications modules (ram), advanced missions, and advanced development, “principal effort is directed toward developing . . . understanding and planning the use of the shuttle.” In RAM program, “we will be continuing the study of concepts of a family of payload carrier modules suitable for transport in the Shuttle Orbiter cargo bay.” Modules would range from “austere shuttle ‘Sortie Can’ with relatively simple laboratory equipment . . . through more sophisticated, dedicated laboratory and observation facilities, including automated free-flyers serviced by the Shuttle.” Sortie mission using orbiter as platform for short-duration experiments was among most promising shuttle operating modes. Mission would use advantages of shuttle in payload design, development, and operation, and, “for the first time, permit the investigator to accompany his experiment into space.” Sortie missions would be modeled after arc Airborne Research Program in which Convair 990 aircraft was used as airborne laboratory. “The goal in developing procedures for managing the Space Shuttle Sortie Missions will be to retain the relatively simple, flexible and highly responsive aspects of the ‘990’ program.” (Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews briefed House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Applications Technology Satellites F and G and Synchronous Meteorological Satellite. Projects had been reported to be experiencing technical and cost problems. NASA review had found in ATS project “considerable progress has been made in . . . completion of . . . thermal structural model. Other elements, such as the integrated communications transponder, were not keeping pace . . . significant imbalance had developed in the total project. It has been necessary then to reschedule and reestablish the proper phasing between project elements.” Manpower and expenditure rates had been reduced, management changes had been made, and reporting arrangements had been strengthened. Reduced project content would provide for protoflight ATS-F and required integration and testing. “These actions are expected to be completed this summer. Our appraisal ... is that the ATS—f launch will occur in the early spring of 1974 with ATS—G to follow in a year to eighteen months.” Costs were expected to remain within FY 1973 estimate of $180 million to $215 million exclusive of $48.4-million vehicle costs. Review of SMS had confirmed need for correction in funding and scheduling because of introduction of advanced design features not adequately assessed in program definition. “Primary emphasis is now being placed on completing engineering model verification tests during . . . this year to insure an orderly initiation of the production phase in early FY 1973.” NASA had established and was monitoring milestone schedules, had strengthened contractor’s project management organization—including change in project manager and transfer of key NASA personnel to organization—and had improved flow of information between NASA and contractor to improve project visibility. Parts procurement was proceeding satisfactorily after “special remedial attention.” SMS development schedule would be 33 mos, placing launch of SMS—A in early fall of 1973. Second spacecraft, sms-b, was scheduled to be launched five months later. SMS—B total runout cost was estimated at maximum $50 million exclusive of $8.4-million vehicle cost, reflecting FY 1973 reprogramming requirement of $4.5 million. “I believe that this project is now proceeding on a sound basis and will prove to be a very significant addition to NOAA’s [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s] weather satellite system.” (Testimony)
S.S. Stcctendam of Holland-American Line sailed from New York with about 100 passengers for cruise advertised as “Voyage Beyond Apollo.” Itinerary included Cape Kennedy for close-up view of Apollo 17 launch, scheduled for Dec. 6. Passengers included novelists Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter, science writer Isaac Asimov, and Northeastern Univ. physicist Dr. Robert D. Enzmann. Dr. Wernher von Braun—Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, who had been advertised as participants in space seminars aboard ship, did not appear. (Buckley, NYT, 12/12/72, 43)
Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, during hearings hy House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology on FY 1973 NASA authorization, testified that recently developed NASA technology could have increased supersonic transport’s investment return rate. Calculations had been made showing that “incorporation of now emerging technology for static stability augmentation and active flutter control could have allowed a weight savings, and thus a payload increase, of better than 16,000 pounds, or an additional return on investment of about 7.5 NASA research and technology in aerodynamics, configurations, materials, structures, propulsion, and avionics applicable to advanced long-haul transport aircraft design showed “real promise.” Application of automated active control concepts “could result in considerable weight savings by eliminating the need for inherent aerodynamic stability and thereby reducing the size of control surfaces. It could also result in reduced structural fatigue for longer life, lower structural loads for lighter structures, and ride quality control and active damping of aircraft flutter for a more comfortable ride.” (Transcript)
NASA applications program was reviewed by Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Objectives of program were “to establish useful applications of space and space know-how through the development of user relationships, through the development of requisite technology, and through the conduct of appropriate ground, airborne and space flight investigations.” Space was “a magnificent vantage point to survey the surface of the earth and to expedite and enhance the flow of information around the globe.” Core of program was new applications of earth observations and communications, but “other areas associated with the unique environment of space, particularly weightlessness, show promises which must be explored, developed and exploited.” Space manufacturing processes offered good example. “Space applications, however, should not be envisioned just as activities that lead to satellites or laboratories in space, for . . . applications relate to contributions to men and women who . . . reside right here on the ground. Know-how provided by experience with the development of space systems can be applied to . . . areas involving housing, transportation, health care and many others.” NASA participation in Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would increase significantly in FY 1973 as transition occurred from planning to carrying out Tropical Experiment and Data Systems Test, both planned for CY 1974. Planning would be accelerated for Global Experiment during 1976-1977. garp was being conducted by World Meteorological Organization and International Council of Scientific Unions to increase understanding of circulation of atmosphere and provide mathematical and physical basis for long-range weather prediction, determination of feasibility of large-scale climatic modification, and assessment of consequences of man’s pollution of atmosphere. (Transcript)
Dr. Karl Klager, Vice President and Director of Science for Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., was named winner of 1972 James H. Wyld Propulsion Award by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for his development of hybrid and solid propellants. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 11; aiaa pio)
Prediction that deep-space probes would be launched by combination rockets propelled by chemical, nuclear, and electric engines by 1980 had been made by Soviet aerospace designer Valentin P. Glushko in interview by Moskovsky Komsomolets, New York Times reported. Rockets would be launched with liquid or solid chemical fuel. Nuclear engine would take over when spacecraft penetrated earth’s atmosphere. Times also reported that color film “The Taming of the Fire” had been released in Moscow. Film, based on life of Sergey P. Korolev, head of Soviet space program until his death in 1966, raised philosophical questions of use of scientific advances for military purposes. Film showed Soviet dictator Josef Stalin at end of World War II calling for Soviet development of military rockets to counter weapons he expected Dr. Wernher von Braun to develop in U.S. Dr. von Braun, while not actually portrayed in film, was “frequently mentioned by name.” (Shabad, NYT, 10/16/72, C17)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin were received by Vice President Boris Bakrac of the Assembly of Croatia and met with President of Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts, Dr. Grga Novak, during two-day visit to Zagreb, Yugoslavia. Astronauts were touring Europe to discuss Apollo 15 mission with scientists. (FBis-Yugoslavia, 2/4/72, 112)
U.S.S.R. successfully flight-tested new intercontinental missile over 6300km (3900-mi) distance between Tyuratam in central U.S.S.R. to Kamchatka Peninsula. U.S. intelligence experts later said flight was first successful test of improved missile about as large as Soviet SS-9. (Hoffman, AP, W Star & News, 1/7/73, A5) December 31:	Use of solar energy to combat encroaching energy crisis was being examined seriously, Oliver Bell reported in Washington Post article. Solar energy panel had been established in Office of Science and Technology’s Energy Research and Development Goals Study and NASA was “actively researching whether it can become involved in the solar energy picture.” Solar satellite power station concept developed by Peter E. Glaser of Arthur D. Little, Inc., was being considered. Satellite would circle earth in synchronous orbit at 35 900-■ km (22 300-mi) altitude exposed to sun 24 hrs a day. Solar collector— lightweight panel of solar cells—would convert sun’s light into electricity, which would then he changed to microwave energy, beamed to earth, collected on antenna, and reconverted into electricity. Other proposals included earth-based system to reflect sun’s radiation onto solar furnace and boiler atop 460-m (1500-ft) tower, and system to use steel collecting surfaces with “greenhouse” effect to produce temperatures to 813 K (1004°F). Congress would decide whether Government would fund research into unconventional sources of power. (W Post, 12/31/72) During December: House Committee on Science and Astronautics released Solar Energy Research: A Multidisciplinary Approach, responses of Federal agencies to requests for information on solar energy research. NASA and National Science Foundation—agencies primarily responsible for Government’s solar energy efforts—had recommended Federal program of research and development to apply solar energy to U.S. heat and power needs. NASA had recommended development of economical systems for heating and cooling buildings; economical methods for producing and converting organic materials to liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels; and economical methods for generating electricity. If programs were successful, NASA had said, building heating could reach public use in 5 yrs and building cooling in 6 to 10 yrs, synthetic fuels could be produced from organic materials in 5 to 8 yrs, and electricity could be generated from solar energy in 10 to 15 yrs. There were no significant environmental disadvantages to wide use of solar energy. (Text)
Willis H. Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, described functions of NASA advisory committees in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Government. Subcommittee was conducting hearings on public access to information under Freedom of Information Act, which required public accessibility to advisory committees [see June 5]. NASA Historical Advisory Committee, established in 1964, advised and assisted NASA management in implementing NASA historical program. Committee met annually to review program and its relation to academic and public activities. Research and Technology Advisory Council and Related Committees (rtac), established in 1967, provided consultation and advice on advanced research and technology goals in aeronautics and space and reviewed work in progress. NASA Space Program Advisory Council and Related Committees (spac), established in 1971, provided comprehensive space program advisory structure for NASA management on goals and objectives. NASA Tracking and Data Acquisition Panel, established in 1972, reviewed and advised on potential application of new technologies in carrying out tracking and data acquisition functions. Panel would be disbanded following its final report in near future. Aerospace Advisory Panel, established by NASA Authorization Act of 1968, reviewed safety studies and operation plans and reported on them to NASA Administrator. Membership of NASA advisory committees was drawn largely from universities, nonprofit organizations, industry, and other Government agencies. Scientific and technical subjects addressed by committees were open to public access through meetings and public had direct access to NASA officials and committee members. (Testimony)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1973 budget to Congress said: “We have been reordering our research and development investments in defense and space. We have reassessed the space program and placed it on a firm future footing with increased attention to practical and economical applications of space and reductions in the cost of manned space flight. “. . . we have strengthened our defense research and development capability to insure that the country will not face the possibility of technological surprise or lack of the deterrent power necessary to protect our national security.” Therefore budget authority requested for Dept, of Defense research, development, technology, and engineering (rdt&e) was at all-time high. President proposed measures “to emphasize this Administration’s strong belief that science and technology can make significant contributions to the quality of American life and to economic growth”; to encourage private investment in R&D, including investment by small firms with innovative ideas; to use NASA and Atomic Energy Commission talents on clean, economical energy and safe, fast transportation— “this year we shall have the agency which sent men to the moon and back begin to assist the Department of Transportation in finding better ways to send people downtown and hack”—and to review economic policies which might restrict utilization and development of technical advances. President also said human resources spending would be 45% of FY 1973 budget, while defense programs would total 32%. Outlays requested for major environmental programs in 1973 were $2.5 billion, “more than three times the 1969 level.” {PD, 1/31/72, 104-17)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union address before joint session of Congress and sent written message to Congress. He said in speech: “In reaching the moon, we demonstrated what miracles American technology is capable of achieving. Now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth, of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man.” He would propose new “Federal partnership” in technological research and development “with Federal incentives to increase private research, federally supported research on projects ... to improve our everyday lives.” In written message President said dealings with U.S.S.R. had “advanced the prospects for limiting strategic armaments. We have moved toward greater cooperation in space research and toward improving our economic relationships.” President said he would request Dept, of Defense budget increase “to preserve the sufficiency of our strategic nuclear deterrent, including an allocation of over $900 million to improve our sea-based deterrent force.” He had instructed dod “to develop a program to build additional missile launching submarines, carrying a new and far more effective missile.” Space program had been reoriented to produce increased domestic benefits: “In recent years, America has focused a large share of the technological energy on projects for defense and for space. These projects have had great value. Defense technology has helped us preserve our freedom and protect the peace. Space technology has enabled us to share unparalleled adventures and to lift our sights beyond earth’s bounds. The daily life of the average man has also been improved by much of our defense and space research—for example, by work on radar, jet engines, nuclear reactors, communications and weather satellites, and computers. Defense and space projects have also enabled us to build and maintain our general technological capacity, which—as a result—can now be more readily applied to civilian purposes. “America must continue with strong and sensible programs of research and development for defense and for space. I have felt for some time, however, that we should also be doing more to apply our scientific and technological genius directly to domestic opportunities. Toward this end, I have already increased our civilian research and development budget by more than 40 percent since 1969 and have directed the National Science Foundation to give more attention to this area .... “I recently announced support for the development of a new earth orbital vehicle that promises to introduce a new era in space research.” Reusable space shuttle would lower cost and risk of space operations and open new opportunities in weather forecasting, communications, monitoring natural resources, and air traffic safety. “The space shuttle is a wise national investment.” Proposals included increase of $700 million in civilian R&D, 15% increase over previous year. And technically oriented agencies like NASA and Atomic Energy Commission would work more closely with agencies with primary social mission like Dept, of Transportation. {PD, 1/24/72, 74-92)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on earth resources program during FY 1973 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: Program was probably most significant present element of earth observations program, using advanced satellite and ground-based techniques. FY 1973 funding of $48.4 million would go for procurement (including spacecraft development) and flight operations, data-handling system development, and aircraft program already underway. Queried on pace of program, Mathews said NASA had “good basic program” that would merit expansion. Results from erts-a satellite—to be flown with high degree of participation by users from Government, industry, and universities— should show program merited extension and how it should be done. Mathews also cited need for regulation and control of information as it was gathered more nearly completely and accurately. Gathering information was “less of a problem and less of a challenge than the proper use of this information.” (Transcript)
Rep. Bob S. Bergland (D-Minn.) was elected member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 1/27/72, H367)
Office of Senate Republican Leader Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said Sen. Scott would nominate President Nixon for Nobel Peace Prize to be awarded in winter 1972. Scott aide said Senator was preparing documentation citing President’s initiatives in People’s Republic of China visit and Soviet summit meetings, (upi, NYT, 7/19/72, 15)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences met in closed session to hear testimony from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 15 astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin on Apollo 15 commercialism. Discussed were selling of stamp covers carried on mission and of replicas of statue “Fallen Astronaut” placed on moon during mission. Following meeting Committee Chairman, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), issued statement: “The testimony of NASA management and of the astronauts was forthright and complete. There is no doubt that certain provisions of NASA’s Standards of Conduct for NASA Employees were violated by the astronauts for which they have been punished. The question of whether or not they violated any law is being examined. No conclusions were reached by the Committee at this meeting and the Committee will decide at a later time what further action it will take.” (CR, 8/3/72, D869; Text)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Gerhard B. Heller, Director of Space Science Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center, died in Nashville, Tenn., at age 58 of injuries received in automobile accident. Heller had begun career in 1940 at Peenemuende Rocket Center in Germany. He had come to U.S. with Dr. Wernher von Braun’s rocket group after World War II and worked with Army Ordnance Corps until transfer of group to msfc in 1960. During nasa career Heller had pioneered in thermal control of earth satellites. He had served as director of Space Sciences Laboratory’s Thermophysics Div. before becoming Laboratory director in 1969. (msfc Release 72-128)
Reception in House Rayburn Building honored retiring Chairman George P. Miller of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Rep. Miller (D-Calif.)—defeated June 6 in California primary for nomination for reelection to House—had presided over House Committee in overseeing and funding U.S. space program since 1961. House Speaker, Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), said that “never had so much been accomplished in the national interest in so short a time” as by Committee. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., praised work of Committee in evolution of entire U.S. space effort. Rep. Miller responded that U.S. space achievements were “a beginning and not an end” of the national enterprise required to serve Nation and society in the future. National Space Club President Donald R. Rodgers presided over ceremony attended by 300 guests, including Congressmen, NASA and industry representatives, and Senate and House Space Committee staffs. (NASA Hist Off)
Washington Post published first of series of articles on U.S. energy crisis. Population had doubled in 50 yrs, while energy use had almost quadrupled. Per capita electricity consumption had doubled five times— twice in last 15 yrs. Nationwide environmental movement had halted Government’s Plowshare program to release trapped oil and gas by nuclear explosions, delayed Alaska pipeline, and forced near-moratorium on dam building. Ecologists had “forced power companies to abandon scenic river and lake sites in 10 states and have caused more than 20 delays in the construction of nuclear power plants.” Disagreement was “rampant” over changes wrought by environmental movement. But ecologists had caused no shortage of energy in U.S. thus far. Many energy experts believed technology would “bail us out by letting us tap new, clean fuels and by cleaning up existing fuels.” Mitre Corp. had recently completed exhaustive energy study. Its Senior Vice President Charles Zraket had said, “We believe the physical resources and technical options exist to get us out of this crisis in 10 years.” (O’Toole, W Post, 11/26/72, Al) November 27:	NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and new fuselage fairings, was flight-tested at constant dynamic pressure of 9580 newtons per sq m (200 psf). Pressure distribution and wake survey measurements were made with instrumentation at outboard station. All tests with new fuselage fairings had been made with vortex generator off. Generators would be reinstalled and drag measurements made for direct comparison with previous tests with original fairings and vortex generators on and with wind tunnel results. Some measurement of shock wave dynamics was being made with microphones installed on wings. (NASA proj off)
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
Annual Dept, of Defense report to Congress, National Security Strategy of Realistic Deterrence, was presented by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird to House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations during hearings on FY 1973 dod budget and FY 1973—1977 program. U.S.S.R. had reached position “where—unless we take appropriate action—there could be new surprises and new ‘sputniks.’ But they are less likely to be in areas such as the peaceful exploration of space; rather they are more likely to be a part of a major new Soviet military capability.” (Text)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. Johnson reported that in 1971 Thor-Delta launch vehicle had had five launches with four successes. One failure, on itos-b mission Oct. 21, had been caused by leak in 2nd-stage oxidizer system. Review board recommendations had been carried out and Jan. 31 launch of Heos 2 had been successful. Thorough design review and certification was in process for launch by new-configuration Thor-Delta of itos-c in April. All critical components of old and new configurations had been completely and intensively reviewed by independent group and most previous qualifications had been verified. Estimated cost of responding to review board recommendations was $2 million for FY 1972, $3 million for FY 1973, and $5 million per year thereafter. (Transcript)
Former astronaut James A. McDivitt—Special Assistant to Manned Spacecraft Center Director for Organizational Affairs since May—announced his resignation from NASA and Air Force, effective Sept. 1, when he would become Senior Vice President of Consumer Power Co. in Jackson, Mich. He would be on terminal leave from July 1 until Sept. 1. McDivitt, Air Force brigadier general, had commanded Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) and Apollo 9 (March 3-13, 1969) and had left Astronaut Office in June 1969 to become Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA Release 72-131)
Symposium on use of electronic computing machines in production management was held in Moscow by Soviet specialists and U.S. engineers from Digital Equipment Corp. Digital Equipment Corp. Vice President Theodore Johnson later told Tass correspondent that agreements signed between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in science and technology May 24 would widen firm’s contacts in U.S.S.R. (fbis-Sov, 5/26/72, LI)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s FY 1973 authorization request before House Committee on Science and Astronautics as hearings opened. He emphasized importance of space program to U.S. national economy: “Scientific knowledge, scientific exploration, and the practical applications of aeronautics and space are enormously important in their own right. But perhaps most important of all is the need for the United States to have a continuously advancing technology. To meet the pressing social problems of our times requires above all a sound economy operating at a high level of employment to generate the tax revenues required at all levels of government. To maintain such an economy in a competitive world, we must increase our productivity year after year, decade after decade. The only way in the long term to keep increasing our productivity is through advancing our technology. “I know of no other activity which has done and can do as much to keep the United States strong in advanced technology as NASA’s programs in space and aeronautics.” Economic necessity for advanced technology; “the direct practical benefits of space applications and improved aircraft, including their significance for national defense; and . . . the human and future practical values of increased understanding of the earth, sun, moon, planets, and universe—these are the basic reasons for maintaining a strong national program in space and aeronautics.” Dr. Fletcher said that NASA’s FY 1973 program “moves forward in that it fully supports President Nixon’s decision to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle, the keystone to the Nation’s future in space; it continues our major ongoing space programs; and it provides a 50 percent step-up in our work in aeronautics. It is realistic in that it supports these objectives within a fiscal year 1973 budget approximately equal to that of last year, and under a plan that does not commit the Nation to higher total NASA budget levels in future •• years.” (Transcript)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on planetary exploration program at opening session of FY 1973 nasa authorizatization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Dr. Naugle presented plan under study for “much more modest outer planets exploration program” instead of originally proposed two-mission, four-spacecraft Grand Tour of all outer planets, canceled because of budgetary restrictions. Jupiter exploration would continue. “We are studying a mission for the initial exploration of Saturn. We would take advantage of the rare alinement of the planets to launch two Mariner-class spacecraft in 1977 on a trajectory which would carry them first past Jupiter and on to Saturn to investigate that strange planet. ... At present, this program appears to be an excellent outer planets mission within the current constraints. However, we are studying other options with our science advisory groups to determine the set of outer planets missions which provide the most significant scientific information.” Viking project to softland spacecraft on Mars in 1976 remained “most significant element of the ongoing planetary exploration program.” Mariner 9’s orbiting of Mars had been major highlight in 1971 planetary program. To date, “Mariner 9 . . . has been in orbit 96 days, is still healthy and operating nominally. ... it has transmitted back to Earth over 5700 pictures of Mars, a number of closeups of its two moons, and measurements of surface features and atmospheric properties by ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers.” NASA had mapped approximately 66% of Martian surface at resolution of 1 km (0.6 mi) or better. “To date we have visited Venus and Mars, and will soon reach Jupiter and Mercury. Within the next year we shall have studied Mars in detail from orbit and within 5 years shall have begun an intensive automated exploration of its surface. By the end of the decade we expect to know whether life exists, has existed, or could exist on Mars.” Three spacecraft to be launched in 1972 would open “brand new areas of research or application.” Pioneer-F would be launched in March to begin study of Jupiter. Next, Earth Resources Technology Satellite would open new field of earth study. In fall, astronomy Explorer satellite would begin to study gamma rays from stars. Major
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of members to National Science Board: Dr. Wesley G. Campbell, Director of Hoover Institute on War, Revolution and Peace; Dr. T. Marshall Hahn, Jr., President of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ.; Dr. Anna J. Harrison, Mt. Holyoke College chemist; Dr. Hubert Heffner, Stanford Univ. physicist; Dr. William H. Meckling, Univ. of Rochester economist; Dr. William A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institute of Oceanography; Dr. Russell D. O’Neal, Executive Vice President for Aerospace with Bendix Corp.; and Dr. Joseph M. Reynolds, Louisiana State Univ. physicist (reappointment). Terms would expire May 10, 1978. (PD, 8/7/72,1198, 1205) August 3:	NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
Half-hour documentary film “The Worlds of von Braun” was televised by wmal-tv in Washington, D.C. Documentary, filmed at NASA Wallops Station, included footage never before televised, from NASA, U.S.S.R., and moon. In film, Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, discussed his careers as World War II rocket expert and with NASA in interview with wmal-tv Public Affairs Director James Clarke. Washington Post TV critic Victor Cohn said of film: “Wernher von Braun is a compelling man and a true believer . . . and the joy is that of seeing any man so thoroughly absorbed in a discipline that he absorbs you, even at the distant end of a TV tube.” (nasa Special Ann, 1/4/72; W Post, 1/7/72, Bl)
Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, presented report on Luna 20 samples to Academy. He had earlier, on May 4, published data on soil sample in Pravda. Luna 20 had landed near moon’s Apollonius Crater in mountainous area between Sea of Crises and Sea of Fertility and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna 20 soil was light grey, porous consertal (of texture in which irregular crystals interlocked) material containing fewer glassy, fused particles than Luna 16 samples from Sea of Fertility. Average particle size was 70-80 millimicrometers with largest particle in excess of one millimeter. Albedo value was higher than for samples returned by Luna 16, Apollo 11, or Apollo 12. Basic mass of particles were anorthositic rock containing large amount of feldspar, metallic iron, and olivine. “The lunar samples’ surprise proved to be the presence of pulverized metallic iron, which . . . does not oxidize, as distinct from terrestrial iron. This discovery may be of great practical significance. We have shown experimentally that under certain conditions it is possible to obtain such iron in the laboratory from basalts. If we succeeded in developing cheap technology for the industrial production of inoxidizable iron, this would give technology a magnificient construction material.” Understanding nature of formation of anorthosites would be of even greater significance. “Perhaps it will even elucidate the most ancient history of our planet. A popular hypothesis once existed among geologists that the earth’s crust originally consisted of anorthosite rocks. Now it has unexpectedly received strong ‘corroboration’ from the moon. “After study of the lunar rock the nocturnal luminary appears before us as a ‘twofaced Janus.’ On the moon’s visible side vast territories are occupied by basaltic seas, while the entire far side is practically a solid continent, apparently formed from anorthositic rocks. Such a sharp difference is one of the moon’s most exciting secrets.” (Izvestiya, fbis-Sov, 5/17/72, LI; Sov Rpt, 5/19/72, 1)
John Stack, engineer who had helped develop first high-speed wind tunnel in 1930s, died at age 65 after fall from horse. Stack had joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1928 and had been head of high-velocity airflow research at Laboratory in 1939, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research from 1961 to 1962, and Vice President for Engineering at Fairchild Industries until his retirement in 1971. He had received numerous awards for his work in supersonic technology, including Robert J. Collier trophy in 1947 for work with X—1 rocket aircraft. (AP, NYT, 6/20/72, 38; frc X-Press, 7/21/72, 2) June 18-July 30: Exhibit of kinetic art of Dr. Frank J. Malina—artist, astronautical engineer, and past Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1944^1946)—was held at Univ. of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. Catalog noted Dr. Malina was “pioneering on the new frontier of man’s adjustment to the explosive impact of science, technology and the exploration of space on the world.” Artist believed “man must understand this world in order to survive in it, and that this understanding must be both intellectual and emotional.” Paintings included impressions of space phenomena. (Catalog)
Former Congressman H. Allen Smith of California was quoted as having said in letters to Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Cal Tech that he would not seek to enforce law passed Oct. 21 to change jpl name to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Smith had written: “I have no intention of bringing any lawsuit or any other action to force this name change. There are many laws on the federal books which are not enforced.” Wall Street Journal said it was “doubtful” that Congress would reverse itself on measure. NASA officials had already found House Committee on Science and Astronautics “unwilling to help provide relief.” (WSJ, 11/24/72) Nov. 24-Dec. 8: U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Groups 2 and 4, meeting at Manned Space Center on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), defined antenna locations on Soyuz and confirmed that U.S.S.R. would build antennas; negotiated interface signal characteristics for radio communication and ranging systems and confirmed 428-km (266-mi) ranging capability; agreed on end-to-end compatibility tests of radio and hardline communications; resolved U.S. very-high-frequency amplitude-modulation implementation requirements for Soyuz systems, defined design of cable communications systems including cable lengths, junction boxes, and Soviet supply responsibilities; and discussed intercenter control communications, establishing basis for March negotiations. (NASA proj off)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space announced it would hold hearings in July on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for cooperation in space, medicine, science, and environment. (Reuters, W Post, 5/27/72, A23)
Space shuttle was “investment in the future,” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, said in Aerospace article. Controversy over manned versus unmanned space flight had been “negated” by advancing technology that provided “entirely new approach to space operations.” Shuttle combined “advantages of man in the cycle with a degree of economy hitherto unobtainable.” Fundamental reason for shuttle program was “to make available a means of routine access to space, to remove the constraints imposed by an earlier level of technology, to progress from space adolescence to full maturity.” (Aerospace, 4/72, 3-9)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill [see March 23]. (H Rpt 92-976)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
Senate approved S.R. 261, making minority changes in committee assignments. Sen. James L. Buckley (R-N.Y.) was removed from Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.) was added. (CR, 2/23/72, S2379-80) February 23—24:	NASA officials continued testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson reported “excellent results” in first acoustic tests, completed in November 1971, of experimental quiet engine for conventional takeoff and landing (ctol) aircraft. “In an unsuppressed baseline configuration . . . the noise levels were the equivalent of at least 3 EPNdB [epndb, effective perceived noise in decibels] lower than the original targets. In a first cut simulation of an acoustically suppressed nacelle which was not an optimum design, the noise levels were from 7 to 9 EPNdB lower yet, with aerodynamic performance losses no greater than expected.” It appeared possible to design an advanced version of ctol engine “which will incorporate all the advances in technology and will have a more nearly optimum trade-off between noise reduction and installed weight penalty.” In FY 1973, $2.5 million was requested for program to reduce noise of short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to 95 epndb at 500 ft (150 m). Tests at Flight Research Center of quieted T-34 high-bypass-ratio engine operating with simulated wing-flap system would develop design data for both quiet, experimental stol (questol) aircraft program and quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine program. Vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (vtol) noise reduction program, with budget request of $2.5 million, focused on lift fans with additional work on helicopter rotor noise. Acoustic and aerodynamic data would continue to be developed in tests at Langley, Ames, and Lewis Research Centers. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), described NASA role in Joint nasa, Federal Aviation Administration, and Dept, of Defense microwave landing system (mls) development plan to provide landing system for civil and military use to replace current very-high-frequency (vhf) landing system. NASA would provide personnel in faa mls Project Office, chairmanship of the mls Interagency Advisory Group, flight-test validation of the mls for stol operations, and extension of our work in FY 1973 to include ctol and vtol aircraft. “We are convinced the national microwave landing system program will make significant contributions toward noise abatement, airport congestion relief, and, especially, safety enhancement in the airport area.” Gerald G. Kayten, Director of Transport Experimental Program Office in oast, said on Feb. 23 that NASA programs would “provide a foundation upon which industry can base the design and development of the new stol systems in the late 1970’s, and upon which the Government can establish criteria for certification and regulation of such systems.” Programs also would enable Government to make 1976 decision on vertical short takeoff and landing (v/stol) incorporation recommended in Dept, of Transportation Northeast Corridor Report. “NASA’s main focus is on propulsive-lift technology for effective and economical STOL capability, engine technology for development of quiet and clean STOL propulsion systems, and airborne STOL avionics and system technology.” Technology represented “totally new capability based on major advances in each of several technical disciplines.” Albert J. Evans, Director of Military Aircraft Programs Office in oast, on Feb. 24 described support of military aircraft development programs. NASA had assigned research engineers to F-15 and B-l aircraft and Air Force prototype systems program offices. “This has put NASA ‘on the scene’ as technical problems become recognized and defined, and brings NASA’s technical capabilities ... to bear on the problems at an early date.” F—15 would make first flight early in FY 1973 “with about 12,000 nasa wind tunnel hours behind it, and much technical consultation by NASA staff members with the Air Force and the industry that is developing the F—15.” F—15 operational engine would be installed at Lewis Research Center to analyze air flow through engine components, combustion efficiency, and performance characteristics. nasa would analyze F-15 engine and airframe performance and flight-test aircraft at LeRC, where similar tests would be run on Air Force AX aircraft in cooperation with usaf. In B-l program, four frc engineers would be assigned to usaf Systems Program Office and contractor to assist in establishing flight-test requirements and instrumentation to verify analytical design techniques and ground-test data obtained at small scale in wind tunnels and information from simulator studies. (Transcript)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space on U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on cooperation in space [May 24]. He described events that led to agreement on joint rendezvous and docking mission: Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, then nasa Administrator, had suggested to Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov during April 1970 meeting in New York “possibility of cooperation in the area of astronaut safety, including compatible docking fixtures for space stations and shuttles.” National Academy of Sciences President, Dr. Philip Handler, had conveyed NASA’s interest to Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. “In July, Dr. Paine suggested directly to President Keldysh that this possibility be considered.” Dr. Low said if docking mission was successful, “both countries will have increased their chances of rescuing astronauts in distress without commensurate increase in the costs of a standby rescue capability. It is here that the joint test mission is particularly important. It will give us the opportunity to identify and resolve under the best possible conditions the problems we can expect to flow from differences in language, equipment, and operational procedures.” Joint working groups were making significant progress. Space meteorology group was organizing experiments to advance temperature sounding from satellites and microwave measurement of precipitation zones, ice conditions, and sea surface roughness and temperature. Another joint working group had provided for coordination of meridional sounding rocket networks in Eastern and Western Hemispheres and had begun to exchange operational and scientific meteorological data. Working group on natural environment was defining coordinated experiments in remote sensing of the environment related to vegetation, geology, and the oceans. Oceanographic effort would continue satellite and ship measurements over same ocean area. In group on scientific investigation of near-earth space, moon, and planets, “experts from both sides have been working on a common system of lunar coordinates and a program for compiling a complete map of the moon on the scale of 1:5,000,000.” Group on space biology and medicine was “considering certain common standards and procedures to increase the comparability of information.” If U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together to achieve “intimate and complex common goal” like joint space mission, “we will have built mutual confidence and trust. The symbol of US and Soviet spacemen meeting in orbit before the eyes of the entire world cannot help but ameliorate attitudes, viewpoints and expectations throughout the world.” (Transcript)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, would become Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics in January 1973, Washington Post reported. He would replace Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who was defeated for renomination to House. Post quoted Rep. Teague as saying he wanted to push U.S. space program forward because it “seems to be taking a back seat.” (Lyons, W Post, 12/15/72)
President Nixon announced appointment of John S. D. Eisenhower as Chairman of new Classification Review Committee to implement security classification system established March 8. President also released text of National Security Council directive governing classification, downgrading, declassification, and safeguarding of national security information. Government departments were requested to establish computerized data index system for classified material. President said: “This application of computer technology across the board should lead to a much more manageable classification system and greatly enhance the flow of information to the public.” Executive Order 11652 of March 8 included NASA among agencies originating classified material. (PD, 5/22/72, 870-1) May 18:	House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation. Appropriation—$58 million less than budget estimate of $3,407 billion, but $39 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,310 billion—allocated $2.55 billion for research and development (r&d), down $50.9 million from budget request; $69.7 million for construction of facilities, $7.5 million below budget estimate; and $729.45 million for research and program management as requested. Committee did not distribute r&d funds but recommended balanced program to continue “useful and significant . . . projects in space science, exploration, practical applications of advanced technology, and aeronautics”; approved authorization bill’s levels for aviation safety and noise reduction program; and deferred request of $5.54 million for construction of facilities for manufacturing and final assembly of space shuttle at “various locations” until “such sites are decided upon and plans are developed.” (H Rpt 92-1071)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics since 1961, was defeated as candidate for reelection to Congress during Democratic primary in California. (Dem Natl Com; Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) told press in Washington, D.C., that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would include probe of Apollo 14 crew’s decision to carry 200 privately minted silver medals on Jan. 31-Feb. 7, 1971, mission in scheduled Aug. 3 hearings on commercial exploitation of Apollo 15. (AP, Pasadena Star-News, 8/1/72)
Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) criticized Sept. 13 action of Office of Management and Budget in impounding $44.9 million of $50.5-million FY 1973 NASA appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program. As Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, he signed telegram to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, protesting action. (CR, 10/14/72, H10111)
Directors of North American Rockwell Corp. proposed to change firm’s name to Rockwell International Corp. at meeting in El Segundo, Calif. If change was approved by shareholders at Feb. 15, 1973, annual meeting all trace of name North American Aviation, Inc., founded in 1928, would disappear, Los Angeles Times said later. NR had been formed in 1967 through merger of North American Aviation and Rockwell-Standard Corp. (LA Times, 11/12/72) November 11:	Four hundredth anniversary of discovery of Tycho’s Star by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe. Supernova that increased in brightness by millions of times, Tycho’s Star was first unusual star ever recorded by European astronomers and first definite proof that sky was not immutable. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 11/6/72) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, told press in Rio de Janeiro he did not believe in flying saucers. “Such things do not exist. I gather the whole business is a hallucination.” Dr. von Braun was in Brazil to promote sale of communications satellite equipment to government. (AP, W Star & News, 11/12/72, A5)
