The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held hearings on NASA’s proposed space tug. The hearings sought to determine the tug’s role in the space shuttle program, the tug’s fiscal impact on the program and the overall manned space flight budget, the operational impact on NASA’s latest proposed mission model and on projected cost-per-flight of the shuttle, the Dept, of Defense role in development and use of the tug, and NASA’s and industry’s progress in tug conceptual design. Charles V. Donlan, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Deputy Director of Advanced Programs, presented an overview of the tug program Sept. 5 but made no recommendations, pending completion of a study. NASA would later recommend program approach and supporting rationale. Representatives of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div,, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Martin Marietta Co. Denver Div., and Grumman Aerospace Corp. presented results of efforts to date, with supporting data to substantiate the options afforded NASA in proceeding with tug development. Options under study included liquid-storable and cryogenic systems for a growth-stage tug, the Centaur as an expendable or recoverable launch vehicle, an expendable Thor-Delta vehicle, an expendable or recoverable Agena vehicle, and an expendable or growth-stage Transtage vehicle. (Transcript) September 6:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 584 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 89.9min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 20. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; Sov Aero, 9/10/73, 110)
The General Accounting Office released its study Cost Growth in Major Weapons Systems made at the request of the House Committee on Armed Services. Cost overruns on 45 major weapon systems in the U.S. arsenal had totaled $31.3 billion. Each of the 45 systems had incurred an overrun. (Text) March 26—27:	Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the report United States Military Posture for FY 1974 to the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Defense Appropriations: Strategic parity existed between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. “While the Soviet Union has a substantial advantage, not only in the numbers of strategic missiles, but also in missile throw-weight, the United States still has a substantial advantage in other areas of key importance to the overall strategic balance—e.g., missile accuracy, MIRVs [multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles], submarine quietness, sonars, and numbers of bombers and bomber payload. And, while the Soviet Union has enormous advantage in air defense, without an extensive ABM [antiballistic missile] defense . . . the air defense could be substantially undercut by ballistic missile attack, particularly ... a large number of mirvs.” The U.S. advantages were transitory, resting on a “technological lead that has been steadily narrowing over the past decade.” With the momentum of the Soviet offensive research and development program, “we cannot preclude the possibility that our technological lead in this area may further diminish or disappear altogether during the current decade.” Adm. Moorer believed “that the Soviet Union will soon succeed in its efforts to develcrp an effective MIRV system for its strategic missiles. Thus, the Soviet Union may be able to challenge our lead in both missile guidance and mirvs . . . , and thereby pose a significant threat to our Minuteman force.” (Text) In a statement confirmed later by Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim, Adm. Moorer said the U.S.S.R. was actively testing three new intercontinental ballistic missiles and might deploy 60 improved multiple-warhead versions of an existing missile during the summer. He said the People’s Republic of China was expanding production of weapon-grade nuclear materiel and slowly but steadily building a stock of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons. (Beecher, NYT, 3/28/73, 4; dod pio) March 27:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Fernando de Mendonca, Director General of the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (inpe), signed a Memorandum of Understanding to extend the NASA—inpe cooperative project in remote sensing using the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by NASA July 23, 1972. The project’s purpose was to advance applications of spacecraft and aircraft remote sensing to monitor environmental conditions. INPE would establish a data-acquisition station at Cuiaba, central Brazil, and a data-processing facility in Sao Paulo state. There would be no exchange of funds; both agencies would share all data and information necessary for the conduct of the program; and inpe would make available to NASA, cost free, copies of erts data it acquired and processed. The data would be available to the domestic and international community. (nasa Release 73-82)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on short-term energy shortages. Acting Director Darrell M. Trent of the Office of Emergency Preparedness testified that the U.S. “economy’s demand for all types of energy continues to increase at an amazing rate. However, our ability to find and produce domestic supplies of energy is not keeping pace with rising demand.” The U.S. was becoming increasingly dependent on foreign supplies. “Except for Alaskan discoveries, additions to domestic petroleum reserves have fallen behind production since 1967. Gas is already in short supply. ... At current growth rates, demand could double within the next 12 years over what it was in 1970. Because of the growing imbalance between domestic supply and demand, we may have to import as much as 60 percent of all the oil and gas we need in 1985. Such reliance on foreign sources of supply could pose serious problems for our national security. . . . The cost of our petroleum products alone could rise from about $6 billion in 1972 to as high as $45 billion by 1985, with grim implications for our troubled balance of payments.” (Transcript)
A New York Times editorial commented on the research recession caused by changing priorities of the Federal Government and insufficient budget appropriations in Federal research programs: “The brilliant record of American scientists . . . testifies to the quality of the national research enterprise. But how long can such top quality survive in the face of the present economic stringency and the threat of even worse times ahead?” (NYT, 1/5/73, 28) January 7:	Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had announced his decision to leave NASA and retire from the Navy effective March 1 to accept a position with private industry, Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Lovell, who had been Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC since May 1971, would become Senior Executive Vice President of Bay Houston Towing Co. Lovell was a veteran of four space flights including Gemini 7 (launched Dec. 4, 1965) ; Gemini 12 (launched Nov. 11, 1966) ; Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968), the first mission to circle the moon; and Apollo 13 (launched April 11, 1970), the mission scheduled to make the second lunar landing but aborted after an onboard explosion. He held the record for total time in space— 715 hrs (30 days), (msc Release 73-01)
The National Science Foundation released An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function: FY 1963-73 (nsf 72-313). Federal expenditures for research and development were expected to grow faster than total Federal outlays in FY 1973 for the first time since FY 1965. Between FY 1972 and 1973 r&d expenditures were expected to rise 3.6%, with total outlays up 2.6%. The Federal R&D percentage of the total was expected to be 7.3% in FY 1973. Of total outlays for space research and technology, 98% was expected to go toward R&D, but the R&D share of the total outlay for international affairs and finance, veterans benefits and services, general government, and income security would be less than 1%. Functions other than national defense and space R&T had increased emphasis on R&D significantly 1963-1973, from 10% to an expected 23%. The trend toward more civilian-oriented programs within the Federal r&d total was continuing, with an expected rise of 2% between 1972 and 1973. (Text)
b/g William J. Kennard (usaf, Ret.), former air surgeon of the Military Air Transport Service, died at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at age 67. He had served from 1959 to 1967 as Executive Vice President of the Aerospace Medical Assn, and managing editor of Aerospace Medicine. (W Post, 10/26/73, C8) October 24:	Establishment of the Spacelab Program Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by nasa. The new office, to be headed by Douglas R. Lord, would replace the Sortie Lab Task Force. The reorganization followed the Sept. 24 signing of a cooperative agreement by NASA and the European Space Research Organization which called for European design, development, and manufacture of a Spacelab to be flown in the space shuttle orbiter. (NASA Release 73-228)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), new Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had promised an “in depth” inquiry into the FY 1974 Nasa budget request at early date, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The Committee staff was being expanded and Sen. Moss would visit Manned Spacecraft Center in February. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.), the Committee’s new ranking minority member, had urged that more attention be paid to aeronautics. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), minority member, had said the Committee should be more forceful in pushing aerospace programs “because nasa seems reticent at times to speak for itself.” (Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), Committee member, introduced H. Con. Res. 223 requesting the President to proclaim July 16—22 of each year as “U.S. Space Week.” The resolution was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. (CR, 5/23/73, H3976)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegates met in Vienna to continue Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt). (Tass, fbis-Sov, 5/9/73, HI) May 9:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 7528, a $3.074-billion nasa FY 1974 authorization bill replacing the original $3.016-billion H.R. 4567. Increases in research and development funding included $25 million for the space shuttle, to total $500 million; $12 million for space applications, to total $159 million; $34 million for aeronautical research and technology, to total $180 million; $10 million for space and nuclear research and technology, to total $11 million; and $500 000 for technology utilization, to total $4.5 million. Overall R&D decreases were: $7 million in space flight operations, to $548.5 million; $8 million in space science programs, to $37 million; and $10 million in tracking and data acquisition, to $240 million. The budgets for construction of facilities and research and program management remained at $112 million and $707 million. The Committee said its $10-million reduction in Skylab funding, to $224 million (within space flight operations), reflected a “success postured program” without major problems and expressed confidence in NASA Skylab management. Space shuttle funding was increased $25 million to provide more effective program implementation and hold total program funding “at or below the current projection.” Total reductions of $8 million in funding for orbiting explorers, physics and astronomy, and lunar and planetary exploration supporting research and technology would be applied to the Earth Resources Survey Satellite program to permit immediate reinstatement of the erts-b project, on which the Committee placed “the highest priority.” In the aeronautics program, a $14-million increase—from $18 million to $32 million—was recommended “to investigate and demonstrate noise reduction modifications to current narrow-body jet aircraft” and $20 million was added to reinstate the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program terminated in January. The $10-million increase in space nuclear research and technology funding was “to maintain a viable, long-range capability in advanced nuclear power and propulsion research.” It was probable “that any sensible energy research program undertaken by this nation would involve a significant part of this continued program.” (CR, 5/1/73, D452; H Rpt 93-171; Text)
NASA participation in the National Science Foundation’s Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program was described by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NSF Assistant Director for Research Applications and former NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy. Dr. Eggers testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy during a hearing on energy research and development: “Particularly close ties are developing between nsf/rann and NASA in the field of Energy Research and Technology.” The major focus was on terrestrial applications of solar energy. Lewis Research Center was especially active in joint work on requests for proposals on solar thermal areas, photo-voltaics (use of the generation of electromotive force when radiant energy fell between dissimilar substances), flat plate collection, and heating and cooling of buildings. NASA had made a preliminary inventory of its test facilities applicable to nsf’s solar energy research program. nsf had requested NASA to review the status of solar insolation data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and, working with noaa, to examine the need for better data and methods. Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Cal Tech Environmental Quality Laboratory were jointly conducting workshops and studies in water heating and other solar technology applications. A NASA Wind Energy Workshop at LeRC would pursue plans for a wind energy research program. Other areas of NASA participation included research into bio-conversion of organic materials to fuels, thermal batteries and superconducting transmission technology, earthquake engineering, regional environmental systems, trace contaminants, and fire. (Transcript)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) introduced H.R. 32, National Science and Policy Priorities Act of 1973. The bill differed from S. 32, passed by the Senate in 1972 but never reported out by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics [see Jan. 4]. The new bill sought to protect the National Science Foundation’s pure science functions by allocating at least 40% of the science budget to nsf. {CR, 1/3/73, H27; nasa LAR,
Office of Technology Assessment: Background and Status, a report to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was published by the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, Science Policy Div. No appropriations had been approved as yet for the OTA, which had been established “as an aid in the identification and consideration of existing and probable impacts of technological application” under Public Law 92-484 Oct. 13, 1972. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had requested $289 000 for OTA salaries and expenses under H.R. 7447, an FY 1973 supplemental appropriations bill. No funds had been requested by the House, and the requested appropriation had been deleted in conference. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had recommended a $3 980 000 FY 1974 ota appropriation. The FY 1974 legislative branch appropriations bill (H.R. 6691) had been passed July 19, but the conference committee had not yet met to resolve differences between the House and Senate versions, ota funding would not be allotted until the appropriation was available. (Text)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1973. The plan abolished the National Aeronautics and Space Council, including the position of Executive Secretary, and the Office of Science and Technology, including the posts of Director and Deputy Director, nasc had been created under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, enacted July 29, 1958. Provisions of the plan would take effect July 1 unless Congress acted against the plan. In his transmission message the President said NASC had “met a major need during the evolution of our nation’s space program. Vice President Agnew has served with distinction as its chairman for the past four years. At my request, beginning in 1969, the Vice President also chaired a special Space Task Group charged with developing strategy alternatives for a balanced U.S. space program in the coming years. As a result of this work, basic policy coordination can now be achieved through the resources of the executive departments and agencies, such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, augmented by some of the former Council staff.” In streamlining the Federal science establishment, the Administration was “firmly committed to a sustained, broad-based national effort in science and technology.” The research and development capability of executive departments and agencies had been upgraded. The National Science Foundation had “broadened from its earlier concentration on basic research support to take on a significant role in applied research as well” and had “matured in its ability to play a coordinating and evaluative role within the Government and between the public and private sectors. I have therefore concluded that it is timely and appropriate to transfer to the Director of the National Science Foundation all functions presently vested in the Office of Science and Technology, and to abolish that office.” The President also announced his intention to ask Dr. H. Guyford Stever, nsf Director, to take on the additional post of Science Adviser to advise and assist the Administration “on matters where scientific and technological expertise is called for” and to act as the President’s representative in selective cooperative programs in international science, “including chairing such joint bodies as the U.S.—U.S.S.R Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation.” (PD, 1/29/73, 75-8; nasa Leg Off)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA’s third Administrator, became a senior vice president and member of the corporate executive staff of General Electric Co. He had resigned from nasa Sept. 15, 1970, to join GE as Vice President and Group Executive, Power Generation Group. (Av Wk, 7/2/73; GE pio)
The House Committee on Armed Services voted in closed session to appropriate $172.7 million to continue production of F-llls at a one-a-month rate through 1975 [see June 6]. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/21/73)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Dr. Fletcher explained the decision to cancel the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program because of FY 1974 budgetary restrictions. “The Air Force STOL program turned out to use some of the advanced concepts that we had developed in NASA and some of which we were planning to use on the QUESTOL.” The main difficulty with the Air Force advanced medium STOL transport (amst) “is that it doesn’t have the proper engine—you couldn’t operate a noisy transport like that for commercial uses, especially in a city—and we are proceeding post haste with the advancement of technology for an engine for missions such as that, in the quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine (qcsee) program.” It was not clear when the STOL would be phased into the current fleet. “The technology would be developed by and large for commercial aircraft, with quiet engines and at some later date either we or more probably a commercial company can put these technologies together and develop that STOL as the need requires.” (Transcript)
Resignation of NASA Associate Administrator for Astronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, effective Oct. 26, was announced. Jackson would rejoin Northrop Corp. as Corporate Vice President, Program Management. He had joined Northrop in 1953 and left to become NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Nov. 2, 1970. (nasa Release 73-221)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing on H.R. 8348 [see June 4] and H.R. 9133, duplicate bills to authorize the National Science Foundation to designate certain institutions of higher learning national energy research centers. Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NSF Deputy Director, described the NSF program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) devoted to energy: “It includes research on analytic techniques and potential conservation measures directed at meeting U.S. energy requirements while satisfying environmental quality restraints; energy conversion research directed at developing technologies that allow more efficient use of our energy resources; research on superconducting transmission lines and other aspects of energy and fuel transportation; and research on advanced coal technology, geothermal energy, and perhaps most importantly, on solar energy.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews described nasa’s Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) program in continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1974 authorization hearings. The satellite, a potential new start for 1974, was intended to provide a multidisciplinary earth observations capability to support the areas of meteorology, environmental quality, earth resources and, in some respects, the earth and ocean physics program. The system would be the first major shuttle-compatible spacecraft with modularity, giving ability to retrieve and repair modular elements of the spacecraft, and the spacecraft might also be modular in basic size. “We may be able to build up a different size and weight spacecraft, using these modular techniques.” Elements were expected to serve the several disciplines without significant changes in components through the modular buildup. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator in OAST, testified that Lewis Research Center was providing technical management on several Environmental Protection Agency contracts. Turbines, heat exchangers, combustors, and fuel controls obtained from NASA’s low-cost jet engine research would be evaluated for use in automobile turbine engines. A memorandum of understanding with epa would expand LeRC responsibility for component and system development for advanced automotive power systems and would exploit LeRC test facilities. (Transcript)
Capt. John T. Geary (usn) became Director of the Naval Research Laboratory, succeeding Capt. Earle W.„Sapp who was reassigned. Capt. Geary had been Deputy Commander for Planning, Programming and Resources with the Naval Electronics System Command. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27; nrl pio) July 17:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz testified on the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1-2 mission in a joint hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Conrad said the mission had proved the feasibility of maintaining a large space station for manufacturing in space. “I think the data will show that you can do all the things up there that you can do down here and many of them perhaps better.” Skylab 1-2 earth resources and solar telescope data would show “that eventually space has a very definite role in helping mankind and in solving some of these problems that are in front of us. After all, the Sun is probably the most single efficient nuclear device that we know about. We do have an energy crisis. We need to better understand that. We just scratched the surface with our 30,000 photographs we brought back. I think you will find that the Earth resources data, when coupled with . . . erts [Earth Resources Technology Satellites] and those types of sensors will ... as an overall systems design, tie all of these things we talk about with different satellites into a big picture.” At the mission’s completion the Skylab 1—2 crew could hand over to the Skylab 3 crew a Workshop that could harbor “a 100-percent successful 56-day mission.” Dr. Kerwin said Skylab 1—2 medical experience enabled him to extrapolate a 56-day mission “without difficulty.” He felt the inflight portion would be “a piece of cake.” Postflight, the Skylab 3 astronauts might “feel a bit loggier than we did.” But Skylab 1—2 had demonstrated that this was a “minor illness . . . that you get from being 28 days in space and that you can return very rapidly to normal.” Weitz said Skylab’s earth resources survey equipment permitted a more selective data acquisition than that of unmanned erts. “I think we have shown in the past with unmanned satellites that part of the problem is that you have a continuous data flow, not all of which is usable, but all of which must be processed and reduced and analyzed in some form.” With Skylab equipment “we can track point sites” and “be selective . . . pick out specific sites, fields, or a bend in the river, if you want to study silting.” (Transcript)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, with other NASA officials, testified on the FY 1974 NASA authorization request in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the NASA request of $3,016 billion was down $400 million from FY 1973 but said the agency program was significant. In 1972 NASA had completed the transition from manned exploration to a focus on practical benefits, unmanned exploration, and development of the space shuttle “as the means to make more practical and more economical all future uses of space, unmanned and manned, especially for applications of economic, commercial, international, or national security significance.” Work on uses of the shuttle was “reinforcing our view that the Space Shuttle system will not only provide the launch capability needed for future space activities of all types but will revolutionize the ways in which space is used as well. The more the specialists in various fields look at the shuttle’s capabilities, especially in the sortie mode, the more they see how its weight and volume capacity and flexible operations will permit them to carry out experiments and useful applications in a much simpler and economical manner.” Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management Joseph F. Malaga testified that NASA Hq. would have 1581 permanent positions in FY 174 after agency reduction in force, or 6.3% of the total NASA Civil Service employment. “This is down 600 positions from the 1968 peak, when it represented 6.7 percent of the NASA total. Headquarters has thus kept its size consonant with agency size.” NASA’s policy on disposition of manpower and equipment necessitated by FY 1974 budget cuts was described by Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, in a prepared statement: “We are already well into the organization and operation of a comprehensive program to identify specific employee preferences and abilities and corresponding suitable potential employers. We have set up training for staff members in gathering job information and in counseling employees, and have arranged for a coordinated flow of information about job openings throughout NASA, and other Federal agencies, state and local government units, educational institutions and private industry. . . . Rut even more basic ... is our recognition that these people represent a virtually irreplaceable national resource.” He referred not only to “this highly talented and trained professional-technical work force but also to the complex of sophisticated plant and equipment which must be partially idled. ... It would be unconscionable to permit key elements of America’s aeronautics and space capability to be disbanded or retired without making every effort to keep them available for further service to the nation.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on “practical returns from our space investment,” including the work of NASA Applications Teams in the technology utilization program. Teams assisted local, state and Federal Government agencies in biomedicine, air and water pollution, fire safety, transportation, housing, law enforcement, postal service, and mine safety. “Those teams work with the user to explore important technical problems in his specific field and then, often with the help of specialists at NASA field centers, search for aerospace technology which can be used in the solution of the problems.” A technique used by NASA to inspect space vehicles had been adapted to improve the x-ray diagnosis of tumors and cardiovascular problems, with a tenfold reduction in radiation dosage. (Transcript)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified on NASA’s balloon program as the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications concluded FY 1974 authorization hearings: “Balloons are used for a variety of programs in both atmospheric science and astronomy. We, in many cases, launch with a balloon a prototype of an as-■ tronomical instrument which we may later fly on a sounding rocket or orbiting satellite.” Payloads ranged from test instruments to an infrared experiment; “as you get above the water vapor in the atmosphere you can do very good infrared experiments, and you can keep the instrument pointed precisely for quite long periods . . . and do very valuable scientific work at nominal cost.” Balloons were launched from Texas, South Dakota, Missouri, and Alabama in the U.S., and from Canada, Australia, and Argentina. “One of the beauties of the balloon program is that they can be launched from many areas, and we can recover the payloads. . . . We use the same payload many times for balloon observations, and it’s not at all unusual to use the same payload for half a dozen flights with sometimes slightly different instrumentation each time.” (Transcript)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on solar energy for heating and cooling. Dr. George 0. Lof, Colorado State Univ. professor of civil engineering, testified June 7 that heating and cooling buildings by solar energy was technically feasible and closely approaching economic viability. “With adequate funding, the dual involvement of industry and university . . . can be expected to move solar heating and cooling into public use within a very few years.” Electric power from solar energy, however, would cost several times the present cost of conventional power and the best method was not even known. A major study funded by the National Science Foundation was beginning at Colorado State Univ., with West-inghouse Electric Co. collaboration, of the best system and conditions for generating solar power. (Transcript) June 8:	The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites—believed by Western specialists to be a military communications data-relay system—on a single booster from Plesetsk. The satellites entered earth orbit: Cosmos 564, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1397-km (868.1-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 565, with a 1493-km (927.7-mi) apogee, 1448-km (899.7-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 566, with a 1484-km (922.1-mi) apogee, 1435-km (891.7-mi) perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 567, with a 1486-km (923.4-mi) apogee, 1413-km (878.0-mi) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 568, with a 1483-km (921.5-mi) apogee, 1377-km (855.6-mi) perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 569, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1361-km (845.7-mi) perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 570, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1340-km (832.6-mi) perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 571, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1322-km (821.5-mi) perigee, 113.7-min period, and 74.0° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/12/73, 233; Shabad, NYT, 6/10/73, 41) • Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, telegraphed congressional congratulations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, for the Skylab 2 astronauts’ achievements in repairing the solar array on the Skylab Workshop (launched May 14): “The magnificence of this accomplishment and the significance of this achievement is nearly impossible to put into perspective.” Congress sent congratulations to the astronauts, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and his team, and “all of your group who work in complete anonymity hut under the intensive examination of history.” (CR, 6/8/73, S10691)
Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., announced organizational changes to strengthen new roles in domestic and international satellite communications. Three new vice presidents were elected by ComSatCorp’s Board of Directors: David C. Acheson, Senior Vice President and General Counsel; John A. Johnson, Senior Vice President; and George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Division. The subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. was formed to carry out ComSatCorp’s U.S. domestic programs. It would be headed by John A. Johnson, President; Joseph H. O’Connor, Vice President and Treasurer; John L. Martin, Jr., Vice President; and Jerome W. Breslow, Secretary. ComSatCorp had formed the International Systems Div. to consolidate all activities related to the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Global Satellite System. The division would be headed by George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Div.; Richard R. Colino, Assistant Vice President for Technical Development and Support; and H. William Wood, Assistant Vice President for International Systems Operations. (ComSatCorp Release 73-9)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the supersonic transport effort: Environmental and economic problems and order cancellations had created a bleak outlook for the French and British Concorde. The modest budget request for research into the environmental impact of the U.S. SST by the Nixon Administration was realistic and should be approved by Congress “for the nation’s protection.” But the Administration should be “resigned to its defeat of 1971 in the building of an SST prototype.” (W Star & News, 2/8/73, A10) February 9:	Aspects of President Nixon’s FY 1974 budget requests were discussed in a Science article: The space program seemed “alive and well as it makes the transition into the post-Apollo era, despite recent fears . . . that its activities might be cut back severely.” NASA officials seemed confident the space shuttle would be built. The President had supported the project “although his new budget message contained no mention of the space program” and, “in Congress, it has survived handily all past attempts to kill it. The fact that the project helps sustain an aerospace industry that has suffered grievously from layoffs is a point lost on no one. And then too, NASA has going for it the fact that, both in Apollo and in the unmanned programs, it has generally met its goals and stayed within its budget.” Evidence existed “that the President does indeed look to a possible revival” of the supersonic transport “but not until later in the 1970’s. The new NASA budget contains $28 million—more than twice as much as last year’s budget—for research and development on supersonic technology. The work focuses on problems of noise, pollution, and efficiency of configuration.” (Carter, Science, 2/9/73, 551-2)
The Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Research and Development Collaboration with the U.S.S.R. and Japan. The report summarized discussions with Soviet and Japanese officials during the Subcommittee’s July visit to the U.S.S.R—U.S. Aeronautical Technology Symposium and Display in Moscow and a subsequent visit to Tokyo. The Subcommittee had found that “although military and space parity had been achieved with the United States, the U.S.S.R. is far behind in virtually all consumer products. There are also glaring weaknesses in certain areas of high technology.” Soviet leaders had accepted the fact that, “if their plans for the massive expansion and improvement of their commercial air transportation system are to succeed within the proposed time frame, assistance will be required from abroad where superior technology exists. We believe the U.S. aerospace industry is the best, though not the only, source for such high technology products, and evidently the responsible Soviet officials think so, too.” As one of the world’s most highly developed technological countries, Japan had “much to offer to any cooperative venture in science or space.” The Subcommittee urged the National Science Foundation to explore possible collaboration with the Japanese government in its Sunshine Project, a proposed large-scale effort to develop new energy sources. (Com Print)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics continued hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, identified locations for space shuttle development: Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., as the launch and landing sites; NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility for the external tank production; and the Rockwell International Corp. facility at Downey, Calif., for orbiter and systems integration. “The major unknown, at the moment, is where the solid rocket boosters will be produced and tested. We expect that this location will be identified when the solid fueled rocket booster contract is awarded this November.” Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in omsf, contrasted a typical operational communications satellite program using expendable launch vehicles with one using the space shuttle. Launched on the Titan IIIB-Centaur launch vehicle, each spacecraft was estimated at 467 kg (1030 lbs). To fulfill 1979-1990 requirements for reliable communications services, 26 spacecraft would be required. Use of the Titan IIIB-Centaur would require 26 new spacecraft and 26 new launch vehicles, at an average cost for each flight of $25.8 million. “If the same program is carried out using the Shuttle and Tug, the cost changes significantly. First, with the Shuttle we can apply the low cost approaches to payload design. We are no longer constrained by weight limitations; therefore, we can ruggedize the spacecraft structure, simplify the design and verification test program, and thus reduce both development and unit spacecraft cost.” The shuttle and tug combination could deploy and retrieve 2 satellites on a single flight, making 13 flights to deploy 26 spacecraft—10 new and 16 refurbished. On 8 of these flights 2 spacecraft would be deployed and retrieved. “The total cost for conducting the program would be $14.9 million per spacecraft flight, compared to the $25.8 million for the expendable approach—a savings of 42 percent.” m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, discussed disposition of facilities at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Rrook Station, which would he closed because of FY 1974 budget cuts. LeRC was discussing the station’s availability and capability with potential user agencies—including the Electric Research Council, which planned to establish an electric power research institute, and the Eusi-ness and Employment Council of the Governor of Ohio, which had recommended establishment of a state-funded Ohio Development Center. LeRC was studying possible use of the station’s reactor for environmental research by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Plum Rrook space power facility was being prepared to test the shroud for NASA’s Viking spacecraft but “there are no additional programmatic needs for the use of this facility and it is anticipated that it will be placed in a standby mode by the end of Fiscal Year 1974.” (Transcript)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the General Accounting Office’s June 1 report on space shuttle program costs. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator Willis H. Shapley testified: “nasa believes that the results of our cost benefit analyses are important and valid elements supporting the decision to develop the Space Shuttle, even though the principal justification for the Space Shuttle is in the new capabilities it will provide. In our view, the GAO review, which we welcome as an independent review and check of what we have attempted to do, has not found or demonstrated any substantial reasons for questioning the correctness of the decision which has been made to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle.” The Subcommittee concluded, following their testimony by NASA and Gao representatives: “a. The five noneconomic issues cited by gao ‘ as major considerations in the decision to develop a space shuttle are valid and proper elements in the original decision to proceed and in the future evaluation of the progress and pace of space shuttle development, b. Cost, performance and schedule goals and estimates are both a valid and essential element in the decision making process of the Congress and the GAO studies in these areas . . . must have sufficient depth to encompass all major cost considerations, c. The fragmentary arguments with respect to costs advanced by GAO reports are so incomplete as to fail to validate the GAO conclusions drawn from them. d. That GAO should continue review of the space shuttle program development in conjunction with the legislative and oversight activities of the responsible committees of Congress with emphasis on evaluation of cost, performance and schedule as the space shuttle development program progresses.” (Transcript)
Skylab 2 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was retiring from nasa and the Navy effective Feb. 1, Johnson Space Center announced. He would become Vice President, Operations, and Chief Operating Officer, of the American Television and Communications Corp., a Denver-based cable TV firm, (jsc Release 73-158)
Mikhail D. Millionshchikov, Vice President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and a principal spokesman in Soviet scientific contacts with the West, died in Moscow at age 60. He had contributed significantly to the studies of the turbulent flow of liquids and gases, nuclear energy, and new techniques for direct energy conversion. On April 28, 1970, Academician Millionshchikov—as head of a 10-man Soviet delegation to a conference sponsored in Washington, D.C., by the Fund for Peace— had suggested U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space exploration. This proposal had been “the first public suggestion by a Soviet spokesman of this hope,” the New York Times reported later. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, also a conference participant, had proposed the next day that the two countries agree to exchange space engineers as a first step toward joint space cooperation. {NYT, 5/29/73, 32) May 28:	A New York Times editorial commented on the repair of Skylab 1, damaged on launch May 14: “Many people deserve credit for this remarkable turn of events. First there were the Houston ground controllers who maneuvered the crippled Skylab into an optimal position. ... A small but varied army of technicians hurriedly contrived not one but three possible ways of creating a parasol in space so as to replace the missing heat shield that had created the most trouble. Finally, the Sky-lab astronauts mastered their new tasks in an incredibily short time, reached orbit in the neighborhood of Skylab, surveyed the damage, and made the most essential ‘fix,’ the sunshade, which yesterday brought the station’s temperature down to tolerable levels.” It had been a grueling test for all concerned. “But for the moment, at least, the Skylab project has been truly resurrected from near-death.” (NYT, 5/28/73, 14)
NASA released details of Langley Research Center’s planned program to heat and cool a 5000-sq-m (53 000-sq-ft) Systems Engineering Building by solar energy. The program had been announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Nov. 13 testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy. The program was to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience with a source of clean power as an alternate to fossil fuels and other conventional energy sources. Planned for mid-1975 completion, the building—believed to be first of its size for which solar energy would provide a significant part of its heating and cooling system—would use a 1400-sq-m (15 000-sq-ft) solar collector to provide most of the heating and some of the cooling requirements. It also would test energy-storage capacity. NASA believed the solar collector to be the pacing component in the system and had established heating and cooling cost goals of $1 to $2 per 0.09 sq m (1 sq ft) over a 15-yr life span, (nasa Release 73-282)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
The Senate adopted S.Res. 10, establishing the number of members of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences at 13, and S.R. 12, which elected Chairman and majority members to the Committee. Majority members were Democrats Sen. Frank E. Moss (Utah), Chairman, succeeding Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), who had retired; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (Wash.); Sen. Stuart Symington (Mo.) ; Sen. John C. Stennis (Miss.) ; Sen. Howard W. Cannon (Nev.) ; Sen. James G. Abourezk (S. Dak.) ; and Sen. Floyd K. Haskell (Colo.). {CR, 1/4/73, D6; A&A 1972)
U.S.S.R. Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin A. Vershinin died at the age of 74 after a long illness. Vershinin had directed Soviet military aviation during World War II. After the war he had commanded the antiaircraft defense forces and had been Chief of the Air Force and U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Defense. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 1/4/74, VI; NYT, 1/3/74, 36) During December:	NASA employee retirements totaled 215 during the month, including 37 at Headquarters, 58 at Marshall Space Flight Center, 50 at Langley Research Center, 22 each at Goddard Space Flight Center and Johnson Space Center, 18 at Kennedy Space Center, and 8 at Lewis Research Center. Among retirees were Dr. Homer E. Newell [see Dec. 26], nasa Associate Administrator; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth [see Dec. 28], NASA Director of Key Personnel Development; Vincent L. Johnson [see Dec. 26], Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences; Dr. Charles A. Berry [see Dec. 21], nasa Director of Life Sciences; General Counsel Arthur D. Holzmann; William T. O’Bryant, Director of Lunar Programs in the Office of Space Science; C. Dixon Ashworth, Manager of the Astronomy and Solar Observatory Programs; Director Adelbert 0. Tischler of the Low Cost Systems Office; and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Research Council Chief in the Office of Science and Technology, (nasa Off Personnel; nasa Off Comptroller)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on nasa’s FY 1974 applications program in authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. With communications satellite services being provided throughout the world “on a highly useful, economic, and profitable basis,” NASA had turned its emphasis to earth resources observations from satellites. “Perhaps the most significant event occurred last July [23] with the launch and successful operation of the first Earth resources technology satellite, . . . whose very special images of the Earth’s surface are being provided to users and investigators here and throughout the world every day.” More than 300 investigations were under way and “important uses are being defined in almost every area under study.” The Noaa 2 satellite launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Oct. 15, 1972, “afforded for the first time the measurement of temperatures at various heights in the atmosphere throughout the entire world on a truly operational basis.” The information was being rapidly provided to the U.S. Weather Service for prediction programs. In addition, more precise images of global cloud cover were being obtained night and day. Noaa 2, in conjunction with the continuation of the experimental program through the launch of Nimbus 5 in December, “bodes well for continued progress in meteorology.” New efforts in earth observations to start under the FY 1974 budget were in pollution monitoring, oceanography, and earth and ocean physics. In technology applications, NASA was supporting the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development on integrated utility systems to minimize energy consumption and waste output in housing units and the Dept, of Transportation in urban mass transportation. Special programs also included manufacturing in space. In a new lead-center concept, responsibility for support in particular disciplines had been assigned to Centers: Johnson Space Center—Earth Resources Center; Goddard Space Flight Center—Weather and Climate Center; and Ames Research Center—applications aircraft program. The Applications Program Integration Board (apib) had been established to evaluate major new proposals for applications or modifications to major ongoing efforts. (Transcript)
The election of Dr. John V. Harrington, Director of the Center for Space Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as Vice President, Research and Engineering, with Communications Satellite Corp. was announced. He would join the corporation in October. (ComSatCorp Release 73-49)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology continued hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the nasa Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, described the Dept, of Transportation Climatic-Impact Assessment Program (ciap), in which nasa was cooperating: The ciap “undertakes to assess the potential impact on the atmosphere of large fleets of SSTS [supersonic transports] operating in the eighties and the biological consequences of their potential modification of the stratosphere. We are cooperating with dot by contributing to the technology needs of ciap, with particular emphasis on the levels to which pollution can be limited.” Contradictory requirements for civil transport aircraft (low-fuel consumption engines required by SSTs for good range and payload characteristics, tended to be extremely noisy in terminal areas) might be best met by variable-cycle engines that varied their mode of operation in each condition of the flight profile, nasa would “intensively study variable cycle-engine concepts in FY 1974.” Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in oast, testified that hypersonic research for potential application to military and civil airbreathing cruise vehicles was directed at “the critical aspects of propulsion, structures, and aerodynamics for this flight regime where hydrogen is used both as the fuel and as a coolant.” Hydrogen was the most likely candidate for hypersonic aircraft fuel because its high coolant capacity was essential for a propulsion system to survive in the high-temperature environment, and liquid hydrogen’s coolant capacity could cool portions of the vehicle’s structure away from the engine area. NASA’s structures and materials program provided essential technology for designing lightweight, reliable, actively cooled structures and advanced the technology of actively cooling structures heated to high temperatures. The program also extended shuttle technology on reusable surface insulation toward hypersonic cruise application. Flight Research Center test pilot Gary E. Krier testified on nasa’s digital fly-by-wire program to develop an all-electric flight-control system using intelligence inserted into the digital computer memory. “We did this by using refurbished Apollo equipment and two surplus [Navy] F-8 fighters. Using this approach, we estimate we flew about 2 years earlier than we otherwise could have.” To date, nasa had flown 15 DFBW flights with no major problems. “Airliners that we’ll ride in the 1980’s could profit from fly-by-wrre in the form of smooth flight at very high speeds and the near elimination of the response to turbulence by computer application of smoothing controls.” The “best use of fbw” was to build a control-configured vehicle [ccv] with reduced drag, increased lift, and slower approach and landing speeds. “It has been estimated that landing speed could be cut by 25 percent and range increased 15 percent with no sacrifice in mission capability, just by modifying existing aircraft. A much larger improvement in performance could be gained by starting from scratch with fbw. We have been refining aircraft for years now, and the fbw/ccv combination gives us a chance to make a quantum jump in aircraft performance.” (Transcript)
After a 35-yr local dispute, the “Great White Sands Missile Range Lost Gold Treasure Affair” had “blossomed into a national mystery,” the New York Times reported. Attorney F. Lee Bailey recently had been engaged by 50 unidentified claimants who sought prospecting rights to gold bars and treasure said to be buried on the missile range and to be worth up to $1.5 billion. In 1963 the Army, insisting there was no treasure, had banned prospectors from the range because of danger from exploding target-practice shells. Rep. Harold L. Runnels (D-N. Mex.) had proposed a joint Federal-state search for the treasure, said to have originated in various ways. (Sterba, NYT, 10/13/73, 37) October 14:	Doctors in Galveston, Tex., had pronounced the condition of Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., “good and stable” following skin grafts for bums he received in an Aug. 22 aircraft accident, United Press International reported. Haise had been burned over 55% of his body and had suffered a lung ailment following the crash of a World War II training aircraft he had been piloting for an air show group, (upi, M Her, 10/14/73)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight transmitted Space Shuttle— Skylab, 1973: Status Report (dated January 1973) to its parent House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The report covered the transition from detailed design to development phase of NASA’s shuttle program (in which the first manned flight was planned for 1978) and the updated cost, performance, and status of the Skylab program (to be completed in 1973). The Subcommittee concluded that technology and resources existed for successful development of the NASA configuration for an earth-orbital shuttle and that the shuttle design would permit the total development cost to stay within $5.15 billion and the per-flight operational cost within $10.5 million. Success in meeting this cost was “particularly sensitive” to the cost of the hydrogen-oxygen tanks and an acceptable recoverable and refurbishment cost of the solid-fueled rocket boosters. Space tug development was “of key importance to gaining full utility of the space shuttle.” Development of a low-cost space shuttle system was essential “if the nation is to realize the full benefits of near space in . . . scientific exploration, practical application, and national security.” The Skylab program was within costs projected by NASA for FY 1973. Development schedules were being met “with some problems being encountered in procuring and integrating experiments.” NASA was recommended to consider the possibility of flying Skylab in the 19741976 period and also possible Skylab revisits after the first three manned missions. (Text)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., released Monopsony: A Fundamental Problem in Government Procurement. The report, prepared by the Orkand Corp., said the problems of a monopsony—a market dominated by a single buyer—were no longer restricted to defense and space suppliers as Government agencies took increasingly active roles in mass transit, education, health, and environmental protection. Results of Government monopsony power were higher final costs and lowered or nonexistent profits that compounded industry’s difficulty in attracting capital. In the end, “what is in jeopardy is not one or two industries but rather our capability, as a nation, to undertake programs in which the resources of government and industry must be committed to the development and implementation of solutions to society’s problems. The study recommended: establishment of a Government Procurement Practices Board (gppb) to limit governmental monopsony power; a continuing review by gppb of procurement policies, regulations, and practices; a “free market test” criterion to govern the procurement process; and formulation by gppb of procurement principles that could be submitted to Congress and enacted into law. (Text)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director Chester M. Lee testified on the status of the joint 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission, during the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. Activities were being directed to identify and define candidate astp experiments to provide data for U.S. and Soviet scientists, provide for coinvestigators in both countries, require active cooperation by Soviet cosmonauts, and use existing hardware where possible. Experiments would be discussed at the March meeting of U.S.-U.S.S.R. working groups [see March 15-30]. No launch vehicle work specifically for ASTP had begun, but modification, testing, and checkout would begin during the coming year at Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39 and other facilities. The program was “on schedule and moving well toward our current mission date of mid-July 1975.” (Transcript)
Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in hearings on NASA’s tracking program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology that the percentage of Spacecraft requiring real-time control would increase from 70% to 90% in 1975. With increased number of satellites and volume of data, as well, new tracking capability would be required. NASA proposed a new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) for the late 1970s—possibly leased from the private sector—to support low-earth-orbit spacecraft. Two synchronous satellites would relay telemetry, voice, and video data from other spacecraft to a single U.S. earth station, or from the station to the spacecraft, tdrss would support all spacecraft below 5000 km (3100 mi), including shuttle, Spacelab, and automated spacecraft. The new system would give 88% continuous contact with spacecraft, realtime interactive experiments, and reduced dependence on foreign-based tracking stations. Half the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network stations could be closed, saving “tens of millions of dollars.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight resumed hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified that a thorough analysis of the space shuttle’s possible environmental effects had been made in 1972 and a report had been filed with the Environmental Protection Agency. The shuttle’s effect on atmosphere, water, and noise would be “minimal and below allowable limits.” Safeguards to be added would further minimize any potential environmental impact. NASA and Dept, of Defense studies with space-experienced companies to determine the reduction in satellite costs by use of the shuttle for launch and retrieval had shown “payload costs reductions of 40 to 50 percent” from “present-day payload costs.” Plans for FY 1974 called for “an orderly buildup” in prime and subcontractor manpower for the orbiter and space shuttle main engine development and award of contracts for all remaining major elements of the shuttle, including the external tank and solid rocket booster. FY 1974 funds, although less than requested, would provide for “an expanded scope of design, development, and testing activities and for continuation of subsystems and component development.” Director Douglas R. Lord of nasa’s Sortie Lab Task Force testified that the lab would be designed for installation in the space shuttle’s cargo bay “to allow nonastronaut scientists to use nearly conventional laboratory equipment at orbital altitudes.” The lab would consist of a closed, pressurized module for experimenters and their laboratory subsystems and apparatus, as well as a pallet section exposed to space when the payload bay doors were opened, for large sensors requiring space exposure, such as telescopes. The pallet could be used either with the pressurized module or separately, mounted in the payload bay and supported by the shuttle orbiter. The sortie lab would provide “an opportunity for international participation, ... for the first time in the manned program, in the initial development of a completely new capability.” (Transcript)	*
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the Skylab 1 Investigation Report [see July 13]. A Senate hearing had been held July 30. Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, Skylab 1 Investigation Board Chairman, testified that the failure to recognize design deficiencies in the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield that led to its loss during the May 14^-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission and the failure to communicate the importance of proper venting of the shield must be attributed to “an absence of sound engineering judgment and alert engineering leadership . . . over a considerable period of time.” There had been no evidence to indicate that “the design, development and testing of the meteoroid shield were compromised by limitations of funds or time. The quality of workmanship applied to the shield was adequate for its intended purpose.” Testing emphasis on ordnance performance and shield deployment had been appropriate. “Engineering and management personnel on Skylab, on the part of both contractor and Government, were available from the prior Saturn development and were thus highly experienced and adequate in number.” The Investigation Board had suggested corrective action: omit the meteoroid shield on any future Workshops, coat the Workshop for thermal control, and rely on meteoroid protection from the Workshop tank walls. If further protection was required, the Board had favored a fixed, nondeployable shield. To reduce the probability of separation failures as had occurred at Saturn S-II interstage second separation plane, linear-shaped charges should be detonated simultaneously from both ends, and all ordnance applications should be reviewed for a similar failure mode. Structural systems that had to move or deploy, or that required other mechanisms or components for operation, should not be considered solely as structure; and complex, multidisciplinary systems should have a designated project engineer. N0I FILMED NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley described nasa’s actions to prevent recurrence of the Skylab Orbital Workshop anomalies: “We established an independent Investigation Board, have accepted the Board’s report, and have directed all our program and project people to examine their projects in light of the findings of the Board. We will follow up to see that changes in formal management systems are made when required.” (Transcript)
Rep. Lawrence R. Coughlin (R-Pa.) resigned from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and was elected to the House Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa LAR XII/26)
nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during nasa FY 1974 authorization hearings: Support in 1972 had been provided to more than 40 ongoing missions as well as 18 new flight projects. New launches—which included Apollo 16 and 17 and the first probe to Jupiter, Pioneer 10—“placed increased demands on the capacity and reliability of the tracking systems.” During the two-year, 1 000 000 000-km (621 400 000-mi) journey of Pioneer 10 to Jupiter’s vicinity, the Deep Space Network would continuously monitor the spacecraft’s condition and acquire data from its 13 experiments. Major changes in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) had been the installation of a transportable station at St. John’s, Newfoundland, to provide Skylab launch support and the closing of the station at Fort Myers, Fla. The closing was “the first of the station closures planned to take place over the next few years as the spaceflight tracking and data network moves toward a single integrated network in the post-Apollo-Soyuz test project time.” (Transcript)
The Thor-Delta launch vehicle and “its entire missile launch system” were being sold to Japan by McDonnell Douglas Corp., Director Andrew Eiemiller of the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (afl-cio) Dept, of Legislation said in testimony before the House Committee on Finance’s Subcommittee on International Trade. Eiemiller told the Subcommittee that the U.S. aerospace industry, “where the U.S. has held technological supremacy,” was “steadily being exported abroad.” Dept, of State spokesman Charles W. Rray, III, later told the press in Washington that the sale had been approved under a 1969 agreement on space cooperation. Japan would be obligated to use the rocket system for peaceful purposes only. (CR, 3/6/73, S3977-9; Doder, W Post, 3/7/73, A10)
The U.S. defense outlay continued to increase despite improving relations with the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China, the U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement to limit strategic arms, the Vietnam cease-fire agreements, and sharp cutbacks in U.S. military forces, the Wall Street Journal noted. FY 1974 spending was projected at $79 billion, up $4.2 billion from FY 1973, “a shade above the Vietnam-war peak and a shade below the World War II pinnacle. While the White House talks detente, the Pentagon speaks of growing Soviet military power and the likelihood, given further price and pay inflation, of $100 billion-plus military budgets by the end of the decade.” (Levine, WSJ, l/Yl/73, 1) July 17—18:	NASA launched a series of 26 meteorological experiments on rockets and balloons from Wallops Station to provide an in-depth com> parison between remote sensors on satellites and sensors on rockets and balloons from a mid-latitude site. The project—divided into a day and night series to provide data both with and without solar energy input—• was conducted in conjunction with Nimbus 5 (launched Dec. 10, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) satellites. Four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched carrying Goddard Space Flight Center acoustic grenades to measure temperature and winds. The grenades were ejected and detonated in flight, one at a time, from 30- to 95-km (19- to 59-mi) altitude. The first Nike-Cajun was launched July 17 and reached an altitude of 117.4 km (72.9 mi). The rocket performed satisfactorily. Thirty of the thirty-one grenades were successfully detonated and the sound returns were received by the ground microphone array. The second Nike-Cajun launched 79 minutes later reached an altitude of 116.2 km (72.2 mi) and detonated all of its 12 grenades successfully. The third Nike-Cajun was launched July 18 to a 114.9-km (71.4-mi) altitude. Rocket performance was satisfactory and all 31 grenades were successfully detonated. The final Nike-Cajun was launched two hours later to an altitude of 120.7 km (75 mi). The rocket performance was satisfactory and all 12 grenades were detonated successfully. In addition to the Nike-Cajuns, the launches included 4 balloonsondes, 3 Viper Darts, and 15 Super Lokis instrumented to obtain density and temperature data. Participating in the program with Wallops Station were White Sands Missile Range, the Air Force, and GSFC. (WS Release 73-7; nasa Rpts srl)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of James W. Plummer, Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.’s Space Systems Div., to be Under Secretary of the Air Force. He would succeed John L. McLucas, who became Secretary of the Air Force July 19. {PD, 3/12/73, 1378, 1381)
President Nixon signed S J.R. 37 into Public Law 93-8, redesignating the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President, who died Jan. 22. The President said: “Few men in our time have better understood the value of space exploration than Lyndon Johnson.” As senator, Johnson had written, introduced, and helped to enact legislation which created NASA. He had called NASA the “proudest legislative achievement” of his congressional career. As Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, he had served in the “early years of exploration when the groundwork was laid, and the determination made to put a man on the moon.” As President, Johnson had overseen the first Apollo flights, “in a way that led people beyond the adventure and the pride to the deeper meaning and the deeper benefits of space exploration.” President Johnson “by his vision and his work and his support” had drawn America up closer to the stars “and before he died he saw us reach the moon—the first great plateau along the way.” (PD, 2/26/73, 160)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1973, introduced Dec. 10 as a clean bill incorporating amendments to H.R. 10952 [see Oct. 16] and 17 similar bills. Language changes more explicitly delineated agency responsibilities and two distinct program , phases. NASA would have major responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling equipment in the first phase. In the second, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would be responsible for installation, testing, and evaluation. A major amendment would require HUD to establish a Solar Heating and Cooling Information Data Bank. If a law created a permanent Federal energy agency, responsibility assigned to NASA and the National Science Foundation would he transferred to that agency. (House Rpt 93-769, reprint in Com Print, 2/74)
U.S.S. Wasp, World War II aircraft carrier and NASA prime recovery vessel, made her last voyage—to the ship breakers’ yards at Kearny, N.J. The 30-yr-old ship had been purchased for scrap metal by Union Mineral Alloys Corp. for $505 250. She had served as the prime recovery vessel for NASA Gemini-Titan manned space flights: Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965), Gemini 6 (Dec. 15-16, 1965), Gemini 7 (Dec. 4-18, 1965), Gemini 9 (June 3-6, 1966), and Gemini 12 (Nov. 11-15, 1966). (Phalon, NYT, 6/19/73, 39; nasa Hist Off)
The Federal Aviation Administration had set 1975 as a target date for phase-out of its seven DC—3 aircraft, United Press International reported. FAA was still using the aircraft—known as the workhorse that carved out much of U.S. aviation history—to check aerial navigation aids on the West Coast. Manufactured by the Douglas Aircraft Corp., the DC-3 had carried 95% of U.S. airline traffic by 1938. A 1966 survey had shown that one third of the world’s transport planes were still DC—3s. The aircraft, nicknamed “The Gooney,” had been designated the C-47 in World War II and the Korean war. By 1945 10 000 DC-3s were in military service. Built to carry 29 passengers in civilian configuration, the DC—3 flown by Gen. James H. Doolittle from China after his 1942 Tokyo raid had carried 72 persons. The DC-3 had been redesignated the AC-4.7 and armed with heavy machineguns for service in the Vietnam war. Scores of the aircraft were still flying in the U.S., in private hands and with Government agencies. (Clifford, UPI, W Post, 5/6/73, F15) May 6—8:	The Commission on Education of the National Academy of Engineering held a Washington, D.C., symposium to examine the problems of recruiting minority students in engineering to alleviate an impending engineer shortage. Only one percent of engineering students were members of an ethnic minority, (nae Release 5/2/73, NAE pio)
U.S. Patent No. 3 781 647 was awarded to Peter E. Glaser, Vice President for Engineering Sciences of Arthur D. Little Co., for a system to produce electricity with satellite solar power stations. The proposal was to orbit satellites at 37 500-km (23 300-mi) altitude in geostationary position to convert radiation received by solar cells to direct current and then to microwaves for transmission to an earth station. There the microwave beam would be converted to electric power. The patent said a belt of solar cells 5 km [3 mi] wide around the earth could provide more than 200 times the projected world electrical energy requirements for 1980. (Jones, NYT, 12/29/73; Pat Off pio)
President Nixon accepted the resignation of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering, and announced he would nominate as Dr. Foster’s successor Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Vice President for Research and Engineering of Beckman Instruments, Inc., in Fullerton, Calif. Dr. Currie had been with Hughes Aircraft Co. 19541969, serving as Vice President from 1964 until he went to Beckman in 1969. The nomination was submitted to the Senate June 6 and confirmed June 15. (PD, 6/11/73, 736, 752, 753; CR, 6/15/73, D695)
NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held a joint press briefing at Johnson Space Center on the commercial benefits from Skylab electronics technology. Robert H. Webster of Ampex Corp. said that the 28-track, high-reliability earth resources experiment package tape recorder developed for the Skylab missions was being tested for use by auto and truck manufacturers. Airlines and heavy equipment manufacturers were using it because of its environmental strength. Thomas H. Kenton, Westinghouse Regional Vice President for the Southwest, said that Westinghouse had manufactured two sensitive, low-light-level TV cameras for Skylab. The cameras could operate at light intensities 500 million times less than typical studio lighting conditions and equal to the light level of a dark moonless night. The cameras could be used for commercial TV camera systems. (Transcript)
Sir Robert Watson-Watt, Britain’s “father of radar,” had died in Scotland at age 81, the Washington Post reported. Watson-Watt was credited with directing and accelerating development of radar immediately preceding World War II. He was best known for his work in the use of radio waves to detect aircraft, but also had developed an underwater detection system for use against German U-boats during the Battle of the North Atlantic. (Hailey, W Post, 12/7/73, C15) December 8:	The risk to future development of man’s life outside the earth was “that the public will come to denigrate what Skylab has done and rate it below the achievements” of Pioneer 10, an Economist article said. Pioneer 10’s pictures, “passable photographs” of Jupiter, were “better than no pictures at all, but if the evidence of the first space shots past Mars are anything to go by, useful results require the cameras to go in much closer than Pioneer was able to do, and to stay in orbit round the planet for long enough to take ... a set of controlled mapping pictures. Pioneer 10 has shown that it is going to be technically possible to do this; the next stage is to build the space probe that will do it. When it comes to this sort of detailed work, the instruments on board tend to need the fine adjustments that only men can give them.” The U.S. should be planning “another Skylab with instruments calibrated to look further into space than the present ones. The results could be even better than Pioneer 10’s.” (Economist, 12/8/73, 20)
The James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for 1973 was presented by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics to Gerard W. Elverum, Jr., Manager of trw Inc. Energy Systems Operations Div., and Norman C. Reuel, Vice President for Liquid Rocket Programs and Production Operations of Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div., during Las Vegas, Nev., ceremonies. Elverum was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the deep throttling rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” Reuel was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the liquid hydrogen rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” (Av Wk, 11/12/73, 9; aiaa pio)
NASA activities in solar heating and cooling were summarized by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Aeronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy in hearings on H.R. 10952, the Solar Heating and Demonstration Act. Thermal control of spacecraft had been a NASA challenge since the space program’s inception. NASA and its contractors had developed competency in materials, thermal control coatings, heating and cooling technology, and thermal analysis technology which bore directly on the collection and use of solar energy. In the Skylab program Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a thermal coating with unique properties that increased solar collection efficiencies, resulting in higher operating temperatures. The higher temperatures allowed more efficient operation of absorption refrigeration cycles. NASA’s work in solar heating and cooling included advanced research and technology, a residential systems engineering demonstration program, and the planned use of a large new office building as a test bed to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience. (Transcript)
Science & Government Report commented on results of the March 19-21 Washington, D.C., meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation: “What is clear is that after two postponements of the Commission’s debut and a good deal of indecisiveness, at least on the Washington end, concerning how much R&D [research and development] cooperation to offer the Soviets, both parties are approaching the relationship with caution and no evidence of haste. We will no doubt be seeing more Soviet researchers than ever before, and access to labs in the USSR will be eased a bit for American visitors, but the politically inspired match of the two research communities should not be mistaken for a raging love affair.” (Sci & Govt Rpt, 4/1/73, 3)	... April 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified on nasa’s role in supersonic transport aircraft development before the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans during FY 1974 appropriation hearings: “I don’t think we can turn our back on supersonic technology. This is a fact of life. Military planes are flying supersonically in this country; ssts are flying in Europe and Russia. We can not just say we don’t want to build a transport ourselves and therefore we should turn off all technology in this area. What we are doing in NASA is trying to address ourselves to the main problems with supersonic flight, both military and civilian. The main problems include the economic factors involved, the pollution of the stratosphere, and the noise.” NASA was the only agency qualified to investigate these problems but “I do think that the Congress has responsibility to determine any future development of a supersonic transport in this country, at least as far as the Government’s support of such a program, and it is not our intention to in any way change that decision.” (Transcript)
Newspaper editorials commented on the Sept. 25 successful splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28—Sept. 25]. The Washington Star-News: The astronauts couldn’t have selected a worse evening to return to the earth “in the whole 20th Century.” Their reentry had been “upstaged, unfortunately,” by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s vain attempts to clear himself of allegations of bribery and income tax evasion, “and, of course, the Watergate hearings persisted as a distraction. But these latest Skylab voyagers still must receive the recognition they deserve for the longest and most voluminously rewarding space flight in history.” Skylab was “the proper program in space for the years just ahead, because it promises many more revelations about the earth and seas—the condition and potentials of our planet.” (W Star-News, 9/28/73, A18) The Wall Street Journal noted that the Skylab 3 crew could anticipate a small pleasure that eluded most returning travelers. “Unlike the rest of us, they have numbers of people who are absolutely hungering to see the photographs they brought back, despite the fact that they’ve returned with no fewer than 77,600 shots of the sun and 16,800 of the earth.” (WSJ, 9/28/73)
The Army announced award of a $1 969 269 firm-fixed-price contract to Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modification of the acoustic model engine test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, (dod Release 63-73) February 7:	The House passed and cleared for the President’s signature S.J.R. 37, to designate the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), for himself and Rep. Kenneth J. Gray (D-Ill.), introduced H.J.R. 328 for the same purpose. H.J.R. 328 was referred to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/7/73, H838.9, H877)
Rep. John W. McFall (D-Calif.) introduced H.Res. 158, providing for 30 members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman, succeeding Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who had been defeated in a 1972 primary; Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.); Rep. John W. Davis (D-Ga.) ; Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) ; Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) ; Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.) ; Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Walter Flowers (D-Ala.); Rep. Robert A. Roe (D-N.J.) ; Rep. William R. Cotter (D—Conn.) ; Rep. Mike McCormack (D-Wash.) ; Rep. Bob S. Berg-land (D-Minn.) ; Rep. J. J. Pickle (D-Tex.) ; Rep. George E. Brown, Jr. (D—Calif.); Rep. Dale Milford (D-Tex.); Rep. Ray Thornton (D—Ark.) ; Rep. Bill Gunter (D-Fla.); Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio) ; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) ; Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) ; Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.) ; Rep. Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. (R-Calif.); Rep. Marvin L. Esch (R-Mich.); Rep. Lawrence Coughlin (R-Pa.); Rep. John N. Happy Camp (R-Okla.) ; Rep. John B. Conlan (R-Ariz.) ; Rep. Stanford E. Parris (R—Va.) ; Rep. Paul W. Cronin (R-Mass.) ; and Rep. James G. Martin (R-N.C.). {CR, 1/24/73, H442-H443; A&A 1972) January 24—25:	Symposium on recycling used glass containers was held in Albuquerque, N. Mex., by Univ. of New Mexico Technical Application Center (tac), Albuquerque Environmental Health Dept., and Glass Containers Manufacturers Institute. Representatives of NASA’s public technology program, glass researchers, and city and county officials discussed recycling glass into glassphalt road surfacing material, foams for building insulation, and other new products, tac operated one of NASA’s six Regional Dissemination Centers for space agency-developed technology. (nasa Release 73-7; nasa pao) January 25:	The Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp) Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate), largest and most complex international scientific experiment, would observe one third of the earth’s tropical belt from June 15 to Sept. 30, 1974, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. A network of satellites, ships, aircraft including NASA’s instrumented Convair 990, instrumented buoys, and land stations would collect meteorological data from the tropical Atlantic and adjacent land areas to improve forecast techniques for the equatorial belt. Brazil, Canada, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Mexico, Netherlands, Portugal, U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, and Venezuela, in addition to the U.S., would process data for compatibility. Data would be integrated by the gate data center and distributed in 1976. U.S. participation would be coordinated by NOAA. (noaa Release 73-5)
Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.), with cosponsors from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 8871 to authorize the NASA Administrator to conduct research and development programs to increase knowledge of tornadoes, hurricanes, large thunderstorms, and other short-lived weather phenomena and to develop methods for predicting, detecting, and monitoring such atmospheric behavior. {CR, 6/20/73, H5064)
President Nixon addressed himself to the energy crisis in a speech over nationwide radio and TV: “We are heading toward the most acute shortages of energy since World War II. Our supply of petroleum this winter will be at least 10 percent short of our anticipated demands, and it could fall short by as much as 17 percent. Now, even before war broke out in the Middle East, these prospective shortages were the subject of intensive discussions among members of my Administration, leaders of the Congress, Governors, mayors, and other groups. From these discussions has emerged a broad agreement that we, as a Nation, must now set upon a new course. In the short run, this course means that we must use less energy—that means less heat, less electricity, less gasoline. In the long run, it means that we must develop new sources of energy which will give us the capacity to meet our needs without relying on any foreign nation.” The President announced steps to lower energy consumption. He asked the Atomic Energy Commission to speed licensing and construction of nuclear plants and would ask development of an emergency energy act. {PD, 11/12/73, 1312-8)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on the scheduled spring 1974 launch of the Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications hearings on research into short-term weather phenomena. Based on utility demonstrated by Applications Technology Satellites for storm monitoring, the first operational prototype geostationary meteorological satellite was a forerunner of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. Once the satellites were placed in orbit and checked out by NASA, they would be turned over to NOAA as a part of the operational system, which could observe the earth’s surface day and night, using visible-light and infrared sensors, and acquire in situ data from ocean buoys, aircraft, ships, river stage stations, and other ground-based remote stations. The GOES system—of two satellites in geostationary orbit viewing the western U.S. and Pacific Ocean area and the eastern U.S. and Atlantic area—would provide near-continuous surveillance of all tropical Atlantic storms, all tropical storms of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean, and all storms of observable size within the limits of the U.S., its territories, and its surrounding coastal waters, except Alaska. Improved sensors were expected to provide new and improved data on severe storm causes and development. (Transcript)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial praised Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev, who died Dec. 23, 1972: “His warmth, intense and lively professional curiosity and sense of humor did much to open channels of communication between the secrecy-shrouded and isolated Russian aerospace industry and the West.” Until close to his death “he was still the gracious host to foreign technicians at his experimental facility outside Moscow.” Tupolev had “escorted astronaut Neil [A.] Armstrong around his supersonic transport prototype in 1970.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/8/73, 9) January 8-10:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 9th Annual Meeting and Technical Display in Washington, D.C. Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright was General Chairman. Lane Director for Space Eugene S. Love delivered 1972 von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Technology and the Space Shuttle.” Lecture discussed shuttle development, need to maintain aggressive advanced research and technology programs independent of near-term needs of major systems, and future transport systems that would blend successful shuttle development technology with nonshuttle technology advancements that could be accomplished within the current decade. Guest speaker Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), criticized Administration budget policies that had affected NASA programs and gone “far beyond the space program.” Policies implied “cutback and stand-still philosophy.” Sen. Weicker was “concerned over the recently announced White House directed NASA cuts but Pm much more concerned about the leadership of this nation . . . playing to our lowest, most immediate desires rather than our" highest future potential.” Apollo 17 had been “15 years in the making and thousands of years in the future will benefit.” Vietnam war “in 10 years has undone 200 years of building the American image and contributed not one year to the American dream.” Dr. Holt Ashley, Director of Exploratory Research and Problems Assessment in the Office of Research Applications of National Science Foundation, was installed as 1973 aiaa President. aiaa presented the Daniel Guggenheim Medal posthumously to William C. Mentzer, Senior Vice President for Engineering and Maintenance with United Air Lines, Inc., for “many-fold accomplishments in airline engineering, maintenance, and economic disciplines, which accomplishments contributed significantly to the achievement of today’s civil air transportation system.” The Elmer A. Sperry Award was presented to Leonard S. Hobbs and Perry W. Pratt, United Aircraft Corp. engineering executives, for “their contributions to the development of turbojet engines.” The History Manuscript Contest award of certificate and $500 was given to Dr. Richard K. Smith for First Across—U.S. Navy Transatlantic Flight of 1919. Section Special Event Award went to AIAA Houston Section for the public relations program “Down to Earth Space Program Applications.” The De Florez Training Award was presented to James W. Campbell, Special Assistant, General Aviation Accident Prevention Program, Flight Standards Service of Federal Aviation Administration, for outstanding contributions to improving the skill and knowledge of flight instructors throughout the general-aviation community. The John Jeffries Award was presented to Roger G. Ireland of the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Dept, of the Navy, for “outstanding efforts and achievements, over a long time span, in improving the flight safety of aerospace flight personnel, particularly in the areas of life support and rescue systems.” The Robert M. Losey Award was given to George H. Fichtl of Marshall Space Flight Center Aerospace Environment Div. for “original work in the definition and interpretation of atmospheric wind environments for the design and operation of aeronautical systems.” The Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to I. Edward Garrick, Chief Mathematical Scientist at LaRC, for “outstanding contributions in the areas of aeroelasticity, structural dynamics, noise, flutter, and landing dynamics of aerospace vehicles.” (aiaa Release; AIAA Bull, 1/73; Program; CR, 1/18/73, S985) January 9:	The first Skylab space vehicle, Saturn IB with “boilerplate” spacecraft, was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center for fit checks and fueling tests. The vehicle would remain at the pad for three weeks before return to VAB for removal of boilerplate spacecraft and mating with flight spacecraft. The launch of unmanned Skylab was scheduled for April 30, 1973. The Apollo spacecraft carrying the first three-man crew to the orbiting Skylab would be launched 24 hrs later, (ksc Release 6-73) January 10:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its honors night banquet in conjunction with the Jan. 8-10 9th Annual Meeting and Technical Display and Jan. 10-12 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, aiaa Fellows inducted included Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center (LeRc) ; and Harris M. Schurmeier, Manager of the proposed 1977 Jupiter-Saturn mission at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, aiaa presented the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to Dr. Richard H. Battin, Director of Apollo Mission Development, and David G. Hoag, Director of Apollo Guidance and Navigation, both of Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The citation was for “leadership in the hardware and software design of the Apollo spacecraft primary control, guidance and navigation system which first demonstrated the feasibility of on-board autonomous space navigation during the historic flight of Apollo 8.” The G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Marcus F. Heidman, aerospace research engineer, and Dr. Richard Priem, Head of the Rocket Combustion Section of LeRC Chemical Research Div., for contributions to the literature in the field of liquid rocket combustion, particularly on performance and instability criteria for liquid motor design. The Lawrence Sperry Award was presented to Sheila E. Widnall, Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT, for “contributions to the understanding of vortex flows in wing wakes, aerodynamic noise and lifting surface theory.” The Spacecraft Design Award went to Grumman Aerospace Corp. Vice President Thomas J. Kelly for his contribution to the design, development, production, and operation of the lunar module. The aiaa Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., for “significant scientific accomplishment resulting from his examination of material returned from the lunar surface. His precise measurements of lunar sample elements by the stable isotope dilution method has been one of the most outstanding scientific achievements in lunar science.” The Goddard Award was given to Dr. Edward S. Taylor, Professor Emeritus of MIT, for continuous contributions to the advancement of air-breathing propulsion over 45 yrs, “as designer, inventor, researcher, teacher, advisor and as founder and leader of a major educational and research center of aircraft engine activity.” The von Karman Lecture Award was presented to Director for Space Eugene S. Love of Langley Research Center. (Program)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., President testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development that the aerospace industry fully supported U.S. conversion to the metric system. He said the conversion was necessary if the U.S. was to continue to hold a prominent position in precision engineering in international trade, but urged that the conversion be timely, planned, orderly, and not necessarily exclusive of other measurement systems, (aia Release 73—11)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
The National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds & Manpower in the United States 1953—1973 (nsf 73-303). Total U.S. research and development spending was expected to reach $30.1 billion in 1973, 3% above the $29.2-billion 1972 level. R&D was expected to account for 2.4% of the gross national product (gnp) in 1973, down from 2.5% in 1972 and 3.0% in peak year 1964. The Federal Government would support 53% of U.S. R&D in 1973, with about 70% concentrated in defense and space programs. Almost 40% of R&D spending in the U.S. was for research, with 1973 basic research expenditures estimated at $4.5 billion and applied research at $6.8 billion. Development spending was estimated at $18.8 billion. Colleges and universities would perform nearly three fifths of U.S. basic research, with industry leading in applied research and development. An estimated 525 000 R&D scientists and engineers were employed in the U.S. in 1972, 1% fewer than in 1971. Of these, nearly 70% were employed by industry. (Text)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology opened its hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.), Committee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would be particularly concerned with “the extent of progress toward the enunciation of a national aeronautics and aviation policy.” The Subcommittee had been partially responsible, he said, for the reduction of emphasis on aeronautics because it was “not aggressive enough in its insistence that more emphasis be placed on aeronautics during . . . the late I950’s when the Committee was first established, and the early 1960’s when the tremendous emphasis on space tended to push aeronautics . . . into the background.” Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that reorientation of NASA’s space and aeronautical programs to meet changing national goals had been completed “without jeopardizing the continuing development of a broad base for new knowledge, and the potential for meeting future, but presently unseen, needs.” In the oast aeronautics program the research and technology base took priority over experimental programs. The R&T base was “work that is unparalleled in the U.S. It is the data base from which springs new ideas for development in the future.” When faced with the necessity to cut expenditures, “we had to consider primarily a reduction in our work on flight experiments and experimental programs.” Among examples of meeting future needs, hydrogen as a long-term aircraft fuel for the distant future was a “concept of potential major importance to the reduction of air pollution, while simultaneously conserving our increasingly scarce petroleum reserves.” Hydrogen eliminated hydrocarbon pollution and was “a more efficient fuel, but the reduction of NOx [oxides of nitrogen] may require additional effort.” The “earliest likely commercial use of hydrogen as an aircraft fuel will be about 15 to 20 years hence.” Hydrogen was “a low-density, cryogenic fuel which represents problems of relatively large, insulated tanks, the need for materials to keep their strength through wide temperature variations, very low temperature hardware including pumps, valves, seals and associated maintenance. In addition to cost, hydrogen is difficult to store and transport. . . . Our experience with the practical use of liquid hydrogen in NASA’s space program suggests that there will be some complexities to solve but these should not be insurmountable.” Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in OAST, reported on the quiet, clean, short-haul experimental engine (qcsee) program to integrate and demonstrate technology required for an environmentally acceptable and economical powered-lift propulsion system, “qcsee will utilize a basic existing engine core, modified as required to mate with specially designed low-pressure spool fans and turbines to build up an experimental engine. This, together with appropriate flight-type acoustic nacelles and wing section installations, will be tested for noise and performance and operating characteristics. The design and test program will provide the technology base needed to help guide Government . . . environmental rulemaking and to provide industry with data to evaluate propulsion concept effectiveness and development risks.” George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in OAST, described the status of aeronautics programs after revisions necessitated by FY 1974 budget restrictions. The General Electric Co. quiet engine contract had been completed and both engines delivered to NASA. Engines A and C were scheduled for extensive in-house research programs at Lewis Research Center. An in-house study underway at LeRC would determine the technical value of another contracted effort, for a second-generation quiet engine. “In the meantime, we are working to generate component noise design and performance data, so that a significant noise reduction below that demonstrated by the first Quiet Engine can be obtained in any future engine program. No important area in aeronautical propulsion has been terminated, although funding levels for certain portions of the aeronautics programs have been readjusted based on a review of priorities. The F-8 high-speed supercritical wing verification project was not cut back or terminated. During FY 1973, the project was completed according to plan. The results were very encouraging and gave confidence as to wind-tunnel test results at transonic speeds.” A follow-on to the F-8 was under study. Depending upon results, a follow-on F-8 flight-test program might be undertaken in FY 1975. (Transcript)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed a joint symposium on space program planning of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the Society of Automotive Engineers in Denver, Colo. Points paramount for the U.S. space program, in his mind, were: “First, despite a year with all the trappings of potential disaster, NASA is coming through in pretty good shape. Second, now is the time for space planners—inside and outside the NASA family—to get serious about how best to use the space shuttle. Third, the single most important need for a healthy future space program is a substantially higher NASA budget request for Fiscal Year 1975. Fourth, Congress is willing to leave overall planning for future space options to the Executive Branch, but cavalier disregard for specific congressional decisions—such as we witnessed last January— is not likely to be so lightly accepted in the future.” (CR, 7/14/73, S13479)
The House attitude toward solar energy as a factor in relieving the energy crisis was discussed in a Washington Post guest column by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, and Rep. Mike McCormack (D— Wash.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy, both of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Members of the subcommittees had expressed the urgent need for an accelerated program in solar energy research and development and had encouraged NASA and the National Science Foundation to use funds provided to develop “an expanded, mission-oriented program.” But they warned against expecting that solar energy would provide any significant relief from the energy crisis during the immediate future: “We cannot emphasize strongly enough that this nation must depend primarily upon the combustion of coal, gas, and oil, and on nuclear fission, for energy for the balance of this century. No amount of enthusiasm for solar energy, and no expansion of solar research and development, should keep us from pursuing and expanding the more immediate and urgent research and development programs in coal gasification and liquifica-tion and in research and development associated with nuclear reactors and nuclear breeders.” (W Post, 8/6/13, A23)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The Federal Government and Energy R, & D.: Historical Background. The report, by the Science Policy Research Div. of the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, said energy research and development in the Federal Government had “followed a typically American pragmatic course. A need has appeared—necessary research has been conducted— development has occurred almost simultaneously.” One exception was the National Science Foundation. “Its support of basic research includes energy R&D projects which may or may not be based on any demonstrated needs for practical results.” To a much less extent, “basic research is conducted in other Federal agencies but their projects are usually mission-oriented.” There was no comprehensive national energy R&D program or policy. (Text)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on geothermal energy. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director for Research Applications with the National Science Foundation, testified Sept. 11 that geothermal energy was recognized as a “currently viable and relatively unpolluting energy resource.” Its importance depended upon development of new technologies and “resolution of institutional constraints.” NSF was recommending a program to develop necessary technologies and “to synthesize these into pilot plants capable of generating power from a variety of geothermal sources.” An advantage of geothermal energy was “that construction of power plants can be carried out in a relatively short time.” With solution of the technical problems in extracting the earth’s heat and converting it into electricity, “the commercial impact of geothermal energy could begin to be felt within this decade. Geothermal energy is, therefore, counted on to contribute at least regionally to a resolution of the energy crisis in the short term as well as to provide sizable blocks of energy in the remaining years of this century.” (Transcript) September 12:	The Federal Communications Commission approved five applications for permission to build domestic satellite networks—from American Satellite Corp., jointly owned by Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc.; rca Global Communications, Inc., and rca Alaska Communications, Inc.; gte Satellite Corp. and National Satellite Services, Inc., a Hughes Aircraft Co. subsidiary; American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; and Communications Satellite Corp. GTE also was authorized to begin interstate toll telephone service in competition with AT&T. ComSatCorp was given interim authorization to proceed with procurement of high-capacity satellites for lease to AT&T “at its own risk.” fcc said ComSatCorp appeared not to have complied with an Fcc order to form a separate corporation to engage in domestic satellite activities, (fcc pio; ComSatCorp Release 73-48; W Post, 9/13/73, D12)
