Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul E. Hemke, a pioneer in aeronautical engineering, died at the age of 84. In 1910 he had assisted in designing one of the Nation’s first aircraft, which flew to a height of 0.6 m. Dr. Hemke, an analyst at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory 1924-1927, was responsible for establishing aeronautical engineering departments at Case Institute of Applied Science in 1931 and at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1936, where he headed the department until 1949. During World War II Dr. Hemke served on a Government team of scientists sent to Europe to persuade European scientists, especially rocket experts, to emigrate to the U.S. (W Star-News, 29 May 74)
President Nixon resigned as 37th President of the United States. Vice President Gerald R. Ford was sworn in as the Nation’s 38th President. President Nixon had been facing possible impeachment after two years of bitter public debate over his conduct following the 17 June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate compound in Washington, D.C., by agents of the Committee for the Reelection of the President. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 9 Aug 74, 1; Montgomery, NYT, 9 Aug 74, 13; PD, 12 Aug 74, 1014^1017)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology reported on prospects for Advanced Nuclear Research in the wake of the February 1972 termination of the nerva nuclear rocket program and the FY 1974 reductions in nuclear power and propulsion research brought by NASA budget cuts. Concerned lest the $1.5 billion invested in these programs since NASA took charge of them in 1958 be entirely lost, the Subcommittee had held hearings 7 Feb. 1974 to determine how to maintain a research capability and to ensure that results of the previous R&D would be used toward solving critical energy problems. The Subcommittee was “disappointed” that the AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office had been abolished. Witnesses from industry, NASA, and aec described work being done in thermionic technology, plasma-core reactor research, high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, and medium-power reactor systems. The Subcommittee concluded that, though funding in these fields was modest, “the potential benefits [were] enormous in scope and magnitude.” While the traditional R&D areas were becoming less well defined for the various agencies, the Subcommittee found the greater portion of the funds for the programs should go to aec rather than to NASA. The Subcommittee recommended: (1) NASA should continue, and expand as its budget permitted, its advanced nuclear research in potential energy applications. (2) NASA should continue complementary arrangements with other Federal agencies, especially aec. (3) The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy should evaluate the Subcommittee findings. (4) NASA and aec should jointly investigate and report how nuclear power and propulsion r&d had been used and how data was stored. And (5) NASA and AEC should expand industrial participation. (Com Print)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
Charles A. Lindbergh—the first man to fly solo nonstop from New York to Paris, in 1927—died of cancer on Maui, Hawaii, at the age of 72. He was buried three hours later in a simple funeral near the Kipahulu church on Maui. In Washington, President Ford said: “Nearly half a century has passed since his courageous solo flight . . . but the courage and daring of his feat will never be forgotten. For years to come, we will also remember the selfless, sincere man himself . .., one of America’s alltime heroes and a great pioneer of the air age that changed the world.” For the transatlantic flight, airmail pilot and barnstormer Lindbergh had helped design a Ryan monoplane, calculating every ounce. When the Spirit of St. Louis landed at Le Bourget airfield, Paris, at 10:22 pm 21 May 1927 after a 33-hr 29-min flight, Lindbergh was greeted by 25 000 wildly cheering persons. British, French, and Belgian governments awarded the flyer their highest decorations for valor. He received the first U.S. Distinguished Flying Cross and the Medal of Honor and was promoted from lieutenant to colonel in the Army Air Corps Reserve. Following goodwill flights throughout the U.S. and Latin America, sponsored by the Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Lindbergh served as adviser to Pan American World Airways and to the predecessor of Trans World Airlines, helping to lay out transatlantic, transcontinental, and Caribbean air routes for commercial aviation. He served as a member of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 1931-1939, heading the special committee that recommended to Congress expansion of U.S. aircraft research facilities and establishment of what became the Ames and Lewis Research Centers. After the kidnaping and murder of his first son and the subsequent publicity, Lindbergh moved to Europe in 1935, where he studied the military forces of the European countries. His conclusion that the German Luftwaffe would be superior to the combined forces of the Allies, his acceptance of the Service Cross of the German Eagle from the German government, and his opposition to U.S. participation in World War II provoked the U.S. public to question his patriotism and he resigned his commission in the Army Air Corps. During the war he was a consultant to bomber aircraft manufacturers Ford Motor Co. and United Aircraft Corp. He traveled to the Pacific war area in 1944 to study the Navy’s Corsair F-4U under flying conditions and there, as a civilian, flew 50 missions against the Japanese. Following the war, his commission restored and promoted to the rank of brigadier general, Lindbergh was a technical consultant for Government and private industry in missile and space flight programs. As a consultant for Pan Am he worked on design specifications for the Boeing 747. Lindbergh devoted the later years of his life to writing and speaking on world conservation policies. (NYT, 27 Aug 74, 1; 18; Crawford, W Post, 27 Aug 74, C3; PD, 2 Sept 74, 1068-9; James, NYT, 22 May 27, 1; Affidavit Exec Apptmt, 6 Nov 31; letter, naca Chm Bush to Lindbergh, 7 Feb 40)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998 was reported to the Senate by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The Committee authorization of $3,267 billion was $8,145 million higher than that passed by the House 25 April. It was equal to 1% of the total FY 1975 Federal budget and was $0.5 billion below the constant-level NASA budget endorsed by Congress two years earlier. The Committee had added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget request, to fund procurement and launch of a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-c) for continuity of remote-sensing data. The Committee also had added $6 million to support activities under way and the initiation and application of new ideas in energy and environmental areas. It refused to concur in $20 million added by the House to the space shuttle program. (SRpt 93-818)
Aircraft designer Clarence L. (Kelly) Johnson announced his retirement as Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., effective in mid-January 1975. During his 43 yrs with Lockheed, Johnson had contributed to the design of some 40 aircraft—about half of them his original designs—including the P-38 “Lightning” fighter of World War II, the P-80 jet fighter, the Constellation series of airliners, the F-104 mach 2 fighter, the U—2 reconnaissance plane and its successor SR—71, and the C-130 transport. In 1964 President Johnson awarded Johnson the National Medal of Science, citing his achievements and products “as both incomparable and virtually incredible.” (Getler, W Post, 8 Nov 74, A12)
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings on early results from Skylab’s earth resources data. Perhaps the most interesting so far was the unconfirmed indication of mineral deposits near Ely, Nev. The Skylab earth resources experiment package had also identified several areas of citrus fruit fly infestation on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande, demonstrated the use of remote sensing for snow mapping, identified new urbanization patterns in Phoenix, Ariz., and inventoried vegetation patterns in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area photo and similar imagery for 12 other cities were being used by the Dept, of Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, astronaut on the 25 May-22 June 1973 mission to man the Orbital Workshop, testified that Skylab astronauts were healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their long flights. After initial decreased appetite, an astronaut had a feeling of well-being with normal thirst and appetite, although he had a continued feeling of fullness in the head and tended to assume a peculiar posture with neck extended and moving backwards and elbows, hips, and knees flexed at 20° to 30°. He tended to become sleepy and required frequent exercise to restore vigor and alertness. His voice had a peculiar nasal quality. After the third day he was virtually immune to motion sickness.. Without gravity, there was no automatic sensation of up and down and without vision he could quickly get lost. Dr. Harry C. Gatos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist and Skylab materials processing investigator, testified Skylab experiments had shown that segments of crystals partially regrown in space exhibited none of the inhomogeneities from dopants (electronically active chemical elements) that characterized earth-grown crystals and inhibited their efficiency. In addition to preparation of special materials for electronic and medical uses, materials processing studies in space would provide an understanding of the structures of materials and permit preparation of materials to perform closer to their theoretical limits. Crystal-growing technology was developing new means to create and store power and could, within five years, provide a practical economic basis for using solar power. (Transcript)
Congressmen and staff of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were briefed at Marshall Space Flight Center and Michoud Assembly Facility in preparation for hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, concept verification test, and use of space transportation systems at MSFC. On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. {Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 2)
9 May: NASA announced the appointment of John F. Yardley as Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Yardley—who had been Vice President and General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Eastern Div. since 1972—would replace Dale D. Myers, who had returned to private industry. At McDonnell Douglas, Yardley had served as project engineer for Mercury spacecraft design 1958—1960, Launch Operations Manager for Mercury and Gemini Spacecraft 1960-1964, Gemini Technical Director 1964-1967, and as Corporate-wide General Manager for the Skylab project, (nasa Ann, 9 May 74)
Research into automotive propulsion systems was reviewed by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Environmental Protection Agency officials in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. H.R. 10392 had been introduced 19 Sept. 1973 to authorize nasa research toward development of economical, energy-conserving systems with clean emissions and improved performance. Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified 4 Feb. that Lewis Research Center was testing epa’s experimental engine, under a June 1973 agreement with epa on work toward a low-pollution gas-turbine-powered vehicle. Upgraded engine work would be completed by mid-1975 and vehicle performance evaluation before the end of CY 1975. First results of Jet Propulsion Laboratory investigations of hydrogen injection into fuel to improve efficiency and reduce pollution in conventional automobile engines promised achievement of 1977 Federal emission standards with 25% improvement in fuel economy. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin testified that, in addition to the gas turbine engine, a broader, longer range, advanced technology program was under way, with 13 industry contracts for such improvements as a low-emission combustor, higher-temperature heat exchangers, lower-cost turbine discs, turbine wheel cooling, and low-cost fuel controls. Dr. William H. Pickering, Jpl Director, reported a test automobile using bottled gas to inject hydrogen into the fuel had already met the carbon monoxide emission standard and had almost met the nitrogen oxide standard, although the hydrocarbon emissions remained a problem. With engine modifications to produce hydrogen from gasoline, instead of using bottled gas, performance per gallon of fuel was expected to improve 25% over the conventional engine. (Transcript) 4- 8 February: The first meeting of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Assembly of Parties was held in Washington, D.C. Seventy-two of the eighty-four member governments were represented. Raymond J. Waldmann (U.S.) was elected Chairman and Dr. Osama Anani (Jordan) was elected Deputy Chairman. Elected as Vice-chairmen were Ambassador Alejandro Orfila (Argentina), Ambassador Adolfo Alessandrini (Italy), Ambassador Leonard 0. Kibinge (Kenya), and Ambassador Motoo Ogiso (Japan). The Assembly of Parties found that the proposed U.S. Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) and maritime satellite system would not interfere with the intelsat system, goes was technically compatible with the use of the radio-frequency spectrum and orbital space by the existing or planned satellites. The maritime satellite system would not prejudice direct satellite telecommunication links. The Assembly refused a United Nations request for free use of INTELSAT satellites, although a priority access arrangement, for periods not exceeding 90 days during an emergency, would be worked out. (intelsat Release 74-12). 5- 22 February: Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, passed within 5800 km of Venus—within 15 km of the planned aim point—at 1:01 pm edt 5 Feb. The encounter sequence was accomplished according to plan and data were transmitted over the 45 million km between the earth and Venus at a rate of 117.6 kilobits per sec. Excellent ultraviolet cloud-structure pictures and new data on particle environment and mass, density, and shape of the planet were returned. Because Mariner 10 approached Venus on the dark side, the TV sequence was not begun until shortly before the encounter, at 12:21 pm edt. The spacecraft flew behind Venus at 1:07 pm edt for 20 min; TV signals were stored on tape and recovered without difficulty after Mariner 10 emerged from the occultation zone. During occultation, the spacecraft’s radio antenna was aimed toward the edge of the planet so that the radio signals were bent around Venus by the extremely dense atmosphere and sent on to the earth. All science instruments functioned normally except the scanning electrostatic analyzer. The TV sequence was completed 13 Feb. after some 4165 pictures were returned to the earth. During the flyby, the 503-kg spacecraft used the gravitational field of Venus to slow its speed and direct the flight path toward a 29 March encounter with Mercury. By 22 Feb. Mariner 10—its speed increasing as it came nearer the sun—was traveling 3 million km per day toward the planet. Preliminary science results were presented at a press briefing 7 Feb. at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Herbert S. Bridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, said the solar wind was interacting with the ionosphere of Venus, producing a magnetic tail that could be detected as a modified plasma flow as far out from the planet as 500 Venus radii. Dr. James A. Dunne, Mariner project scientist, said the magnetic field doubled just before radio occultation but that no evidence of an intrinsic planetary magnetic field was found. Preliminary radio science results indicated that Venus was very round, 100 times less oblate than the earth, and confirmed that Venus had a dayside ionosphere. The mass of the planet was slightly less than that derived from previous data. Hydrogen was a major element of the Venus cloud deck, possibly present in droplets of sulfuric acid as well as water vapor. Manner 10 found no evidence of deuterium on the planet, indicating that the hydrogen had originated from the solar wind. Helium, carbon, and atomic oxygen were found in the atmosphere, with possible traces of argon and neon. Outer atmosphere temperature of 590 K (600°F) was suggested. TV data indicated a uniform main cloud deck with three or four layers and a stratified haze layer. TV pictures in uv showed a classical “Y” feature that originated in the equatorial region and spiraled toward the pole. Clear circulation patterns could be seen at the poles, caused by rising gas transporting excess solar heat from the equatorial zone by convection. The atmosphere was smooth, with no swirling storms, (nasa mor, 11 March 74; Briefing transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 5 Feb. 74, 18; 6 Feb. 74, 1; Miles, LA Times, 6 Feb 74)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
nasa’s 16th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented nasa’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Robert L. Krieger, Director, Wallops Flight Center; Norman Pozinsky, Hq. Director, Network Development and Engineering; Martin L. Raines, Johnson Space Center Director of Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance; Lee R. Sherer, Director, Flight Research Center; and John M. Thole, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Jack M. Campbell, President of the Federation of Rocky Mountain States and former Governor of New Mexico; Harry Dornbrand, Executive Vice President, Fairchild Space and Electronics Co.; and Jesse L. Greenstein, California Institute of Technology astrophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to 12 teams at Centers and Headquarters, the Exceptional Service Medal to 51 persons, and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 16. (Program; NASA Activities, 15 Nov 74,20)
Chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and members of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics received an annual program review at Kennedy Space Center, preliminary to FY 1975 congressional space budget hearings. The Subcommittee was briefed on preparations for the space shuttle, manpower, and plans for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Center personnel would be' further reduced in the next five months, with the closeout of the Skylab program. Runway construction was to begin in the spring for the shuttle, (ksc Release 18—74)
NASA officials testified on the proposal to lease a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System and on the closing of Plum Brook Station, during FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said NASA recommended lease instead of Government ownership and operation for four reasons. First, contracting for services would be as cost-effective as a conventional network of ground stations. Second, expenditures would be deferred to years when resulting savings could be realized. Funding required to procure a NASA-owned TDRSS would reduce the resources that could be applied to important mainline programs. Third, industrial technology was ready to provide the needed services. Fourth, the proposed arrangement was consistent with long-standing policies and practice of the Government to rely on industry for communications services. Acting Associate Administrator Edwin C. Kilgore of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology testified that Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station, which was to be closed by June 1974 because of FY 1974 Civil Service work force cuts, would keep its Space Power Facility on standby. The Air Force, Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and other agencies were considering using the facility—the world’s largest space environment facility, which included a unique solar simulation system. Also, NASA’s cooperative program with the National Science Foundation to study wind-driven energy devices was based at Plum Brook. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin reported that reduction-in-force notices had been sent to 177 Civil Service employees 11 March, following 180 in the past year, out of LeRc’s 400 separations. Dr. Kilgore said 50 engineers and technicians would be retained for the Space Power Facility at Plum Brook, which once employed 600 workers. (Transcript)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue briefed members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the Skylab program: Carr said that, in space, material samples such as paper, teflon, nylon, and neoprene-covered nylon were self-extinguishing when ignited, because of a lack of convection. Polyurethane, however, burned “like something soaked in gasoline. ... I am very certain that we will never ever see polyurethane foam in a spacecraft.” Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had hindered previous Skylab crews in their ability to walk and run upon return to earth had been solved by a very crude treadmill device used to simulate walking and running. “We worked at it every day, and the condition we came back in was good testimony to the utility of that device.” Pogue narrated a dramatic presentation of slides taken from the Skylab Workshop—of mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded by the clearcutting of timber, cities obscured By smog, and rivers and lakes muddied by pollution and silt. He said that the astronauts had been constantly amazed how clearly such effects could be seen from their perch in space. “It has an emotional feedback.” Carr said that it had become “very, very clear . . . that we don’t have a whole lot of places to live comfortably on this Earth and we must take care of it.” Dr. Gibson said that the crew would like to see future missions make more use of man’s capability to use his own judgment in data collection. “We would like to see instruments with high-data capability which could be pointed and selectively operated.” Carr said that, “if you are going to use man in space, he is going to be happy if he can use his own judgment and ... is productive. If he is nothing but a switch twiddler working against the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going to have psychological problems.” (Transcript)
The House passed the NASA authorization bill, H.R. 13998, by a vote of 341 to 37. The total authorization was $3,259 billion, $6 million over the $3,253 billion suggested by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 10 April and $12 million above the Administration request of $3,247 billion. On the floor, the House had approved an additional $3.9 million for research in coal extraction, coal energy conversion, and mine safety. An additional $2 million was authorized for research in hydrogen production and use. (CR, 25 April 74, H3201-31)
A golden age of planetary exploration was a realistic possibility, Science quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying in an interview. Dr. Fletcher believed space science was likely to be a major thrust of the space program in the 1980s, although NASA’s budget was vulnerable to cuts in the present political climate. He ruled out manned programs other than the space shuttle, but NASA would not become an all-purpose technology development agency for energy, ground transportation, and similar nonspace systems. Applications and materials processing would be important. Dr. Fletcher believed NASA’s program was acceptable to Congress and to the White House and that its future problem would not be wholesale cancellation of the space program but surviving annual budget cuts. Increased competition for money and staff attention in congressional space-related committees could aggravate NASA’s budgetary problems, according to Science. Observers had predicted that Congress would be faced with a choice between the shuttle and continuation of the space science and applications program. The decision could rest on the support of the shuttle program by organized labor, as it had in a 1972 Senate attempt to kill the shuttle. Some scientists had suggested that a $l-billion NASA budget cut would be better for science than a $100-million cut because the former would entail canceling the shuttle, in theory freeing money for space science. Dr. Fletcher had maintained, however, that a balance between programs would be kept. (Hammond, Science, 13 Dec 74, 1011-3) .
Aleksander Y. Bereznyak, Soviet pioneer in jet aircraft development, died in Moscow at the age of 61. Bereznyak, one of a group of design engineers who worked on rocket and jet engines during World War II, had helped design a rocket-powered aircraft flight-tested in May 1942. (.NYT, 14 Aug 74,26)
Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that the Thor-Delta launch vehicle improvement program begun in 1971 was nearing completion. The most modern Thor-Delta configuration, the 2914, was expected to fly for the first time during the April launch of Westar-A. Final decision for the launch was pending recommendation of the Failure Review Board set up at Goddard Space Flight Center to investigate the 2nd-stage failure of a Thor-Delta during the 18 Jan. Skynet IIA launch. NASA believed that, with the 2914 Delta, the present family of vehicles could launch any mission, but RCA Corp. had determined that a 30% to 35% increase in the 2914 Thor-Delta capability would permit a 24-channel, rather than the usual 12-channel, satellite to be launched into synchronous orbit, rca and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had agreed to share the cost of the uprating and McDonnell Douglas would reimburse NASA for technical direction. NASA had not agreed to make the new 3914 Thor-Delta a part of its launch family but probably would do so following successful proof flight. The first flight was scheduled for 1975. (Transcript)
The House of Representatives by a 253-to-2 vote passed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. The bill would authorize $50 million over five years for the early commercial demonstration of solar heating technology by NASA and the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, in cooperation with the National Bureau of Standards, the National Science Foundation, the General Services Administration, and other Federal agencies, and early development and commercial demonstration of technology for combined solar heating and cooling. H.R. 11864 was the clean bill that resulted from the 19 Dec. 1973 recommendation -of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy to revise, amend, and combine H.R. 10952, introduced 16 Oct. 1973, and 18 similar bills. The bill was sent to the Senate. (CR, 13 Feb 74, H774; Background <& Legis Hist, Com Print, Feb 74)
General Aviation Programs, forwarded to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by the Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reported on an oversight review based on hearings 14 and 15 May and a visit to general-aviation manufacturers in Kansas 31 May and 1 June. Noting that general aviation made up about 97% of the civil aircraft fleet, flew 79% of the hours and 71% of the miles, and carried up to one third of all intercity passengers—the Subcommittee recommended: continued close NASA-industry cooperation, NASA assistance to Federal agencies to ensure realistic regulations, individual attention to special general-aviation needs, NASA noise and emission research, concerted industry effort to use new technology, NASA effort to increase public visibility of its program, NASA-industry measures toward better understanding of respective roles in research and development, and an annual General Aviation Manufacturers Assn, evaluation of the NASA program. (Com Print)
Dr. Yannevar Bush, who directed the development of the atomic bomb and mobilized U.S. scientific and technical resources during World War II, died in Belmont, Mass., at the age of 84 following a cerebral hemorrhage. Dr. Bush was Dean of Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the 1930s, when he developed the Bush differential analyzer, which led to development of the modern computer. He had been President of Carnegie Institution in Washington 1938-1955 and while there had served as Science Adviser to President Roosevelt. In 1938 he was elected Vice Chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and was naca Chairman 1939-1941. President Roosevelt appointed him Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in 1940 and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in 1941. In that capacity, Dr. Bush organized an unprecedented team of engineers, scientists, industrialists, and military men and oversaw the development of the atomic bomb, radar, proximity fuse, rocketry, and problems of technical warfare. (Washington, W Post, 30 June 74, B8; nae Release, 19 April 66; 24th, 25th, 27th Ann Rpt of the NACA, 1938,1939,1941) 28 fune—1 July: NASA and the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory, in participation with more than 100 U.S. and foreign experimenters, launched 54 sounding rockets from Wallops Flight Center as part of the Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (Project Aladdin, ’74) program. In addition to the 54 rockets launched during a 24-hr period beginning at 1:00 pm edt 29 June, a pre-ALADDiN chemical experiment was launched aboard a Nike-Iroquois 28 June and four post-ALADDiN meteorological rockets were launched 1 July. Chemical releases made yellow to yellowish green fluorescent aurora-like vapor trails visible over the East Coast. The program was studying dynamic and structural conditions of the atmosphere 48-137 km above the earth. Using small meteorological probes, chemical releases, falling spheres, and more sophisticated spectrometer payloads, the rockets tracked and measured winds, wind shears, temperature and diffusion parameters, upper-atmosphere patterns and dynamics, and structure and composition. Data received from the rockets would be compared with data obtained by Explorer 51 (launched 15 Dec. 1973). The data would be used for predicting communications problems and satellite orbits as well as for weather forecasting and pollution studies, (wfc Releases 74-4, 74-5; afsc Release oip 065.74; AP, W Post, 30 June 74, B3)
Gen. Carl A. Spaatz, first Air Force Chief of Staff, died in Washington, D.C., of congestive heart failure at the age of 83. Gen. Spaatz had been one of the first 25 Americans to earn “wings” as the Army’s First Aero Squadron in 1916. In 1929 Gen. Spaatz, with Gen. Ira S. Eaker, set a refueling endurance flight record by staying aloft 151 hrs over Los Angeles. For this feat he received the Distinguished Flying Cross. During World War II Gen. Spaatz commanded the largest armada of aircraft and airmen ever assembled under the control of a single commander. President Truman appointed him Chief of Staff when the Air Force became a separate branch of the military service in 1947. After his retirement in 1948 he served as chairman of the Civil Air Patrol. (Johnston, NYT, 15 July 74,1)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, said data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) had demonstrated savings in land use planning and regulation of 10 to 100 times conventional costs in both dollars and personnel. Every cloud-free photo taken by the satellite had been sold to the general public at least once. One photo of an Alaskan naval petroleum reserve showed a striking alignment of lakes indicating that the deposits might extend the known petroleum area. Dr. Warren A. Hovis, gsfc scientist, testified that the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm) satellite to be launched in 1977 would use a thermal mapper, with a resolution of 0.5 km in optimum orbit, to determine maximum daily temperature variations and thermal inertia of surface material, identify mineral resources, map natural and man-made thermal effluent, and investigate geothermal source location by remote sensing. . Data from the seasat-a satellite to be launched in 1978-^-or from one of its follow-on systems—-would provide optimum, minimum-time ship routing around storms and away from adverse wind, waves, currents, and ice conditions, Dr. John R. Apel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist, testified 6 March. The savings from a one-day decrease in transatlantic crossing time could amount to millions of dollars each year for shipping interests. (Transcript)
Elmer S. “Todd” Groo had been appointed Associate Administrator for Center Operations at nasa Hq., effective 4 Sept., NASA announced. Groo, the first to hold the position created in the reorganization announced 5 March, would be responsible for agency-wide planning and direction of institutional resources and operational activities at NASA field installations. Groo had retired in 1973 from ibm World Trade Corp., where he had served as vice president since 1959. (nasa Release 72—221; msfc Release 74-146)
The House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Transportation approved a Federal Aviation Administration budget request of -63 million to begin the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) system. The two-satellite system, to be built in cooperation with the European Space Research Organization and Canada, would provide over-the-ocean communications for aircraft. In Subcommittee hearings faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield said recent changes in the program had eliminated airline opposition. The changes would limit the size and cost of the program, preclude the imposition of user charges on aircraft operators for recovery of r&d costs, eliminate any commitment for a follow-on operational system, include a very-high-frequency capability for evaluation against L-band, and limit the number of earth terminals. Signing of a- Memorandum of Understanding by the participants was pending Senate approval of the faa budget request. (Subcom Staff Off, interview; Av Wk, 8 April 74,21; SBD, 3 April 74,190)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998, a clean bill introduced 4 April to replace H.R. 12689, was reported out of the House Committee oh Science and Astronautics. The revised bill would authorize $3,253 billion in FY 1975 funding, an increase of $6 million over the original request. Authorizations for research and development increased $11 million to $2,357 billion, and construction of facilities decreased $5 million, to $146.5 million. Funding for research and program management remained the same. Iiicluded in the k&d increases was a $2Q-million addition, to a total $112.3 million, for the space shuttle main engine, which had encountered technical problems during early development. The increase was proposed to add confidence in meeting schedules and hold total program costs at the current projection. A $4.3-million increase, to $170.7 million, was added for aeronautical research and technology. A $1.8-million increase brought the total for space and nuclear research and technology to $76.6 million. Manned space flight operations funding was decreased $15 million, to $308.3 million, including a $5-million decrease (to $109.6 million) for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and a $10-million decrease (to $165.2 million) in development, test, and mission operations. Changes in facility construction authorizations included an increase of $4 million, to $10.04 million for construction of the infrared telescope facility in Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The Committee also requested that NASA make a scientific and technological inventory of its capability to contribute to such critical national needs as energy, transportation, and environmental control. NASA was to report to the Committee by 1 Aug. (H Rpt 93-983)
Francis C. Schwenk, Director of the Research Div. in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified on four NASA projects in hearings on space nuclear propulsion and power before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Early research had shown that high-temperature thermionic converters combined with a compact nuclear reactor could provide an efficient power plant for advanced planetary missions. NASA technology would now focus on thermionic energy conversion for achieving highly efficient operation at lower temperatures. During the Apollo and Pioneer programs, NASA had proved the advantages of a small (40- to 70-w) radioisotope-thermoelectric-generator power system, which had operated at 6% efficiency at a cost of $20 million per kilowatt. NASA was developing technology for a 0.5- to 2.0-kw gas-turbine conversion system (Bray-ton energy conversion system) to achieve efficiencies of 25% and reduce costs to one fourth. Gaseous-core nuclear rocket research had led to plasma-core reactors as advanced energy sources for terrestrial as well as space propulsion uses; use of uranium hexafluoride as plasma fuel was expected to achieve efficiencies of more than 50%. Lewis Research Center research into superconducting magnets and plasma confinement and heating in advanced steady-state schemes was expected to show within a year whether a superconductive magnetic apparatus (summa) could produce fusionlike plasmas as predicted. (Text)
The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee continued hearings on S. 2350 and S. 3484, bills to develop an operational Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 6, 8, 9 Aug.]. Frank G. Zarb, Office of Management and Budget Associate Director for Material Resources, Energy and Science, warned against immediate development of an operational erts system, citing budgeting restraints and marginal value of current erts data. Since an advanced satellite offering higher spatial resolution would increase the usefulness of erts data, Zarb contended that the third satellite, erts-c, should be experimental. His view was supported by S. Benedict Levin, Executive Vice President of Earth Satellite Corp., and by John V. Granger, Acting Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs for the State Dept. (Transcript)
Comsat General Corp. announced the award of a cohtract to ScientificAtlanta, Inc., for 100 shipboard antennas and associated terminal equipment as part of the maritime communications satellite (Marisat) system to provide improved communications to commercial 'ships at sea. The contract was expected to exceed $2 million and included options to purchase up to 300 additional terminals, (comsat Gen Corp Release 74r-31) 6, 11 June: Hearings on converting solar energy into electricity by photovoltaic devices were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy as part of a continuing series of hearings on solar energy. John V. Goldsmith, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist, said the total annual U.S. production of photovoltaic solar cells was 50 to 75 kw, mostly for spacecraft systems. In space, solarcell systems were without parallel but large-scale applications on the earth could not be achieved until systems could be produced in adequate volume at commercially competitive prices. Goldsmith recommended a large-scale photovoltaic technology development program and said that a terrestrial photovoltaic system, with advantages of an inexhaustible energy source and minimal environmental impact, could be reduced in cost from its current $30 per watt to an economically feasible $0.50 per watt by 1985 but would require Federal funding of more than $250 million. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs, said NASA was continuing investigations of orbiting satellite power stations. A microwave energy project was studying problems of processing large amounts of power. However, an orbiting power station would weigh 11 million kg and require a second-generation shuttle in addition to a nuclear-powered shuttle to put it into synchronous orbit. (Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified on the manned space program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Myers said NASA’s ability to hold close to the original cost target for the space shuttle in spite of schedule adjustments in the last two years was “due to bringing on our contractors below our cost estimates” and the ability 6f the management structure to remain dynamic and react to changes and “surprise problems.” He was confident that the average-cost-per-flight commitment of $10.5 million in 1971 dollars would be maintained. However, resolution of the protested selection of Thiokol Corp. for the solid-fueled rocket motor contract was necessary before work on the motor could begin; “a timely start of this . . . activity is very important to orderly progress in the shuttle development schedule.” In the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the astp spacecraft was to be delivered to Kennedy Space Center in the fall, joint docking system qualification testing and preflight docking system compatibility tests were to be completed during the winter, experiment hardware was to be qualified by early spring, and flight readiness activities were to be conmleted by spring, leading to the July launch. NASA had allocated $13 million for experiments for astp. More than 140 proposals from the scientific community had been evaluated by eminent scientists and medical doctors. The final, “first-rate” experiment package had been given final approval by the Administrator. Following astp, two Saturn Vs, two Saturn IBs, one complete and one partially complete command and service module, the unused Skylab backup Workshop cluster, and one astp docking module and system would remain unused. Acquisition cost of the hardware was $870 million. With the conclusion of the programs, the hardware would be stored. Total storage costs per year would be $100 000. After FY 1975, disposition of the hardware would have to be considered. (Transcript)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, a leading U.S. atomic scientist, died at the age of 72 in Boulder, Colo., of complications from heart disease. In 1940 Dr. Condon had become a member of the National Defense Research Council and, in 1941, a member of the Roosevelt Committee on Uranium Research. During the World War II he played an important role in the development of the atomic bomb. In 1945 Dr. Condon had been appointed Director of the National Bureau of Standards but resigned in 1951 because of House Un-American Activities Committee investigations as a “weak” security link. In 1952 he appeared before the Committee and denied charges under oath. From 1945 to 1951 Dr. Condon had been a member of the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics. In the 1950s he developed a missile nosecone—later used by U.S. astronauts—that could withstand the high temperatures of reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. In 1954 he returned to teaching and, while on the Univ. of Colorado faculty, he undertook an Air Force study to investigate sightings of unidentified flying objects. (Weil, W Post, 27 March 74, C4; Slusser, W Star-News, 27 March 74, B5; Who’s Who; House Un-Am Activities Com Special Subcom Rpt)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs George W. Cherry testified in hearings on technology for subsonic aircraft before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. NASA aeronautical programs were structured to provide the airframe industry and its airline customers an efficient and environmentally benign technology base for a new-generation subsonic aircraft. The supercritical aerodynamics program included studies to improve structural efficiency without increasing drag, thrust, or fuel consumption. F-8 and F-lll aircraft flight tests with the supercritical wing had shown that using supercritical aerodynamics on passenger transports would increase profits 2.5% over those of conventional aircraft, or $78 million a year, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. Advanced transport technology studies showed that aircraft extensively employing composite materials would show a yearly profit of 2.7%, or $100 million, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. NASA propulsion technology had initiated an advanced multistage axial-flow experimental compressor weighing 60% less than conventional compressors. This, with technology advances in other components, could reduce gross aircraft weights and fuel consumption 10%. (Transcript) ■
Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, nasa Chief of Solar Physics, testified during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight that Skylab data had changed the understanding of the solar wind. Scientists had thought the solar wind reached the earth because of an expansion of the sun’s corona, but Skylab data indicated the sun’s magnetic fields confined the corona material and pulled it inward. The corona expanded and escaped in a significant amount only through coronal holes in the magnetic field. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, testified that the Skylab 2 and Skylab 3 crews (launched 25 May and 28 July 1973) had experienced similar reductions in their blood cell mass, with a red blood cell reduction. However, after the 59-day Skylab 3 mission the compensating response of the blood-forming elements was faster, returning the mass almost to the pr'eflight level within two weeks after splashdown—rather than the six weeks required after the 28-day Sky-lab 2 mission. The Skylab 4 crew (which splashed down Feb. 8 after 16 Nov. 1973 launch) showed much less red blood cell loss and a much faster return to preflight levels after the 84-day mission, indicating adaptive changes to the space environment. The space life sciences program sought to understand the mechanisms of adaptive changes and would “undoubtedly assist our understanding of basic body physiology of man here on earth.” Capt. Chester M. Lee, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director, said that during Skylah missions the orbital altitude and the limited number of ground stations had permitted communications coverage only 38% of the time. The lower orbital altitude for ASTP would reduce communications coverage to 17%. To alleviate the problem, the Apollo command module was being modified for communications via the ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for 1974 launch. Communications woxdd move from a manned spacecraft through an unmanned communications satellite to the ground for the first time. Coverage would be increased to 50%. The present configuration of the communications network would furnish minimum real-time data to meet experimental requirements. (Transcript)
Nelson A. Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President of the United States after the House confirmed his nomination. The Senate had confirmed the nomination 10 Dec. (CR, 10 Dec 74, D1343; 19 Dec 74, D1413, D1416)
David Baker’s annual review of the NASA budget in Spaceflight concluded that the FY 1975 NASA budget marked “a significant turning point,” because the cuts were not as drastic as they had been in recent years, and, most important, there was a major increase for new programs—from $10.5 million in 1974 to $37.7 million. This led Baker to label “a trifle premature” his prediction of a year earlier that NASA might be relegated indefinitely to the role of serving “as a launch vehicle for satellites and space probes of other agencies, organizations, and nations.” (SF, Oct 74, 362-5) November 1974
Former Mercury astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American to orbit the earth, was elected U.S. Senator from Ohio by a wide margin over his Republican opponent, Ralph J. Perk. Glenn had withdrawn from a 1964 senatorial bid after a fall affected his inner ear. In 1970 he lost the Democratic primary to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who in turn lost the general election to Robert Taft, Jr. Metzenbaum, appointed to fill the vacated seat of William B. Saxhe in September 1973, lost to Glenn in the 1974 Democratic primary. (Farrell, NYT, 6 Nov 74, 37)
Siegbert B. Poritzky, Special Assistant for Systems and Research for the Air Transport Association, presented U.S. scheduled airlines’ views on nasa’s role and responsibility to the aircraft industry, before a House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans hearing on FY 1975 appropriations. Poritzky said it was NASA’s responsibility to build a technology base for aeronautics through innovative independent research in addition to undertaking directed research in response to specific problems. Also vitally important was NASA’s responsiveness to the needs of other agencies. Airlines recommended a $24.5-million increase in funding for NASA’s aeronautical programs— for propulsion environment-impact minimization, aircraft operations, alternative fuels, wake-vortex minimization, and noise research. James J. Hartford, Executive Secretary of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, testified that some cuts in the NASA budget were “penny wise and pound foolish.” Additional but “relatively modest” funding would prevent the High Energy Astronomical Observatory (heao) program—which was to investigate the scientifically exciting black holes in space—from “limping along.” Scientists had been skeptical of the usefulness of the space shuttle to science, but the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount discoveries had so far exceeded expectations that astronomers “could hardly wait” for the Large Space Telescope, planned for launch on the shuttle. “That project unified the space science community” as “nothing ever did in the past.” Other “logical follow-ons” to the approved program were urged: Mariner Jupiter-Uranus 1979 mission, Jupiter orbiter, Venus atmospheric probe, and a follow-on to the Viking Mars 1975 with a rover capability. Hartford also suggested that NASA and other Government agencies were not doing enough work in space applications. Cuts in NASA’s communications satellite research and development program had been based on the incorrect assumption that private industry could take on full comsat r&d with no further Government stimulus. Early commercial exploitation of communications R&D had been rapid only because Government research had reduced risks to an acceptable level. Competition was now coming from Canadian, Japanese, and European organizations with “a lot of government backing” who had developed a technical capability approaching that of the U.S. and were willing to take high risks. (Transcript)
President Ford nominated Nelson A. Rockefeller, former Governor of New York, as 41st Vice President of the United States. {PD, 26 Aug 74,1050-1; 1063,1064)
The House agreed to H. Res. 988, the Committee Reform Amendments of 1974, by a 359-to-7 vote, reorganizing House committee jurisdictions and procedures. The name of the Committee on Science and Astronautics was changed to Committee on Science and Technology effective 3 Jan. 1975, and the Committee’s jurisdiction was broadened to include all research and development in non-nuclear energy, environment, weather, and aviation, with special oversight over all nonmilitary Federal r&d. Legislative responsibility for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration would be shared with the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Responsibility for Federal Aviation Administration civil aviation R&D programs would be added to that for NASA’s aeronautical R&D. Major emphasis on the civilian national space program would continue. (CR, 8 Oct 74, D1210-11, H10146-69; 17 Feb 75, 534-5; House Com Staff interview, 24 March 76)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reporting on almost a year’s investigation of NASA’s tracking and data acquisition program, said the program was effective and efficient and that planned consolidation was progressing well. The consolidation, to be completed by 1976 with a reduction of stations from 25 to 15, would combine the Manned Space Flight Network and the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network into one Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). The Subcommittee recommended that the FY 1976 NASA Authorization request include a detailed analysis of the need for an additional subnet of three 64-m antennas for the Deep Space Network and report on the status of relations and agreements with the U.S.S.R. The Subcommittee warned that NASA’s T&DA capabilities were not designed for the workload that future operational systems would require; solutions should be studied by the President’s Science Adviser. NASA was asked to furnish an analysis of lease versus purchase of satellites for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) in its FY 1975 authorization request. (Com Print)
Kennedy Space Center awarded two contract extensions. A one-year $13257 787 cost-plus-award fee extension was awarded to Federal Electric Corp.- for support services, including launch instrumentation and communications support, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The new award brought the total contract amount to $144 962 628. Bendix Corp. Launch Support Div. was awarded a $20 640 874, 16-mo extension to continue launch support services at ksc, including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39. The extension brought the total contract amount to $261 498 038. (ksc Releases 93-74 ; 94-74) 11,12,13, 18 June: Hearings on H.R. 10392, a bill authorizing NASA to conduct research on ground propulsion systems, were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Rep. Charles A. Vanik (D-Ohio) said that he was becoming impatient waiting “for an energy efficient* American automobile which can meet our pollution standards.” It was “time we truly involved NASA—on a massive scale—in solving our earth-bound problems.” Carl E. Nash of the Public Interest Research Group suggested that serious consideration be given the Dept, of Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency, rather than NASA, when giving authority for ground propulsion research and development, because these agencies had had more experience in the field. Sydney L. Terry, Vice President for Public Responsibility and Consumer Affairs at Chrysler Corp., said many had questioned whether the Federal Government had a legitimate role in automotive propulsion technology, but Chrysler would “welcome NASA’s interest in the automobile with enthusiasm and hope.” NASA’s skill and experience in long-range basic research and in the fields of thermodynamics, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, and aerodynamics could contribute substantially to the development of efficient transportation. The way to proceed was by a “thoughtful division of research and development work between Government and industry.” (Transcript)
