The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
Alexander P. Vinogradov, leading geochemist of the U.S.S.R. and vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, had died at Moscow at the age of 80, according to Tass, the Soviet news agency. Vinogradov had identified 40 chemical elements in earth’s soil zones and had developed a new field of investigation called cosmochemistry—the chemical analysis of lunar and Venus composition. He had remained active as the head of Moscow’s Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry. (Tass, in FBIS, 17 Nov 75; NYT, 19 Nov 75, 38; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 112)
NASA marked the 60th anniversary of the first meeting of NASA’s predecessor institution, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) Established by a law signed by President Woodrow Wilson 3 March 1915, NACA had 12 presidentially appointed members from the military and scientific communities “to supervise and direct the scientific study of the problems of flight, with a view to their practical solution” and “to direct and conduct research and experiments in aeronautics.” During its nearly half-century of operation, NACA was responsible for the technical proficiency of U.S. aviation. Early NACA wind-tunnel research yielded the unique NACA cowling and wing shapes that would dominate aeronautics into the 1940s. NACA’s fundamental research and its direct application to industrial, military, and civil aviation helped create the world’s greatest commercial air transportation network before World War II and the world’s strongest air forces during that conflict. In 1947, it was the NACA-Air Force X—1 aircraft that broke the sound barrier. The agency had remained small in size and budget through 1939 when 523 persons worked with $4.5 million in funds. By the mid-1940s the staff had grown to 6800 and its budget to an annual $40 million. In 1958 the National Space Act dissolved NACA, transferring its 8000 workers and “all functions, powers, duties and obligations” to the new National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (NASA Release 75—86; Anderson, Orders of Magnitude, 1—3)
Dr. Walter C. Williams’ appointment as NASA Chief Engineer became effective. In his new position, Dr. Williams, who had been vice president and general manager of the Aerospace Corp. Vehicle Systems Div., would be responsible for reviewing the technical excellence of all NASA programs and for assuring their development on a sound engineering basis with proper programmatic controls. From 1940 to 1958 Dr. Williams had been employed by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and, after 1958, by NASA. His previous positions included chief of the High-Speed Flight Station, Associate Director of Manned Space Center, Associate Director of Mercury’s Space Task Group at Langley Research Center, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Flight Operations at NASA Headquarters. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Appointment of Dr. S. Ichtiaque RasooL special assistant to the NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, to be the Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science became effective. In that position Dr. Rasool would be primary adviser to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. He would also serve as chairman of the Space Science Steering Committee, responsible for drawing skills and resources of the nation’s scientific community into NASA programs. Dr. Rasool had joined NASA in January 1965 as senior research scientist at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies; in 1971 he was named Deputy Director for Planetary Programs, serving until 1974 when he became special assistant to the Deputy Associate Administrator. (NASA anno, 22 Aug 75) 3 August—6 November: Ariel 5, a U.S.-U.K. cooperative satellite launched 15 Oct. 1974 to study galactic and extragalactic x-rays, detected weak cosmic x-ray emissions from the constellation Orion on 3 Aug. The emissions, subsequently confirmed by NASA’s Explorer 53 (SAS 3 Small Astronomy Satellite launched 7 May 1975), steadily increased in intensity until they were five times greater than any observed to date. New York Times reporter Walter Sullivan quoted Dr. Terry Matilsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, as saying that when the emissions were first observed “we couldn’t believe it.” Sas 3—operated by Goddard Space Flight Center—was able to pinpoint the location of the emissions to within 1 or 2 arc-min. With this clue scientists hoped to explain the phenomenon using ground-based optical and radio telescopes. Observatories around the world had been alerted and were trying to pinpoint the source. The Philadelphia Inquirer reported MIT’s Dr. Saul A. Rappaport as speculating that the emissions probably had been caused by masses of material falling from a large star into an extremely dense neutron star or black hole. The falling matter would heat up enough to emit bursts of x-rays and visible light. Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, reported 6 Nov. to the House Committee on Science and Technology’s Subcommittee on Science and Applications that the Explorer 53 observations had identified the optical counterpart of the x-ray emissions as a faint, otherwise normal-looking star that had brightened 100 times over previous observations. Dr. Hinners repeated Dr. Rappaport’s theory and told the subcommittee that, because a similar brightening of this star had been observed in 1917, it was being classified as a recurrent nova. (1977 NASA authorization hearing transcripts, vol 1, part 1; Sullivan, NYT, 17 Aug 75, 21; AP, P Inq, 31 Aug 75)
President Ford transmitted to both Houses of Congress proposed legislation to create, within the Executive Office of the President, an Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by a director who would also serve as presidential science and technology advisor. In his letters of transmittal to Speaker of the House of Representatives Carl Albert and President of the Senate Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller, President Ford said that the new director would “identify new opportunities for using science and technology to improve our understanding of national problems and to contribute to their solution. He will also chair the Federal Council on Science and Technology, and I expect him to provide advice on the scientific and technological considerations in Federal policies, programs, and budgets.” The President said that the director and deputy director would be presidential appointees. The office would draw extensively on the nation’s scientific and engineering community for advice and assistance, and the director and staff would also call upon Federal agencies for assistance in carrying out their responsibilities. {PD, 16 June 75, 610)
The; House of Representatives, by a vote of 318 to 72, passed H.R. 4700, the bill authorizing NASA $3 585 873 000 in funds for FY1976 and $922 450 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. The bill was passed as reported out of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 14 March, (CR, 9 April 75, H2549—75)
Space programs that create new commercial activity, new wealth, and new jobs were essential to the growth of both the U.S. and Europe, Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah) told the Assembly of Western European Union. Reviewing policies that had governed agreements on space with Western Europe, Moss warned that continued cooperation in space would hinge on Europe’s paying its full share of the expenses. Concentration on programs with immediate application to earth problems should not mean abandonment of space science, or loss of “the vision and imagination that have been so important to our achievements to date,” the senator said. (CR, 10 Dec 75, S 21650; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 185)
Westar I, first U.S. domestic commercial communications satellite (launched by NASA for Western Union Telegraph Co. 13 April 1974), had transmitted its first live sports event—the Milwaukee Brewers vs. Texas Rangers baseball game—within the 48 contiguous states, WU announced. WU Vice President Dow C. Pruitt noted that the low-cost transmission reflected “the power of technology to change basic living patterns.” (Westar News, 11 Aug 75)
Dale D. Myers, president of Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aircraft Operations, announced appointment of Bastian Hello as president of Rockwell’s B —1 Bomber Div. Hello, who had been vice president of the division since 1973, was succeeding Robert E. Greer, who was retiring. Before joining the B—1 Div., Hello was vice president and general manager of Rockwell’s Space Div.’s Apollo launch operations organization at Kennedy Space Center. (RI Release LA—2)
“Clear and immediate benefits to society” that NASA could produce would justify a 25% increase in its budget, said Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, urging the space agency to come up with plans for such a program. Noting that the Administration had been considering across-the-board cuts in the Federal budget, Rep. Fuqua said the President and the Office of Management and Budget should reconsider the NASA cuts, as returns from the space program should give it higher priority than nonproducing areas of the budget. The subcommittee’s three-volume report, “Future Space Programs,” called for new space systems for educational and medical services, and for new earth-survey satellites to provide maritime, agricultural, geological, and demographic data. The report stressed that the agency should offer both short-term and long-term plans. The latter should include plans for lunar bases, orbital colonies, extraterrestrial communications, planetary and stellar exploration, satellite solar power, and disposal of nuclear waste. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology endorsed the subcommittee report, which he said contained “sensible recommendations,” noting particularly the concept of space-based generation of electrical power. Growth of the nation, said Teague, “is fundamentally dependent upon our continuing its number one ranking in science and technology.” (IFPost, 6 Nov 75, A10; NYT, 6 Nov 75, 51; SBD, 6 Nov 75, 28-30)
At least five of NASA’s 25 000 employees had made use in past years of hunting facilities owned by Rockwell International, and the agency and Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had begun investigating the matter. The investigation had not been confined to entertainment at the Rockwell facility in Md., but included “receipt of other gratuities such as Redskin (football) tickets and use of hospitality suites,” the senator said. Rockwell had been prime contractor for the $6.4-billion Space Shuttle program that accounted for more than a third of NASA’s budget. Sen. Proxmire, vice chairman of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, had directed the committee staff to assist NASA in determining the full extent of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA contractors.” NASA had placed five inspectors on the case. (NYT, 19 Nov 75, 1)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94—303 on 1 June 1976. Transitional Period NASA Budget Authorization Congressional Adjustments Program Budget House Senate Conference Conference Request Changes Changes Changes Recommendation Research & Development 730.6 -30.0 -26.0 -30.0 700.6 Research & Program 213.8 0 0 0 213.8 Construction of Facilities Totals 14.5 -6.5 -3.0 -3.7 10.8 958.9 -36.5 -29.0 -33.7 925.2
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations for NASA. Changes recommended by the Committee would increase the total NASA authorization by $46.9 million, to $3,586 billion. [See also 3 Feb.] Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Research and Development Space Shuttle 0 Space Flight Operations -4.0 Advanced Missions + 1.5 Physics and Astronomy + 1.0 Lunar and Planetary -1.0 Launch Vehicle Procure- 0 Space Applications + 6.5 Aeronautical Research and 0 Space and Nuclear Research +2.0 and Technology Energy Technology Applications 0 Tracking and Data Acquisition —2.2 Technology Utilization +2.0 R&D Totals +5.8 Research and Program Management Basic submission* 0 R&PM Totals* 0 Construction of Facilities Modification of 11- by 11-ft 0 transonic wind tunnel at ARC Modification of 40- by 80-ft +12.5 subsonic wind tunnel at ARC Addition to lunar sample —2.5 curatorial facility at JSC Addition for composite model 0 and metal finishing shops at LaRC Construction of transonic re- +27.5 search tunnel at LaRC 1 206.0 Accepted as presented. 203.1 To decrease development, test, and mission-operation activities. 3.0 To increase studies of large space structures, manned orbital systems concepts, and in-orbit maintenance. 156.8 To increase stratospheric research. 258.9 To decrease funding for the Lunar Research Program. 166.9 Accepted as presented. 181.5 To increase emphasis on weather and climate research, earth resources surveys, advanced communications research, data-management techniques, and Space Shuttle payload definition and early flight tests. 175.4 Accepted as presented. 76.9 To accelerate high pressure hydrogen propulsion systems tests and high temperature composites research. 5.9 Accepted as presented. 240.8 To decrease operations and advanced missions activity. 9.0 To accelerate effort of NASA TU teams to work with the public and . increase space benefits analysis 2 684.2 776.0 Accepted as presented. 2.7 Accepted as presented. 12.5 To repower tunnel. Not in original 0 Deleted from funds. 1.9 Accepted as presented. 27.5 Construction of high Reynolds number transonic wind tunnel. Not in original request. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee (continued) Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Construction of Facilities: (cont.t Space Shuttle facilities -0.9 46.3 Deferment of modifications of two hypergolic checkout and refurbishment facilities and construction of facilities to house microwave scanning beam landing system. Rehabilitation of facilities 0 16.0 Accepted as presented. Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old 0 5.0 Accepted as presented. Facility planning and design + 4.5 13.8 For planning and design work assoeiated with construction and modification of two wind tunnels mentioned above. C of F Totals + 41.1 125.7 Grand Totals9 + 43.7 3 585.9
