NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
LaRC announced that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would resign in December to become vice president for advanced programs at Martin Marietta Aerospace. Martin, who came to LaRC in 1964, had managed the Viking project since 1968, directing work at JPL, at Martin Marietta’s facility in Denver, and at universities and subcontractor plants throughout the U.S. Martin Marietta had been prime contractor for the Viking project. LaRC said that G. Calvin Broome, Viking mission director, would become Viking project manager 15 Nov., directing the 18-mo extended mission from the control center at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. (NASA special anno., 5 Nov 76; LaRC Release 76-37; ATT, 6 Nov 76, 9)
Two “pilots of note”—Gen. James M. Doolittle and Neil A. Armstrong— had announced plans to establish a Charles A. Lindbergh Memorial Fund to support the work of young scientists, explorers, and conservationists, the New York Times reported. Gen. Doolittle, leader of the first World War II air raid on Tokyo, and astronaut Armstrong, first man to walk on the moon, would head a drive to raise $5 million for the fund by 20 May 1977, the fiftieth anniversary of Lindbergh’s takeoff on the first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. Income from the endowment, expected to be about $400 000 a yr, would be distributed to Lindbergh Fellows who “combine qualities that made [Lindbergh] a unique human being,” said Doolittle at a press conference. He told reporters Lindbergh “would have been happier with a living memorial than one out of bronze and stone.” Lindbergh, who died in 1974 at the age of 72, had continued in aviation as a test pilot and airline executive but had branched out into medical technology research and wildlife conservation in his later years, the NYT said. The fund’s sponsoring committee included representatives of the Explorers Club and the World Wildlife Fund, as well as other areas of interest to Lindbergh: aerospace, ecology, exploration, and science and engineering. Announcement of selections for fellowships would be made yearly on 21 May, anniversary of Lindbergh’s arrival in Paris after his 33-hr flight in Spirit of St. Louis. (NYT, 20 Oct 76, 22)
The U.S. Senate by unanimous vote of 88 ratified the multination convention on registration of objects launched into outer space. All 37 countries now members of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space—which drafted the convention—were expected to ratify it; France and Bulgaria had already ratified, and 24 nations including the USSR had signed it. Registration would be with the secretary general of the UN, reporting was mandatory, and the information to be provided “as soon as practicable” included the name of the launching state (or states), appropriate designator of the space object (or its registration number), date and territory or location of the launch, basic orbital parameters (apogee, perigee, orbital period, inclination), and general functions of the space object. The convention embraced objects launched into earth orbit or into space transit—lunar or deep-space probes—but did not require reporting on objects in brief transit through outer space, such as sounding rockets or ballistic-missile test vehicles. The convention would supersede the voluntary system that had been in operation since 1962; the U.S. State Department had told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that, although nearly all countries launching objects into outer space had respected the voluntary system, there had never been agreement on the kinds of information to be supplied and the information conveyed to the secretary general had never been uniform. The committee’s only question regarding cooperation was the People’s Republic of China, which had not reported on its outer space launchings; Senator Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) had asked Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger to find out if mainland China would register under the new convention. NASA had told the committee that the U.S. would not incur substantial costs from the convention’s requirement that participating states with space tracking facilities help in identifying a space object, when requested by another participant on the grounds that the object to be identified was “hazardous or deleterious.” NASA was already tracking nearly 5000 space objects, some as small as a dinner plate, and knew which nation owned most of them. (NASA Ofc Legis. Affairs, report for 21 June 76; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 63)
As he assumed the presidency of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. William D. McElroy (chancellor of the Univ. of Calif, in San Diego, and former director of the National Science Foundation) said he planned to reorganize the AAAS journal Science, involve the association more deeply in government and industry activity, and quadruple the membership. Dr. McElroy, called the “leading world authority on the biochemistry of firefly light,” said he hoped to stop the publication of pure research papers in Science, as more specialized scientific journals could do this more efficiently, and to promote a free flow of ideas between the universities and the industrial community by Four of the comsats in NASA's 1976 launch schedule: A, Comsat General’s Marisat, launched 19 Feb.; B, NATO in—A, launched 22 Apr.; C, Comsat General’s Comstar 1A, launched 13 May; D, Indonesia's Palapa, launched 8 July. including more articles of interest to users in industry and engineering, and paying more attention to science issues in government policy. He referred to the “unfortunate separation” between industry and university after World War II when science gained new nonindustrial financial support; by increasing the circulation of Science magazine, he would expand the AAAS membership, as the magazine is available only to members. (NYT, 2 Jan 76, 10) 5 January-4 February: Permission to fly the British- and French-built Concorde supersonic transport into the U.S. was the subject of a hearing called by Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, Jr., in Washington to help him decide the matter within 30 days. Basic arguments pro and con were not new, observers agreed, as they had all been thrashed out in a bitter 1971 congressional fight that halted U.S. efforts to build an SST after about $1 billion had been spent on the project. The case against the Concorde had been that it was too noisy and that its emissions polluted the atmosphere and depleted the stratospheric ozone shield. Spokesmen for the Concorde cited its benefits in speed of travel and technical achievement. At the hearing, representatives of the Va. state government called for approval of Concorde landings at Dulles, in view of the airport’s significance as Virginia’s international gateway; these advocates found themselves opposed to the views of the local Va. jurisdictions which did not want the SST landing there. Gov. Hugh Carey of N.Y. opposed the Concorde’s coming into JFK Airport because of the noise. On 6 Jan. the Environmental Protection Agency reversed its previous stand, calling for a total ban on commercial operations in the U.S. of the British-French SST. On 13 Jan., the Aerospace Industries Assn.—U.S. manufacturers of aerospace vehicles and components— submitted a letter deploring the cancellation of the U.S. program and supporting Concorde’s application to operate. On 29 Jan., the Am. Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, claiming to represent 22 000 engineers and scientists, called for a limited-operations trial period to collect data as the basis for a final decision on giving Concorde access to U.S. airports. The Concorde had begun regular passenger service 21 Jan. between Paris and Rio de Janeiro, and between London and Bahrain, as the climax of 14 yr of technical cooperation between Britain and France and a joint investment of more than $3 billion. DOT Secy. Coleman announced 4 Feb. that he had granted the Concorde “limited scheduled commercial flights” into the U.S. for a period not to exceed 16 mo under precise limitations. British Airways and Air France could send up to 2 flights per day into JFK and Dulles airports, but the permission could be revoked upon 4 mo notice or immediately in case of emergency. The limitations included prohibitions on landing or takeoff in the U.S. before 7 am or after 10 pm local time, and on flying at supersonic speed over the U.S. or any of its territories. In his 61-page decision with 36 pages of appendix, Coleman said the 16-mo period should be long enough to demonstrate the validity of his judgment. Upon hearing of the secretary’s decision, 2 members of the Senate Commerce Committee were narrowly defeated in an attempt to ban the Concorde from landing in the U.S. by attaching such a ban to a bill authorizing funds for airport development. The Concorde’s only supersonic competitor was the USSR’s Tupolev-144, in service since 26 Dec. 1975 within the Soviet Union as a freight plane. (NYT, 5 Jan 76, 1; Av Wk, 5 Jan 76, 26; W Star, 6 Jan 76, A-3; W Post, 6 Jan 76, A—1; AIA Aerospace News Release 76-1; text, AIAA letter to DOT, 29 Jan 76; NYT, 21 Jan 76, 16-17; WStar, 21 Jan 76, A-3; B Sun, 28 Jan 76, A-6; NYT, 1 Feb 76, 3-1; DOT Release 09-76, 4 Feb. 76; NYT, 5 Feb 76, 1, 16, 32M; W Post, 5 Feb 76, A-l, A-18; B Sun, 5 Feb 76, A14)
Rockwell International—prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle—announced that it had purchased more than $18 million of goods and services from minority businesses throughout the U.S. in 1976, a 58% increase over 1975. Rockwell had been cited by the Black Businessmen’s Assn, of Los Angeles for its participation in “Black Economic Development,” and by the Natl. Assn, of Black Manufacturers for its contributions to industry development. Kenneth B. Gay, Rockwell vice president for purchasing, said that “qualified minority businesses in the more technical areas” had been hard to find in the past, but there were “many highly skilled, competent small companies competing aggressively for our business” at present. The more than 500 minority firms supplying Rockwell received about $5 million for machining and specialty fabrication; more than $2 million for metal structures; another $2 million each for raw materials and supplies and for technical services; and more than $ 1 million each for electrical equipment and for maintenance and repair services. (Rockwell Release R-46)
Arnold Palmer, piloting the Learjet “200 Yankee” named in honor of the U.S. Bicentennial, landed at Arapahoe County airport near Denver after a record-setting flight around the world that took 57 hr 25 min 42 sec and covered 37 000 km. Palmer’s flight was 28 hr 43 min 19 sec faster than the longstanding record set by Arthur Godfrey and Dick Merrill in 1966. Accompanied by the official observer and timer for the National Aeronautic Assn., Robert J. Serling, and by copilots James E. Bir and L.L. Purkey, Palmer averaged better than 770 kph on the 2.5-day flight that made 9 stops in 7 countries. In meeting officials at each of the stops, Palmer presented Bicentennial flags and bronze replicas of the Declaration of Independence; at Wake Is., he left a silver plaque commemorating the U.S. Marine Corps defense of the island in World War II. In addition to the speed-around-the-world record, NAA planned to claim for the Palmer flight 18 additional records for speed over recognized course: e.g., Boston to Paris, Paris to Tehran, etc. Since he took up flying in the 1950s, champion golfer Palmer had logged about 4500 hr as a pilot. (NAA News, July 76, 1)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
NASA announced the appointment of Harold E. Pryor as Deputy Administrative Assistant for Technology Utilization in the NASA Hq Office of Industry Affairs. Pryor had been with NASA since 1964, serving as director of the management systems office, the staff operations division in the Office of Procurement, and the NASA/DOD Contract Administration Services Office in the Defense Supply Agency Hq. He was also executive assistant to the Director, Manned Space Flight Management Operations, until July 1973, when he became director of the Scientific and Technical Information Office. Pryor earned bachelor’s degrees in naval science and tactics and in aeronautical engineering; he served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. He would succeed Clare F. Farley, recently retired from NASA. (NASA anno. 27 July 76)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
President Ford named Shuttle Orbiter 101 the Enterprise, over the objections of NASA officials who preferred the name Constitution and had planned the Orbiter rollout ceremonies for 17 Sept., Constitution Day. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had paid a 45-min visit to the White House to brief the President on the Shuttle program and to discuss the naming. The name Enterprise, illustrious in U.S. naval history, had been given to the first nuclear-powered carrier, to a World War II carrier, and to an American sloop in the Revolutionary War. The name Constitution had met with objections that the Shuttle was considered an international effort in which several countries would participate. Aviation Week magazine commented on the “power of an aroused involved public—especially in an election year” in getting nearly 100 000 fans of the TV series Star Trek to sign letters and petitions asking the White House to have the first Orbiter named Enterprise (after the space ship in the series) rather than Constitution, the name favored by NASA officials. Av Wk said the officials were concerned about commercialization of the name Enterprise in association with the TV show. The Washington Star in an editorial said it was “pathetic” that the public desire for drama in outer space had not been killed by the mundane discoveries on Mars, Venus, and the moon, and predicted that “nothing exciting will happen in the real-life Enterprise,” even though the naming incident confirmed a public desire “to associate space with adventure and suspense.” (WPost, 9 Sept 76, E-9, A-2; WStar, 19 Sept 76, E-l; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 26; 27 Sept 76, 11; Marshall Star, 15 Sept 76, 1)
In a special message to Congress, President Ford requested an increase in federal spending to $24.7 billion for scientific research and development in the energy, defense, and space programs. Ford said his request for the 1977 fiscal year, an 11% increase over 1976 estimates, included $2.5 billion for basic research. The budget asked $2.6 billion for energy R&I), a 35% increase over 1976, including funds for nuclear power, development of solar and geothermal energy, and fusion power; major increases were for energy conservation and for research on fossil fuels to improve direct combustion of coal for production of oil and gas. The President also asked congressional conferees to act quickly on bills to establish the Office of Science and Technology. (W Star, 22 Mar 76, 7)
Grover Loening, pioneer aeronautical inventor and first person to receive an M.A. degree in aeronautics from an American university, died at the age of 87 at his home in Fla. after a long illness. In 1913, after working for an aeroplane builder in N.Y., Loening became assistant to Orville Wright and manager of the Wright brothers’ factory in Dayton, 0. In 1914 he was appointed chief aeronautical engineer of the Army Signal Corps aviation section. As vice president of Sturtevant Aeroplane Co., he pioneered the first U.S. steel-frame airplane in 1915; later he formed his own company and developed the M8 2-seat Pursuit monoplane using rigid strut bracing, which he patented. After World War I, Loening produced the Flying Yacht which established world records and won him the Collier Trophy in 1921; his next success was the Loening Amphibian, with the first practical retractable carriage. A member of the Aviation Hall of Fame, Loening was one of the first directors of Pan American Airways and a member of the Smithsonian Institution board for about 20 yr. Awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit and nearly every U.S. aviation medal, he had been selected 3 wk ago to receive the Smithsonian’s Langley gold medal for aerodromics. (WStar, 3 Mar 76, B-5) During February: Water hyacinths thought to be environmentally affected by the location of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, proved to have unexpected benefits for space-age processes and byproducts, when NASA scientists monitoring the effects of wastes discharged into nearby streams found that the water plants had a peculiar ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals, and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants, while they continued to produce massive amounts of plant material. For a year, biochemists at NSTL had worked with the plants as a filtration system for purifying polluted waters, as a source of biogas for fuel, as a protein and mineral additive to cattle feed, and as a soil fertilizer and conditioner. The vascular plants could absorb and metabolize large quantities of nutrients and pollutants from domestic sewage waste waters. An installation of the size needed to meet pollution standards at the nearby community of Orange Grove would have cost about $500 000; stocking the sewage lagoon with enough water hyacinths to purify up to a half million gallons of sewage outflow daily cost only a few thousand dollars. Plants taken from sewage lagoons had been dried and ground into feeding rations for beef cattle, producing a meal rich in minerals and protein, and added to corn silage fed to a herd of steers at the nearby agricultural experiment farm operated by Miss. State Univ. A 4-mo study resulted in weight gain comparable to that on a diet fortified with cottonseed or soybean meal. The high cost of fuel for drying the plants after harvesting led to construction of a prototype solar dryer at NSTL that was designed to dry 18 tons of wet material each 36 hr; the dryer might prove a solution for agricultural problems other than drying of grains and forage. Another use of the plants was as a source of methane gas and fertilizer, using an anaerobic fermentation process with a yield of nearly 57 000 cu.m. (2 million cu. ft.) of gas from an acre of water hyacinths. A state like La., with more than a million acres of unwanted water hyacinths, might produce more than enough methane gas to fuel 2 million homes in the New Orleans region annually. Another study showed a remarkable ability of the plants to filter out “heavy” metals (cadmium, mercury, nickel, lead, silver) and other toxic organic substances common in industrial waste waters. Although plants harvested from these sites could not be used for animal feed or fertilizer, they could be used to produce methane gas; researchers found that biogas generated from plants containing trace metals yielded a higher percentage of methane than plants free from metals. Spinoff projects resulting from worldwide interest in the NASA findings included a survey by NASA investigators of water hyacinths blocking up the White Nile, requested by the Sudanese government; a plan to use hyacinth plantings as a detection system for assessing heavy-metal pollution in waters near thermonuclear installations; and use of the plants in a system to recover millions of tons of gold “tailings” left over from mining and present in streams near disused mines in the western U.S. (NASA Release 76-36)
Louis Morton, one of the foremost U.S. military historians and chairman of NASA’S historical advisory committee from 1970 to 1973, died at the age of 63 in Burlington, Vt., after surgery. A member of the National Archives advisory council since 1968, he had worked strongly for separation of the National Archives and Records Service from the General Services Administration, and had advocated a coordinating office for the federal government’s entire historical program with a chief government historian. Based at Dartmouth College, where since 1960 he had been teacher, writer, and administrator, Morton was active in national organizations related to history and had served on history and biography juries for the Pulitzer prize. He had been with the Army’s office of military history from 1946 to 1959, serving as historian, then as deputy chief and chief of the Pacific branch; he was editor of an 11-vol. history of the U.S. Army in the Pacific during World War II, and general editor of the 17-vol. “Wars and Military Institutions of the U.S.” (W Post, 15 Feb 76, B 12)
The General Services Administration goofed in agreeing to an exchange of California property with Rockwell Inti. Corp., said Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Government Operations. GSA agreed 3 yr ago to accept a $ 19.5-million piece of property on the former Rockwell AFB at Canoga Park, Calif., in exchange for a surplus $ 16-million building. No other agency had been found willing to occupy the Rockwell AFB property, and the corporation had claimed $1.8 million worth of special installations at the former base. Rep. Rrooks urged GSA to fight the corporation’s attempt to get more out of the trade. (C Trib, 14 Sept 76, 4-7)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr previously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roosevelt during World War II, the position lapsed until 1957 when President Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council. (W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
The Federal Aviation Administration would use 15 new twin-jet Sabreliners to do a nationwide airways navigation-system checking job that formerly took about 50 older aircraft to do, according to a report by Rockwell International Corp., makers of the Sabreliner. The old Civil Aeronautics Administration (predecessor to FAA) in 1932 had hired 2 pilots in singleengine planes to inspect beacon markers—then the only night-navigation aids for air travel—as well as to check safety at emergency landing fields. The report reviewed the advent of radio-range transmitters, omnidirectional signals, and instrument-landing systems, for which the FAA operated a Flight Inspection National Field Office based in Oklahoma City with field offices in the continental U.S., the North Atlantic, and the Caribbean. Until recently, safety checks had been the job of a fleet of military-surplus C-47s (commercially called DC-3s) known in World War II as Gooney Birds. These became unsatisfactory with the advent of the jet age, and Sabreliners were added to the fleet in 1968. FAA officials noted that the new twin-jet could cruise at 435 knots, compared to 150 knots for the DC-3s scheduled for retirement in June 1976. (Skyline, Spring 76, 34)
