NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
NASA announced that Dr. Bruce T. Lundin would retire as director of Lewis Research Center Aug. 26 after 34yr with NASA and its predecessor, NACA. LeRC deputy director Dr. Bernard Lubarsky would be acting director until a successor was named. In 1943, Dr. Lundin had begun working at the NACA Lewis Research Center on improvement of World War II aircraft engines. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. Lundin became assistant director of LeRC; in 1961 he became associate director for development, working on space propulsion and power generation. In May 1968 he was deputy associate administrator at NASA Hq, then acting associate administrator for advanced research and technology. He became director of LeRC as of Nov. 1, 1969, and had led the center’s research on solving the nation’s energy problems. He had not announced his future plans. (NASA Release 77-167; NASA anno Aug 9/77)
Global communications systems used by the Dept, of Defense were inadequate, inefficient, and incapable of surviving nuclear attack, according to the investigation subcommittee of the House Committee on Armed Services. A United Press report carried in the W Star quoted subcommittee criticism of the Pentagon’s top-secret command post which, “while located in the basement of the Pentagon, [showed] little possibility that the National Military Command Center would survive a nuclear attack directed against it.” The report cited “dismay over the department’s inability to deploy a satellite communications system after 16 years of effort,” “security deficiencies” in the computer software of the worldwide Military Command and Control System, weaknesses in the Tri-Service Tactical Communications program, and “urgent need for early deployment of improved voice security equipment throughout the military services.” The report commended the use of airborne command posts such as the converted Boeing 747 “doomsday plane” that had taken President Carter to Georgia the previous wk. (W Star, Feb 19/77, A-3)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who had been director of the center 1968-1975 and was now a vice president of Owens-Illinois, Inc., would speak at the center colo-quium Nov. 14 on recent developments in solar energy. Dr. Cortright, in charge of overall technical direction at the large multinational corporation now interested in uses of solar energy, would discuss technical, economic, and legislative aspects of the newly developing industry that would depend for wide application upon being price-competitive with other energy sources in spite of being inexhaustible and nonpolluting. The next few years would see its first domestic applications in areas such as space heating and air conditioning. (LaRC Release 77-54)
NASA Hq announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as assistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM). Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer with the U.S. Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Applications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as program manager for the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. (NASA Release 77-9)
NASA reported that its announcement on selection of Shuttle astronauts, set for December, would not be forthcoming until January. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, agency administrator, had met Dec. 12 with officials of the selection program but, because of current NASA budget activity, had not reviewed the data presented. On Dec. 16 Dr. Frosch had notified JSC director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the selection program, that the review would proceed after the end of the year. (NASA Release 77-254)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA budget in nearly lOyr, including new starts on three major programs. In conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested by NASA to begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed with the Senate on $17.7 million for the project, which NASA said was enough to start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large orbiting telescope, a frequently delayed major scientific project, and $26.6 million for Landsat-D, fourth of a series of earth monitoring satellites. The newspaper said the only real disagreement was over the Jupiter mission, which Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to kill [see June 10] because of its eventual cost, estimated to reach $435 million by the time it was scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had finally accepted the Senate’s figure. Planned to take advantage of a favorable alignment of the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the planet’s atmosphere. During its 20mo in orbit, the mission would also view Jupiter’s moons at close range. [Today, July 21/77, 20A)
Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere. Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the projects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program. Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)
The Carter administration would not request government funds to develop a supersonic airliner, OMB Director Bert Lance assured Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis). The Chicago Tribune story noted that Prox-mire, who had worked to defeat the U.S. supersonic transport program in 1972, was concerned because the House Committee on Science had asked NASA to do a feasibility study on advanced supersonic aircraft. (C Trib, Apr 6/77, 1-5)
The new administration of President Jimmy Carter was reevaluating the NASA budget submitted by President Ford, and would study the possibility of increases, however marginal, in that budget, Defense/Space Daily reported. NASA’s energy program, budgeted at $4.5 million in FY 1958 ($1 million to study satellite solar power and $3.5 million for energy technology that could be transferred to ERDA), would probably be recommended for increase within the next few weeks, the report said. (D/SD, Feb 2/77, 185)
H. Julian Allen, originator of the concept of bluntness as an aerodynamic technique for reducing heating of spacecraft reentering earth’s atmosphere, died of a heart attack at Stanford Univ. hospital at the age of 66. A major figure in modern aerospace technology, Allen’s work had made possible the safe return to earth of U.S. astronauts and had revolutionized the design of ballistic missiles. After earning bachelor’s and engineering degrees from Stanford, Allen in 1936 had joined the Natl. Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) at its Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va., and had returned to Calif, in 1941 when the Ames installation came into being. He had worked there ever since, serving as ARC director from 1965 to 1969. His scientific contributions included a general theory of subsonic airfoils which led to use of low-drag airfoils in World War II on aircraft such as the Mustang fighter. He led in developing high-speed wind tunnels at ARC, now recognized as primary national resources for advancing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and international honors, including NASA’s distinguished service medal and medal for exceptional scientific achievement. He was a fellow of many societies, including the Royal Aeronautical Society of London. (ARC Release 77-06)
The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. Ilyushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World War II to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or cause of death. Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931 devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design was the II-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level. The II-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to New York in July 1968. Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die: A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 supersonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K. Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the 11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A. Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY Times, Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
