French and West German space officials had told a House committee that increasing costs would limit use of the U.S. Space Shuttle and the European Spacelab, Av Wk reported. A NASA official had admitted that Spacelab could have been built less expensively under a single nation’s management, but denied that Space Shuttle operational costs had increased prohibitively. Wolfgang Finke, director of West Germany’s Dept, of Space and Transportation, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that not only had the price of conventional launches increased steadily, but also “the new space transportation system will not revolutionize the cost of space transportation. On the contrary, the estimates for the fare of a Shuttle roundtrip and the fringe costs going with it went up considerably, putting a real brake on our more ambitious plans to utilize the new system.” As for Spacelab, Finke said the results of a West German materials-processing experiment would need a series of experiments for confirmation, with a cost level “well above the range of traditional materials research costs.” Hubert Curien, president of the French space agency, said that “anticipated cost of Spacelab experiments now reaches such heights that their funding raises very serious problems for national budgets and constitutes a very severe limitation.” Finke noted in conclusion that administrative costs of international cooperation had increased costs of the overall project. A NASA official agreed that if Spacelab had been built in the U.S. under one management, total cost would have been less. (Av-Wk, May 22/78, 28)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
DOD’s top command, control, and communications official, Dr. Gerald Dinneen, had characterized the use of satellite-borne lasers to communicate with submarines as costly and inefficient, Aerospace Daily reported. In testimony before the House Committee on Armed Services, Dinneen had said such a scheme would require “a number of satellites.” Spreading out a laser beam would lose energy, so the beam would have to be relatively narrow to maintain contact with an antenna on the surface of the water. This would require either a large number of satellites, or scanning the beam around the surface of the water to communicate with other submarines. Dinneen had downplayed the idea of piggybacking blue-green laser kits on satellites (suggested as a possibility by 1981 or 1982) because very few satellites, communications or navigation, had excess capacity: “If you are going to put something on,” he added, “you have to take off something else.” (A/D, Aug 31/78, 276) During August: The USAF reported that NavStar 2, within seconds of reaching orbit after its May 13 launch, had been tracked by one of SAM-SO’s stations. “About one hour after launch we made initial contact with the satellite,” said 2nd Lt. Joe Fury, satellite operations controller. “Controllers then tested the satellite’s systems to assure their operation before beginning other on-orbit checks to make the spacecraft function.” In its initial 6-hr orbit, the NavStar had “talked” with ground controllers around the world, each of whom fine-tuned the satellite as it passed overhead. Two days after launch NavStar 2’s internal rocket motor, activated by a command from a satellite controller, had shifted it from an egg-shaped orbit into a circular 12-hr orbit; as it arrived there, the NavStar was spun up to 89rpm to stabilize it. For 1.5da, controllers sent computer-coded signals to gradually slow the spin rate to zero. After stabilization, controllers had deployed the two folded solar-array panels and began to warm up the navigation payload to receive computer data transmitted to the satellite, giving it the intelligence it needed to carry out its military mission. Three wk after launch, controllers had positioned NavStar 2 in a 10 900-nautical-mi drift orbit, slowly moving it toward the final position most suitable for the NavStar program. By the mid-1980s the NavStar system of 24 satellites would give users highly accurate data on position, velocity, and time in all weather, anywhere in the world. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 78, 3)
NASA announced it had awarded TRW Defense and Space Systems Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., a contract for the materials processing in space (Spacelab) program at an estimated cost of approximately $9.7 million. TRW would be prime contractor for various aspects of the Materials Processing in Space (MPS)-program, the contract to cover the initial phase of the MPS Spacelab-payloads project expected to begin in September 1978 and continue through 1981. TRW would develop (and support the operation of) specialized and general purpose payload systems that would accommodate a variety of different materials processing experiments during recurring earth orbit missions of the Space Shuttle. NASA had selected the first series of experiments from among proposals by scientists from the U.S. and numerous foreign countries. Objectives of the MPS program were to study new or improved processes and to identify candidate products of initial commercial interest: electronic materials, metals, glasses, and certain chemicals produced by processes such as crystal growth, solidification, and containerless processing. MSFC would manage operational aspects of the program. (NASA Release 78-103; ARC Astrogram, July 27/78, 3)
NASA announced plans to launch on Feb. 9, 1978, the first spacecraft in a new worldwide military communications system. DOD’s Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) satellites would provide vital communications for the Navy, Air Force, DOD, and the Presidential Command Network [see Jan. 20]. The spacecraft would go into synchronous-transfer orbit on an Atlas Centaur from ETR’s launch complex 36. FltSatCom, a highly versatile military-communications system built by TRW Defense and Space Systems, would offer 23 operating channels: the Navy would use 1 fleet-broadcast and 9 fleet-relay channels for communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, and ground stations, ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore. The system could offer reliable secure communications between naval units, even relatively small vessels equipped with inexpensive antennas and simple equipment, anywhere in the world except in extreme polar regions. The Air Force would use 12 narrowband channels as a part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AfSatCom) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) units and other arms of the Air Force; DOD had reserved 1 channel. The Naval Electronic Systems Command would manage the FltSatCom program. The spacecraft would consist of two major hexagonal elements (a payload module and a spacecraft module), with the majority of electronic equipment mounted on 12 panels enclosing the payload and spacecraft modules. The payload module would contain UHF and X-band communications equipment, and antennas—the UHF-transmit antenna, built of ribs and mesh to open like an umbrella; and the receive antenna, a separate deployable helix. The spacecraft module would contain earth sensors, an apogee kick motor, attitude and velocity control, telemetry tracking and command, electrical-power distribution, and a solar array folded around the spacecraft module until reaching final position in orbit, to be deployed by spring-loaded hinges. The 1875kg (41321b) spacecraft weighed about 390kg (8601b), more than any satellite previously launched into synchronous orbit on an Atlas Centaur, NASA’s standard launch vehicle for intermediate-weight payloads. (NASA Release 78-17; MOR M-491-202-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb 3/78)
INTELSAT announced it had elected Canadian Marcel Perras chairman of its board of governors and Randolph Payne of Australia vice chairman. Perras, vice president of Teleglobe Canada, had been a member of the INTELSAT board since 1975. Payne, director of marketing for the Overseas Telecommunications Commission of Australia, had represented Australia on the INTELSAT board at various times since its formation in 1973. The board had also reappointed C. J. Steffen of Switzerland and N. Tuckwell of Australia as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on planning; and O. Schmeller of the FRG and K. Nosaka of Japan as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on technical matters. (INTELSAT Release 78-17-1)
NASA announced it had presented Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, with NASA’s distinguished public service medal on Oct. 3 in an outdoor ceremony at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch lauded Teague’s efforts on behalf of NASA, noting Teague’s “unswerving faith in the value and virtue of a dynamic and imaginative space program—a faith which he has conveyed to all the elements of the government, industry, and university team on which all progress in space depends.” Teague had announced he would retire from Congress after more than 30 yr of service in the House of Representatives. (NASA Release 78-150; NASA anno Oct 3/78)
General Electric Co. and Comsat General had presented to the convention of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association divergent views on whether DOD should have its own satellite communications systems or should lease service from other organizations, AvWk reported. Lee Farnham, vice president of General Electric, said his company, as a hardware manufacturer, would evaluate a number of considerations before entering into any lease arrangement. Joseph O’Conner, vice president for finance and administration of Comsat General, said his firm, as a telecommunications common carrier, had been structured to establish system and lease communications services. At the insistence of Congress, the Navy had issued an RFP for a Leasat system based on a leasing arrangement. Comsat General might submit two bids, one for a dedicated Navy system and one for a system to serve merchant shipping as well as the Navy. GE’s Farnham said a manufacturer would have to consider (in addition to matters such as user requirements and hardware complexity) three factors in making a bid decision: financing, corporate impingement (corporate credit rating), and length of the lease. (AvWk, June 26/78, 23)
NASA announced that Kenneth Chapman, associate administrator for external relations since Jan. 1978, had resigned from NASA to join Vought Aircraft Co., Dallas, Tex., as vice president for market research and analysis. Chapman had assumed his NASA position in Jan. 1978. Before joining NASA, Chapman had been director of nuclear material safety and safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He was a retired Air Force major general. (NASA Release 78-78; NASA anno May 18/78)
The Marshall Star reported that Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, had praised the performance of Heao 1 in a report to the subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Dr. Hinners noted that, before launch of Heao I, scientists knew of about 300 X-ray sources in the sky; Heao I was discovering about 3 new X-ray sources every day [see Oct. 9]. Another major result from Heao 1 was its observation of a hot plasma, apparently about a half billion degrees, extending beyond earth’s galaxy and possibly through the entire universe. A plasma of this temperature and density distributed uniformly throughout the universe would constitute about half the mass required to close the universe. “This concept is of such major importance for cosmologists that new Heao 1 data are being analyzed as they come from the spacecraft,” Hinners said. He also noted that Heao 1 data indicated a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara. Scientific results such as these had been “so significant that we made a decision to extend the operation of Heao I through March 1979,” Hinners concluded. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 4)
Transportation USA, in a story on 75 years of powered flight, quoted the Dec. 17, 1903, telegram from Orville and Wilbur Wright to their father in Dayton, O.: “Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Success four flights Thursday morning. All against 21 mile wind. Started from level with engine power alone. Average speed through air 31 miles. Longest 59 seconds. Inform press. Home for Christmas.” Newspapers had not been impressed; not even the Dayton Journal had mentioned the achievement. Ridiculed by the press and snubbed by their government, the two brothers had taken their craft to Paris and London; when stories of their successes and honors reached the U.S., the two were finally prevailed upon to come home. Aviation had then become big business. The value of airline property and equipment, not counting general aviation, had reached $125 million at the end of World War II; by the end of 1955, the investment had multiplied tenfold to $1.4 billion. By 1965 it had reached $5 billion, and in 1977 $17 billion. In 1977 U.S. airlines carried 242 million passengers, and general aviation another 100 million. The FAA predicted that in 1987 U.S. airlines would carry upwards of 500 million passengers annually, and that privately owned aircraft would carry 200 million. The future might see aircraft using energy other than petroleum; of particular interest was hydrogen, having pound for pound 3 times the energy output. If storage were not a problem, hydrogen might make an excellent aviation fuel. The article concluded: “We’ve come an unbelievably long way in the past 75 years — from a fragile craft airborne for 59 seconds to walks on the moon. No telling where our lust for flight may take us in the next 75 years. The sky’s no longer the limit.” (Trsp USA, Summer 78, 3)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
NASA announced personnel changes at Hq. —Herbert Rowe, acting deputy associate administrator for external relations, would leave to become vice president of the Electronic Industries Association. Rowe had joined NASA in 1975. —NASA had appointed Frank Penaranda director of the institutional Operations Division, Office of Management Operations, effective immediately. He would be responsible for managing the agency’s R&PM budget and institutional management system, including program support negotiations between centers and program offices, coordinating agencywide civil service and contractor manpower planning, and overseeing the center’s aircraft operations. —NASA had appointed C. Ronald Hovell director of the Resource Management/Administration Office, Office of Space Transportation Systems. He would be responsible for budget and control support of each STS program directorate having responsibility for STS funds. —Effective Jan. 1, Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool had become chief scientist in the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Rasool had maintained an active relationship with academic, industrial, and government organizations working on development and use of scientific and technological instrumentation, theory, and techniques for study earth and its nearby space environment. (NASA anno Jan 11, 16, 20, 30/78)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
NASA announced it would award Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) its Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 3 during a 20th anniversary observance. Chairman Teague, who headed the House Committee on Science and Technology, had announced he would retire from Congress after 2 decades of service. NASA had declared his unswerving support of the agency and the U.S. space program an inspiration to all NASA employees. (NASA anno Sept 28/78)
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that the 1979 federal budget presented in Jan. 1978 reflected greater austerity in R&D programs than during the previous 3yr, in which rate of R&D growth had exceeded the rate of inflation. R&D programs funded were those that met direct federal needs, general social and economic needs, or the need to accelerate private R&D efforts because of overriding national interest. The FY79 budget contained a rise for defense and space R&D programs of about 8% each, with only a 3% rise for all other R&D. This would reverse a 13-yr trend in which federal R&D support had shifted steadily toward civilian programs. The 1979 change had resulted not only from increases in defense/space support at rates at least equal to anticipated inflation, but also from expected real-dollar declines in support of civilian R&D areas of health, energy, and environment. Federal R&D obligations rose 6% to an estimated $28.0 billion in the FY79 budget, an all-time high in current dollars, but inflation would mean a drop from the 1978 total figure in constant dollars. Later congressional actions had raised the level approximately 9% above that of 1978, and action on supplemental requests might add another 2 or 3 percentage points. Defense and space programs had accounted for more than 80% of the current dollar rise in R&D support in 1979. Funding for each of these was expected to increase by about 8% in 1979, whereas all civilian functions taken together would increase by only 3%. The defense/space share of the federal total in 1979 would be an estimated 62%, more than the 1978 share but still considerably lower than the 77% share in 1969. (Analysis of Fed R&D Funding by Function, Dec 78, vii)
Harold Berger of the Natl. Bureau of Standards would give the colloquium lecture Dec. 11 on “Nondestructive Testing—Its Growing Importance for the 1980s,” Langley Research Center announced. The aero. space and nuclear industries, which required unusually high reliability and quality in products and operations, had used nondestructive testing extensively since World War II. Berger would describe the early use of NDT, including radiographic, ultrasonic, magnetic, penetrant, and eddy-current techniques. Although early NDT had increased safety and extended product life, it had the potential for significantly improving industrial productivity and conserving energy and materials. NDT was now facing growing problems such as an aging fleet of military airplanes; demand for a deem environment with NDT implications for nuclear plants, pipelines, and offshore facilities; and needs associated with product liability. These challenges had stimulated new developments; as an example, Berger would discuss radiography, including real-time methods, image enhancement, and unusual radiation techniques using neutrons and protons. (LaRC Release 78-83)
A House subcommittee on space science and applications would hold panel discussions later in June on opportunities for international cooperation in space, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology announced. Moderated by Dr. Jerry Grey of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the discussions would follow subcommittee hearings scheduled May 16, 17, and 18 on international space programs. Panelists reviewing the hearings would make recommendations on international cooperation for publication with the hearings. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla), subcommittee chairman, said he favored use of the space environment “not only for our own nation but for the benefit of all mankind. All reasonable efforts should be made in the international community to assure that worldwide understanding and mutual commitments are developed to provide sound basis for these future efforts.” (U.S. House Committee on Sci and Tech Release, June 7/78)
NASA announced it had appointed Frank Simokaitis (Maj. Gen., USAF, Ret.) director of its DOD affairs division, Hq Office of External Relations. During World War II, Gen. Simokaitis had been an instructor pilot and bomber pilot in the European theater. Later he had held a series of special investigative, legal, planning, administrative, and staff posts, including executive assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force from 1969 to 1973. Until his retirement, Gen. Simokaitis had been commandant of the USAF Inst, of Technology at Wright Patterson AFB and commandant of the Defense Institute of Security Assistance Management. He had received LL.B. and J.D. degrees from St. Louis Univ. and was a member of the bar of the State of Missouri, admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Court of Claims. (NASA Release 78-139)
In its report on U.S. R&D spending for 1979, the National Science Foundation pointed out that doubling of the nation’s R&D expenditures since 1969 had been almost entirely attributable to inflation. However, the overall U.S. R&D effort had experienced real growth every year since 1975, mainly from increased emphasis on finding alternative energy sources; it had not provided major stimulus to economic growth or productivity in the short term. The federal government, currently supporting more than half the nation’s R&D effort, had over the last decade emphasized civilian programs rather than defense and space. Largest federal R&D spending increases for 1978 and 1979 were expected in the energy and health areas. During the 1970s, the U.S. had allocated proportionately less of the national R&D effort to basic research. Factors influencing this trend included the federal government’s deemphasizing basic research in defense and space programs during the early to mid-1970s; the industrial sector’s seeking quicker payoffs from R&D efforts aimed at a specific product or process, as opposed to projects with no specific commercial application; and universities’ increased emphasis on applied research over basic research since 1970. (NSF Highlights, May 1/78, 1)
