Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs. Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
The NAA newsletter paid tribute to former Senator A.S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), who died February 13 at the age of 77. Known as “Mr. Aviation” during his 30-year tenure in Congress, he was president of NAA 1970-1972. Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 1955 Federal Airport Act promoting civil aviation, which led to establishment of the FAA. He received in 1961 the Wright Brothers; memorial trophy for service to aviation, and the first Collier award for distinguished congressional service. (NAA newsletter Mar-Apr 80, 4)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that its subcommittees on space science and applications and on natural resources and environment would hold hearings June 24-25 on administration plans to develop a Landsat remote-sensing system with private-sector participation. (House anno 96-204)
MSFC reported signing a $2,271,391 contract with a small business, OAO Corporation of Beltsville, Md., for design, assembly, delivery, test, and checkout within 18 months of a database management system to handle an “immense volume” of instrument data transmitted at “extremely high rates” by spacecraft during missions between 1985 and 1995. The system would accept data at rates tip to 50 million bits per second (44,650 pages of computer printout per minute). “Firsts” to be included in the system would be a data bus of fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of lasers to transmit and receive data at the high rates required. (MSFC Release 80-141) During October: NASA appointed Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, head of MIT’s aeronautics and astronautics department, as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology as of June 1, 1981. Replacing Dr. James J. Kramer who retired in October 1979, he would be responsible for aeronautics, space and energy research, and technology programs. Dr. Walter B. Olstad would act as associate administrator in the interim. (NASA Release 80-156) —JSC announced that Dr. Edward G. Gibson, scientist-astronaut, would leave October 31 to become advanced systems manager for TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. The science pilot on the record 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-1974, he had left NASA in 1974 to work for Aerospace Corporation and for ERNO but had rejoined the agency in March 1977. (JSC Release 80-057) —C.A. Syvertson, ARC director, named Angelo Guastaferro of the Headquarters Office of Space Science as his deputy, replacing A. Thomas Young, recently named director of GSFC. John Boyd, associate deputy director, would remain acting deputy director for six months. (ARC anno Oct 31/80; NASA Release 80-165) —The NAA newsletter reported that Maurice Bellonte, copilot of the first east-to-west transatlantic nonstop flight in 1930, was guest of honor at the National Air and Space Museum on the 50th anniversary of his flight from Le Bourget airfield near Paris to Curtiss Field, NY. In 1929 Bellonte and his copilot Dieudonne Coste had set a world record for longest nonstop flight, 4,788 miles from Paris to Manchuria in 51 hours, 39 minutes. The Atlantic crossing had taken 37 hours, 18 minutes. (NAA nsltr Sept-Oct 80, 2) —The New York Times reported that after long service in orbit and “a galaxy of discoveries” the astrophysics observatories Copernicus and Galileo were nearing the end of their useful lives. Copernicus (Oao 3, launched in August 1972 and named to honor the 500th birthday of the Polish astronomer) carried the first UV telescope above Earth’s atmosphere and made precise measurements of the amount of deuterium in the universe. Galileo (Heao 2, launched in November 1978) carried the only imaging X-ray telescope ever orbited and mapped X-ray emissions from every known quasar. (NY Times, Oct 31/80, A-19) —INTELSAT announced that its Italian signatory member, Telespazio, had set up an award of U.S.$10,000 for contributions to the field of satellite communications. Established on the 10th anniversary of the death of Dr. Piero Fanti, first general manager of Telespazio, the award would go every two years to a researcher or student in an INTELSAT member country who made a contribution of significant value to the field. (INTELSAT Release 80-22-1)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the flight of Salyut 6, with Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin aboard for 12 weeks. The crew spent the first week of July unloading cargo ship Progress 10, which linked with the Salyut July 1. Unloading was completed, and the orbiting station was refueled by July 15. Experiments with Isparitel apparatus were performed, using a powerful beam of electrons to plate metal and glass surfaces with precious metals and alloys of aluminum and copper. Properties of plating done in weightlessness differed from those under Earth conditions, Tass noted. First tests of the apparatus were made last year when Lyakhov and Ryumin brought back 24 titanium plates with metal covering from Soyuz 32; the current tests should produce about 200 specimens covered with films of varied thicknesses. Progress 10 separated from the Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 complex at 1:21 Moscow time July 18 after a 17-day stay, during which its engine was used to adjust the station’s orbit. On July 19 the cargo ship engines were switched on by ground command; it reentered over the Pacific and “ceased to exist.” Soyuz 37, launched at midnight July 23 Moscow time, carried the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, and veteran cosmonaut Col. Viktor Gorbatko as the sixth Intercosmos crew to visit with Popov and Ryumin, fourth main crew on Salyut 6. At the launch, Boris Petrov, vice president of the Soviet academy of sciences, noted that “although space school in Vietnamese science was established later than in other Soviet countries,” experiments in space medicine and technology and i n mapping of land and ocean surfaces had been prepared for the Soviet-Vietnamese expedition. Soyuz 37 docked with Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 at 2302 Moscow time July 24; on July 25, the visitors began a study of head blood circulation during adaptation to weightlessness, with Pham Tuan as first subject. The visitors returned in Soyuz 36 at 1815 hours July 31 to the preset area; near Dzhezkazgan. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 4-31/80)
The Washington Post reported that Summa Corporation, holding company for the late billionaire Howard Hughes’s estate, would “immediately” disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s 140-ton flying boat, since a last-minute public appeal for $750,000 to preserve it had failed. The Port of Long Beach, Calif., had wanted the 220-foot boat, 80-feet high with a 320-foot wingspan, to display with another transportation mammoth, the ocean liner Queen Mary. Designed to be a World War II troop carrier, the eight-engine Spruce Goose (actually made mostly of birch) had flown only once in 1947. Parts of it would go to nine museums, including the Smithsonian. (W Post, May 23/80, F3)
NASA announced that Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had signed a memorandum of understanding with Dr. David H. Jacobson, vice president of South Africa’s council for scientific and industrial research, for establishment of a Landsat ground station near Johannesburg. The pact would let the South African council, an early user of Landsat data, operate a ground station at Hartebeesthoek and receive, process, and disseminate data. The council would pay for a ground station and attending costs, plus an annual access fee of $200,000 after the first six months of data receipt, and would have to make Landsat data available on a nondiscriminatory basis. Landsat users in southern Africa would have access to regular coverage of the region, as a contribution to development efforts of southern African nations. Nine Landsat stations were operating outside the United States, two in Canada and one each in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. The People’s Republic of China and Thailand were buying ground-station equipment, and other ground stations were being planned. (NASA Release 80-147)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that his space science subcommittee would hold hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo., on the consolidated storm information system, a joint NASA-NOAA program. The committee heard about the project in July 1979 when it was merely a concept; “it will be a pleasure to see it coming to fruition.” When fully operational, the system would give a forecaster real-time atmospheric data such as temperature, air pressure, and wind forces, from around the globe, a substantial improvement on current systems requiring several hours to obtain the data. It would combine communications links with data sources, such as environmental satellites and atmosphere soundings, into a single computer system. (H Comm Sci Release 96-235)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
Forthright criticism of Carter-administration space policy came from Rocco A. Petrone, former director of MSFC, and Dr. Thomas A. Paine, who was NASA administrator during the early manned lunar landing years, the Huntsville Times reported. The two testified July 23 before the House Committee on Science and Technology’s subcommittee on space science and applications. Committee chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and ranking minority member Larry Winn (R-Kans.) both expressed support of the NASA veterans; Winn remarked that it was :“like old timers’ day up here.” Under Carter, Paine said, the U.S. had “lost both our senses of direction and our resolution.. .Ringing rhetoric proclaiming U.S. leadership in space is no substitute for plans and programs. In my view it is self-delusive to give lip service to leadership while avoiding initiative and commitment.” Petrone said the usual pause for evaluation after a large program like the lunar mission “is now becoming dangerously close to a condition of stall and possible loss of minimum momentum needed” for complex space programs. He expressed concern over “technological timidity in a nation that has been built over the years on technological strength.” (Htsvl Tms, July 24/80, 6) July 25:A rescue training exercise at KSC was about to begin: a mock-up of the Space Shuttle was set down in a pond, and the rescue team was ready to practice its procedures in case the Shuttle overshot the runway upon its return to launch site and landed in the drink. Then, Fat Albert rose from the pond and lumbered up to Sun himself about 10 feet from the mock-up. The test was halted until wildlife officers arrived on the scene. Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until (so it is said) he ate an employee’s tennis shoe right off his foot. The wildlife officers who lassoed and carried away the alligator weighed him (1,00 pounds) and measured him (13 feet, 9 inches). With Fat Albert gone, the maneuver continued: the rescue team dropped from a helicopter into the pond and rescued two dummy astronauts from the mock-up. (JSC Roundup, July 25/80, 1) July 28.-NASA reported on a solar-flare “first” resulting from coordination of data from the Solar Max spacecraft and from a network of sophisticated ground observatories participating in the International Solar Maximum Year. On the basis of worldwide predictions, instruments on the Solar Max and at observatories in 18 nations had focused on an active region of the Sun June 24. On June 28-29, that region produced two major flares, captured by all seven spacecraft instruments (first all-instrument simultaneous measurement of the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). The observation was also the first in which scientists traced material ejected from a flare into the solar atmosphere. (NASA Release 80-120)
NASA announced award by LeRC of parallel 1-year $1 million contracts to TRW’s Defense and Space Systems Group and to Hughes Aircraft Company for designing an advanced commercial communications satellite system. Operating in a high-frequency 30- to 20-GHz band not used in the United States commercially, the system would help handle: the increased communications expected in the next 20 years which would saturate existing domestic communications satellite capacity. The new system, a network of ground stations using two shuttle-launched spacecraft, would lower costs of services such as videoconferencing, teletext, and electronic mail delivery. (NASA Release 80-84)
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, appeared before the House Committee on Science and Technology to present the agency’s budget request for 1981. After reviewing events of last year, Frosch said NASA would need by July 1 the extra $300 million requested as a supplement to stay within Shuttle cost estimates and maintain development and production schedules. Problem areas had been the Shuttle engines and the thermal protection system (TPS); recent tests had given NASA “increased confidence” in the main engines, but Frosch said that he was “not completely satisfied” with the tiles and their attachment to the Shuttle surface. He said the tiles might not be installed and fully tested before the end of summer, so that the first launch might not come until the end of 1980. The original date of launch was March 1979, and the last previous prediction was June of 1980. Frosch said he expected the first flight “between November and the end of March 1981. A year from now might be a more realistic date.” (Text, Jan 29/80; NY Times, Jan 30/80, A-17)
ComSatCorp announced the formation of a new organization, ComSatCorp World Systems Division, to handle all matters of global telecommunications through the INTELSAT system and global maritime services through the INMARSAT system. John L. McLucas, most recently ComSatCorp vice president for international communications and technical services, would head the new division. Joseph V. Charyk, president and chief executive of ComSatCorp, said that the change responded to FCC concern expressed in a study of ComSatCorp organization, as it would let FCC regulate rates and costs within an organization segment. (ComSatCorp Release 80-34)
The Washington Post reported the death of Walter R. Dornberger, 84, who as a German general had supervised Wernher von Braun’s work on the V2 rocket during World War II. Cause of death June 26 was not given in either the Washington Post or Aviation Week & Space Technology. Dornberger was visiting in West Germany. He had come to the United States in 1947 after two years in a British prisoner-of-war camp; like more than 100 other German-born rocket scientists who worked for the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, he became a U.S. citizen. He also worked for Bell Aerosystems Company, where he was a vice president. A volunteer in the imperial German army of World War I, Dornberger was a career soldier to the end of the second war. In 1932 he was given charge of a group of scientists working on rocket concepts and moved to Peenemunde in 1937. When the first test of the V2 October 3, 1942, was successful, Dornberger asked von Braun: “Do you realize what we accomplished today?” Von Braun said “Yes, today the spaceship was born.” In 1958, nearly three years before President Kennedy voiced the goal of landing a man on the Moon by 1970, Dornberger predicted that man would be on the moon in 10 years: “whether he is Russian or American depends on how much money Congress is willing to spend,” he said. (W Post, July 2/80, B-6; AvWK, July 7/80, 25)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that on June 11-12 its subcommittee on space science and applications would hold hearings on the Space Industrialization Act of 1980 (H.R. 7412) for private commercialization of space. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), committee and subcommittee chairman, said that the bill he sponsored would create a space industrialization corporation to develop new products, services, and industries using space technology and the properties of the space environment. NASA would continue to advance national capabilities in space, Fuqua said, but the corporation would be responsible for encouraging private development. (Committee Release 96-196)
NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would retire from federal service February 29. He joined the Gemini program in 1963 after two years at International Telephone and Telegraph’s (ITT) federal Laboratories as director of space systems, having also worked for the U.S. Navy and for NACA. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal for his work as mission director for 7 of 10 Gemini missions. From July 1967 to December 1968 he directed Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 4 and won NASA’s distinguished service medal for the success of Apollo 8, first manned flight around the moon. He directed the Skylab program from December 1968 to July 1974, and with the three Skylab crews received the Collier Trophy in 1973. He would become a vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation. (NASA anno, Feb 22/80; NASA Release 80-27)
ComSatCorp announced appointment of Dr. Delbert D. Smith, vice president for corporate affairs, to a three-year term on the board of the International Institute of Communications (IIC) at the latter’s annual conference. Smith led a conference discussion of satellite communications for social and developmental purposes. The IIC, based in London, was set up to further international cooperation in the field of communications; it put out research and policy studies of the impact of media on society and analyzed the implications of communications technology, seeking to eliminate barriers to the free flow of communications. (ComSatCorp Release 80-33)
INTELSAT announced election of Irving Goldstein, previously vice chairman of its board of directors, to be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne of Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in the organization, had been working with the board since its formation in 1973. He was vice president and general manager for international communications of ComSatCorp, responsible for activities including planning, installation, and operation of ground stations using the INTELSAT system. (INTELSAT Release 80-10-1)
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially. Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. {AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
