President Reagan announced the nomination of business executive James Montgomery Beggs as administrator and Dr. Hans Mark as deputy administrator of NASA. If confirmed, Beggs (who was executive vice president and a director of General Dynamics Corporation, which he had joined in January 1974), would be the sixth person to head the civilian space agency, succeeding Dr. Robert A. Frosch. Beggs had been associate administrator in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) at NASA in 1968-69, leaving to become undersecretary at the Department of Transportation (DOT). Mark, who became secretary of the Air Force in July 1979 the being undersecretary since 1977, was formerly director of NASA’s ARC. (NASA Release 81-51; MSFC Release 81-50; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A-12; W Post, Apr 25/81 A-4)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
