Presidential Science Adviser Dr. George A. Keyworth announced the names of 13 U.S. scientists and engineers to a White House Science Council. Chairman of the council was Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president, Bell Laboratories; vice chairman was Edward Frieman, vice president, Science Applications Inc. Other members were Harold M. Agnew, president, General Atomic Company; John Bardeen, emeritus professor, engineering and physics, University of Illinois; D. Allan Bromley, professor of physics, Yale University (chairman, American Association for the Advancement of Science); George A. Cowan, senior fellow, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory; Edward E. David, president, Exxon Research and Engineering (former science adviser to President Nixon); Donald S. Frederickson, resident fellow, National Academy of Sciences (former director, National Institutes of Health—NIH); Paul E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); Robert O.. Hunter, president, Western Research Company; Arthur K. Kerman, director, MIT Center for Theoretical Physics; David Packard, chairman, Hewlett Packard; Edward Teller, Hoover Institute, Stanford University. Lt. Col. Thomas H. Johnson, special assistant to Keyworth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would study issues with “significant technical components”; it was not meant to be demographically representative of U.S. science but rather would consist of “people with first-rate technical credentials and excellent judgment.” The New York Times noted that in an interview last summer Keyworth said that “good judgment is hard to find” among scientists because “our profession is one of the few where arrogance has been condoned if not nurtured.” A presidential science advisory committee formed in 1957 was abolished in 1977 by President Nixon, angry when some of its members took public stands against his policies. The new council, known by its initials WHSC (whisk), was meant to be more modest, the New York Times said. It would have its first meeting in March. (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; NY Times, Feb 18/82, A-12)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
George Bush, U.S. vice president, unveiled at KSC the flight version of Spacelab, a reusable scientific-research facility designed to fly on the Shuttle. At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the Spacelab “an extraordinary engineering achievement. . .the largest cooperative space project ever.” Noting that more than 2,000 persons, from 50 European firms and 10 member nations, helped to build it, he added: “If today can be considered Spacelab’s birthday, then there are a great many proud parents celebrating... Let us continue to be partners,” he concluded, “and let me take this opportunity to assure you that we intend to continue our international cooperative programs, just as President Reagan recently reconfirmed the commitment of the United States to a vigorous space program.” The joint venture of NASA and ESA was a cylindrical module built to fit into the Shuttle cargo bay, where both astronaut mission specialists and civilian scientists (payload specialists) would work in a shirtsleeve environment, with a series of unpressurized pallets to support experiments requiring direct exposure, to space. The first Spacelab flight, planned for a seven-day Shuttle mission in September 1983, would carry out some 70 investigations in 5 different disciplines. About 50 firms in ESA’s participating nations had supplied parts to ERNO, prime contractor in Bremen, West Germany, for assembly and integration. The program, which cost ESA about $1 billion, would provide NASA, at no charge, with one engineering model and one complete flight version of Spacelab with associated ground-support equipment and some computer software. NASA was buying, for about $300 million, a second flight-model Spacelab to be delivered in mid-1982. MSFC would manage the first mission with ESA and had been in charge of U.S. development of flight-hardware items, such as the transfer tunnel and other operating equipment. MSFC would manage the second and third (NASA-only) missions alone. (Ofc of VP anno, Feb 5/82; NASA Release 82-14; MSFC Release 82-15; ESA Info 6, Feb 2/82, Feb 3/82)
The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination. The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1) During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000,	and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers. In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
Charles (Pete) Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now a vice president for marketing at McDonnell Douglas, said that pieces of Skylab that crashed in 1979 over western Australia after five years in orbit would go on sale, with proceeds to NASA, for the support of Viking I, the Mars lander still sending messages from the surface of that planet. The Skylab pieces fitted into colorful posters were expected to raise from $150,000 to $500,000. Conrad had been a member of the Apollo 12 mission that landed on the Moon as well as commander of the Skylab mission in 1973. (W Post, Nov 12/82, A-10)
