NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
The NY Times said that“computer enthusiasts” had invaded NASA’s electronic mail system, left cartoon images and “Kilroy was here” messages for agency employees, and played pranks on others. A NASA official said that the intruders had destroyed some information but had not “significantly disrupted” the electronic mail service. NASA first noticed the intrusions in mid-July, and they continued into mid-September. Besides reading unclassified NASA messages, the intruders had destroyed some messages and created personal passwords and new files for themselves and their computer friends. Some NASA employees who used Telemail had been inconvenienced, but the system had never been halted. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said that it was investigating a number of youths in connection with the intrusions. To make Telemail easy to use, NASA had told employees to use their first initial and last names as part of an entry code; employee names were available from agency telephone directories sold by the Government Printing Office (GPO). The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) told a House subcommittee that it was trying to increase security for federal computers, and an FBI official asked Congress for a law prohibiting unauthorized entry into a computer. Without such a law, federal authorities were treating the cases as wire fraud, like use of telephone lines to obtain service without paying. (NY Times, Oct 19/83, A-16) Another report said that the FBI had seized computers and other equipment from 15 computer enthusiasts around the United States, mostly teenagers. The bureau said that there was “extensive” penetration into commercial and DOD computers and that intruders had tampered with the files of some corporations. (NY Times, Oct 17/83, A-12) During October: Kurt Debus, who helped develop Germany’s World War II V-2 rocket and worked on the Redstone ballistic missile for the U.S. Army in the 1950s, died after a heart attack at his home near Cocoa, Fla., at the age of 74. He had joined Wernher von Braun’s rocket team on the Baltic coast during the war and came to the United States afterwards. Von Braun said of him: “We develop the rockets and it’s up to Debus to see they do what they’re supposed to do.” In 1952, Debus became director of what would later be NASA’s Kennedy Space Center; his last official act before retirement was to break ground for a KSC landing strip for Shuttles returning from orbit. (W Post, Oct 11/83, B-6)
A report from the House Appropriations Committee said that the Space Telescope, called by NASA Administrator James M. Beggs “the most important scientific instrument” ever to be flown, would cost $200 million more and reach orbit a year later than expected because of difficulties in development. The report blamed delays and cost overruns on NASA for understaffing the program by 50% in its early development, and on Perkin-Elmer Corporation, one of two major contractors, for failing to “properly plan for a project of the technical and manufacturing difficulty of the Space Telescope.” Besides the glitches in tracking and alignment devices, possibly unremovable dust on the primary telescope mirror after 15 months in a Perkin-Elmer “clean room” had lowered its reflecting power by 20 to 30%. (IT Post, Mar 28/83, A-8)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
