NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) —A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14) During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface. The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of objects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data. IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169) —Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114) —Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30) —Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
