The U.S. House Science and Technology Committee approved President Reagan's request for a $7.9 billion NASA budget for FY 86, the Washington Post reported, but allocated the funds differently than he had requested. By a 32-to-9 vote, the panel decided to retain a subcommittee's recommendation to shift $45 million to spare parts procurement for the Space Shuttle in order to keep the Space Shuttle assembly line open and thus increase chances for a fifth orbiter. The administration requested $2.1 billion in FY 86 for 14 Space Shuttle flights and delivery of the fourth orbiter, Atlantis; it sought no funds for a fifth orbiter. (W Post, Apr 1/85, A9)
Vice President George Bush, after meeting with French President Francois Mitterrand and other French leaders in Paris, said the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program and the European French-sponsored Eureka technology program were not incompatible, Defense Daily reported. Seeking to calm concerns that the Eureka program was in competition with SDI for scientific and technology talent, Bush said that after his talks with the French that "I more firmly believe . . . there is no incompatibility between Eureka. . .and SDI. . . "They understand our research program, which is strictly related to strategic defense, and I think we understand much more clearly their concept of collective research on broad technology as far as Europe is concerned," Bush commented. Technology ministers from 16 European countries had scheduled a meeting for July 17 in Paris to discuss projects and areas of cooperation in the Eureka program. Five areas of high technology were identified for joint programs: information technology, robotics, communications, bio-technology, and new materials. (D/D, July 8/85, 1)
By voice vote the U.S. Senate approved a FY 86 NASA authorization of $7.6 billion, an increase of $142 million above the 1985 NASA appropriation and the House-approved authorization, the Washington Post reported. The increase would mainly cover the cost of restoring the Reagan Administration's proposed 5% pay cut for federal employees and provide additional funds for booster rockets. The Senate spending ceiling was $234 million below the Administration's request. The Senate and House authorization bills were substantially different. The Senate approved cuts in specific programs, while the House simply approved an across-the-board freeze for the entire NASA budget. (W Post, July 1/85, A13) Data Tracking and Relay Systems
A Federal grand jury today indicted General Dynamics Corp., three of its current executives, and its former executive vice president, James Beggs, currently Administrator of NASA, for allegedly seeking to defraud the Defense Department in connection with producing two prototypes of the DIVAD, an anti-aircraft gun for the Army, Time magazine reported. The seven-count, 33-page indictment stated that between January 1978 and August 1981, while General Dynamics was working on a $41 million program to build the prototypes, it made false statements to the government and was guilty of fraud. The indictment charged the company with illegally billing $7.5 million of its expenses to other government accounts, of which $3.2 million was paid. Along with Beggs, the indictment also named Ralph Hawes, division general manager; David McPherson, program director; and James Hansen, assistant director. Beggs, who took a leave of absence from NASA, denied the charge, saying, "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing ... I do not intend to leave, and this is not the first step to a resignation." A General Dynamics spokesman said, "The issue is a highly sophisticated regulatory and accounting matter, which should be resolved in a civil forum, not in a criminal case." (Time, Dec 16/85, 46) The Navy anticipated a series of NROSS satellites with enough launches to keep an operating satellite in orbit unless sensor or other changes made faster launches desirable. NROSS-1's expected lifetime would be three years; an NROSS-2 would depend on needed oceanographic data. The system would help battle group commanders predict ocean conditions for antisubmarine warfare operations, force placement, and plan use of advanced weapon systems. {A/D, Jan 10/85, 50)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
In work done under a three-year grant in cooperation with Wichita State University (WSU) and aircraft and component manufacturers, Lewis Research Center (LeRC) developed the Electro-Impulse Deicing System (EIDI), which creates an electromechanical impluse at the leading edge of an aircraft's wing to produce a minute flexing of the metal skin that serves to shatter, debond, and remove ice buildup, the Lewis News reported. At a LeRC symposium, more than 100 representatives from various companies and other government agencies met to review the results of the cooperative program to develop a technology base for EIDI. Cessna Aircraft Co. planned to apply for Federal Aviation Administration certification for their model 206 aircraft with the EIDI system. Although several methods of deicing or anti-icing were available, all had undesirable energy requirements. The electro-magnetic impulse method, first suggested in 1937 by Rudolf Goldschmidt, a German national residing in London after World War II, offered a promising alternative. During the 1950s and 1960s, industry used electro-impulse methods for metals forming in various industrial processes. In the 1970s, the USSR pursued further research including some aircraft applications. However, for various reasons the development stopped short of full implementation; the system still lacked a well developed underlying technology and known design parameters. Early EIDI system research offered promise of ice removal with low energy requirements, minimal maintenance (no moving parts), greater reliability, and a weight and cost competitive with existing methods. In mid-1982, LeRC funded a six-month grant to WSU to work with two small plane makers and an aircraft electrical system manufacturer to do a feasibility study that resulted in a successful icing tunnel demonstration in October/November 1982. LeRC then organized a consortium of companies for full development of the method for the whole range of civil aircraft, each company agreeing to contribute some services or equipment to the project in return for eligibility to submit its own products for deicing design and tests by the EIDI method. Engine aircraft candidates for the EIDI system included commercial transport turbofans, business jet turbofans, commuter transport turboprops, and commercial transport propfans. (LeRC News, July 26/85, 2)
NASA Administrator James Beggs confirmed this week that NASA cancelled a mission to send an unmanned spacecraft to comet Wild 2, citing budgetary constraints, the Washington Post reported. "However, the comet rendezvous proposal is a very promising candidate for a new start" in FY 88, Beggs said. NASA had expected the mission from FY 87 to 1992 to cost $400 million, which was within the budgetary limits NASA established in 1981 for new planetary missions. The NASA budget the Reagan Administration was drafting eliminated the mission. Delaying a decision on a comet rendezvous by even one year meant the spacecraft could not fly to Wild 2, the favorite candidate of space scientists because it was a bright, fresh comet. Discovered in 1978, the comet would make its third and fourth appearances in 1990 and 1996. In order to rendezvous with the comet when it passed near the earth, NASA in 1986 would have to begin work on the mission to have the spacecraft ready by 1991 for launch from the Space Shuttle. The announcement followed NASA decisions in 1980 and 1981 not to attempt a mission to fly by Halley's Comet. "Once again, the United States is passing up an opportunity to initiate the exploration of the comets, which contain the most unblemished record of the origins of our solar system," the Postquoted Dr. Laurel Wilkening, dean of the graduate school at the University of Arizona and vice chairman of President Reagan's Commission on Space. "The decision is a major setback for the U.S. planetary exploration program," he concluded. Space scientists were also upset because NASA's science advisory groups recommended that a comet rendezvous be the next new misson in planetary exploration [see Astronomy, Oct. 8], Scientists pushed for a mission to Wild 2 because the spacecraft could travel with the comet for 850 days, observing it before its long dust tail formed and obscured the comet's nucleus or damaged the spacecraft. It would have been NASA's most ambitious mission to explore the solar system. The next comet that NASA could approach would be Tempel 2, which would pass by earth in 1998. Such a mission, also costing $400 million, required a NASA decision by the middle of 1986. (W Post, Oct 17/85, A21)
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
Under-Secretary of the U.S. Air Force E. C. Aldridge, Jr. announced in an internal information memorandum that the policy of the U.S. Air Force was to "ensure that the unique capabilities that can be derived from the presence of military man in space shall be utilized to the extent feasible and practical to enhance existing and future missions in the interest of national security objectives." The memorandum implied that U.S. Air Force would be committed to working with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in its most recent manned space undertaking to deploy in orbit a manned, permanent orbiting space station in the early 1990s. Memorandum for the Vice Chief of Staff, USAF from Under-Secretary E. C. Aldridge, Jr., August 1, 1985. August 2Ch Honeywell's Military Avionics Division would soon begin for the McDonnell Aircraft Co. full-scale development, costing about $500 million, of a tactical electronic warfare intermediate support system (TISS) for the F-15 Eagle aircraft program, Defense Daily reported. The award to Honeywell was part of a larger contract the U.S. Air Force recently awarded to McDonnell to upgrade the F—15 tactical warfare system (TEWS). The Honeywell TISS would test the F-15's electronic warfare system to minimize downtime, reduce maintenance costs, and improve overall missile effectiveness. Stanley Moeschi, Honeywell vice president, noted that, "This contract demonstrates the maturity of Honeywell's automatic test technology and a substantial advancement in state-of-the-art digital and radio frequency electronic warfare testing." (D/D, Aug 20/85, 1)
The Australian minister of defense, Mr. Beazley, confirmed that Australia would help test a new U.S. satellite system called "Teal Ruby" that was associated with the space defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English reported. Mr. Beazley stressed, however, that Australia's involvement was not directly related to SDI and would end the following year. He said the U.S. would use Australian defense vessels and aircraft to test the satellite system using infrared rays and that the project had some benefits for Australia over the long term because of that country's surveillance problems. He pointed out that infrared sensing was a good way to maintain surveillance of countries with electronic warfare systems. However, the Australian Democrats's spokesman, Senator Mason, condemned the decision, saying the research was an essential part of the SDI system and that the Australian government was guilty of hyprocrisy in agreeing to participate in the testing. (FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English, May 10/85)
The U.S. House Appropriations Committee deleted $7.2 million in FY 86 funds requested by the Air Force to initiate a $350 million program to refurbish Titan II ICBMs for use as space boosters, Defense Daily reported. The committee warned that the Titan II launchers could "only have a further impact on the Shuttle and result in a less efficient use of Shuttle facilities" and pointed out that the Air Force had "not been able to demonstrate why the expensive Titan II refurbishment program is critical to the defense of the nation." The Committee also noted that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration dropped its plans to launch some payloads on the Titan II in favor of launching them on the Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Revenues Feb. 25 and Oct. 18], "bringing into question whether Titan II is cost-effective on a per launch basis," the committee said. It also cited classified reasons for its action. (D/D, Oct 29/85, 305)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
President Reagan's FY 86 budget for NASA sought $7.9 billion-just under what it would take to sustain the agency's programs at current levels, the Washington Post reported. At a press conference [see NASA/ Budget, Feb. 4], NASA Administrator James Beggs had acknowledged the $230-million budget request for the space station was $50 million less than the agency had sought to keep the project on schedule. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A17)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
Arthur Smith, 74, retired chairman of United Technologies Corp. and the originator of the concept for water injection in piston engines that made major contributions to the performance of World War II combat planes, died August 6 after a long illness, the Washington Times reported. Smith retired as chairman of United Technologies—then known as United Aircraft—in 1973. He had assumed the post 15 months earlier after serving as executive vice president, president, and chairman of the executive committee. In 1935, after two years in the automotive industry, Smith joined Pratt & Whitney as an experimental test engineer. As a project engineer, he and a coworker invented and patented a system for water injection to control detonation and increase horsepower in aircraft piston engines. The 1938 invention increased the speed of U.S. fighter planes used during World War II by 40 mph. In 1949 he became chief engineer at Pratt & Whitney and helped develop the J57, which powered the F-100 fighter, the first production aircraft to exceed the speed of sound in level flight. Smith became president of the company in 1967. {W Times, Aug 8/85, 7B)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press conference, reported that President Reagan had requested a NASA budget of just under $7.9 billion, reflecting the President's determination to continue America's space leadership and to achieve the goal of a permanently manned space station. The budget covered some unforeseen items not addressed by 1985 budgetplanning estimates, including the Congressionally mandated development of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), scheduled for launch in 1989, and acceleration of the advanced turboprop propulsion system for FY 87 flight testing. The budget contained four major appropriations requests: a total of $2.9 billion for R&D, which included funds for previously approved space science and applications programs, development of ACTS, initiation of the orbiting maneuvering vehicle program, and promotion of commercial use of space; $3.5 billion for space flight, control, and data communications to support Space Shuttle production, operations, and tracking and data acquisition (a decrease of $92 million from FY 85's budget plan); $149 million for facilities construction (down $1 million from FY 85); and $1.3 billion for research and program management. (NASA release Feb. 4/85; NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/ 85)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA cleared today the Space Shuttle's main engines for launch, making possible an August 24 launch of Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Laboratory tests and a thorough examination of one of Challenger's engines, which prematurely shut down shortly after a July 29 launch, showed that it was not damaged during launch and that a pair of heat sensors, which mistakenly indicated the engine had overheated, caused the shutdown. NASA had fitted Discovery with new heat sensors that engineers believed were vastly superior to the ones that failed on Challenger. Dominick Sanchini, executive vice president of Rocketdyne, which built the hydrogen-fueled engines, said, "Our analysis has verified what we felt right along was the probable failure mechanism. We're convinced that the sensors we have now have resolved the problem we saw on the last flight." (W Post, Aug 15/85, A8)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
The Senate Appropriations Committee cut the Air Force FY 86 request for development of the advanced tactical fighter (ATF) by $103 million to $140 million and recommended that a unit cost cap be put on the program, Defense Daily reported. The House Appropriations Committee earlier approved $170 million for ATF. Acting on the recommendation of its defense subcommittee, the Senate committee allocated $100 million for the joint advanced fighter engine development program, $13 million for avionics development, and $27 million for continuation of the competitive air vehicle demonstration and validation "for not less than three contractors." Although the committee endorsed the ATF development program "as a long-term counter to Soviet tactical air improvements," it said it "is concerned that the current program does not provide sufficient time to absorb all of the technology" to be incorporated in the aircraft and that the program "entails unacceptable risks." And the committee pointed out that "these advanced technologies would be very expensive to obtain." The Air Force estimated R&D costs for the ATF at $11.8 billion in FY 85 dollars and, after considering a figure up to $40 million, assumed the purchase price would be $35 million in FY 85 dollars. However, the committee pointed out that the Air Force "has not identified how it will reduce ATF costs without deleting technical features previously identified as aircraft requirements." Therefore, the committee directed the Air Force to submit an annual report on the future likely cost of ATF, beginning with the FY 87 budget. It recommended that "a 20% limit be placed on the ATF program unit flyaway costs" above F—15 costs and that this limit be made the baseline of the ATF development program. The ATF would include sustained supersonic dash, internal weapons carriage, blended aerodynamic design including low observable (stealth) technology, and higher thrust (32,000 lb.) engines. It would also have short takeoff and landing (STOL) capabilities, high transonic and supersonic maneuverability, an expanded flight envelope, and improved survivability. (D/D, Nov 7/85, 33)
European Space Agency (ESA), Japanese, and Canadian officials the previous week expressed concern about NASA's expectations of how the costs of operating the proposed space station should be shared, as fears increased that the U.S. Congress or the Office of Management and Budget might slip the planned 1993 operational date for the $10 to $13 billion facility, Aviation Week reported. The officials were meeting with NASA managers to lay the groundwork for critical space station decisions due by December that would determine what type of contribution they would make to the basic $8 billion U.S. investment. The international space officials were unanimous in their view that the non-U.S. contribution to the station's operational costs should be largely amortized through open access and use of their respective portions of the station system—not through funding transferred to the U.S. As the discussions progressed, the possibility of a space station schedule delay to help cut the U.S. budget deficit in FY 87 became a growing factor. Sen. Slade Gorton (R-Wash.), chairman of the Senate science subcommittee, and Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, both influential space supporters, were cautioning that congressional action on the FY 87 NASA budget could trim space station funding and delay the project's 1993 planned operational date by a year or more. Fuqua told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable, a group formed to foster space commercialization, that a slip now, while undesirable and likely to drive up costs later, could be absorbed by the program more easily than one later when the hardware phase was underway. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 18)
The Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, reported that the President's proposed FY 86 budget requested $60 billion for research and development (R&D), of which $40 billion would support non-DOD projects and nearly $8 billion, basic research. Although obligations for non-DOD R&D would decrease slightly from 1985 to 1986, reflecting determination to reduce the federal deficit, obligations for basic research in the physical sciences and engineering would increase by 7%, and those for all basic research would increase 1%. Actual outlays during 1986 would grow by 5%, permitting some modest real growth. In testimony before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, Dr. G.A. Keyworth, Science Advisor to the President, said he strongly supported the necessity of slowing the growth of science and technology funding in the short term, but wouldn't hide his concern over the vitality of U.S. science over the long run. "Our real challenges will come in fiscal years 1987 and 1988, when we simply will have to find ways to ensure our ability to pursue—and pursue vigorously—new avenues of research. . . . We have to be prepared to make hard choices to fund new starts for high-priority research facilities under whatever fiscal scenario we face in coming years. What will be at stake will be the scientific leadership that we can't afford to compromise." (Office of Science and Technology Policy release Feb 4/85; U.S. House Comm, on Science and Technology testimony, Feb 5/85) During February. In its Federal Scientific and Technical Workers: Numbers and Characteristics, 1973 and 1983, the National Science Foundation reported that the federal government was the largest single employer of scientific and technical personnel in the U.S. Government employment of scientists grew by 20% between 1973 and 1983, from 74,000 to 89,000, although such employment declined during that period at NASA and the Department of Defense. The variation by government agency in the proportion of scientists, engineers, and computer (SEC) specialists with at least a bachelor's degree was not great, ranging from 95% at the Department of Transportation (DOT) to 99% at NASA. The proportion of NASA SEC personnel with advanced degrees increased from 29% to 36% between 1973 and 83, reflecting the higher separation rates of bachelor's degree holders and those without degrees during the long-term cutbacks in SEC employees at NASA. The number of SEC staff at NASA declined 8% between 1973 and 83. The decline of 1,800 electronics technicians during the period reflected primarily a fall in total white-collar employment levels of 10% at DOT and NASA; DOT's electronics technicians went from 8,800 to 7,800, NASA's from 900 to 600. (NSF 85-312 [final report], Feb 85)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
A U.S. House Appropriations subcommittee approved a resolution to release $1.5 billion frozen in Congress the previous year for an additional 21 MX missiles, the Washington Post reported. The vote, expected in the defense subcommittee that had supported the MX in the past, was only the first in a series of votes required before funds could be released. But missile opponents acknowledged that the vote was indicative of the uphill battle they faced in trying to defeat the MX in the midst of renewed arms control talks with the Soviets. The Reagan Administration had lobbied hard for the previous two weeks to win release of the funds, contending that continued funding of the MX was crucial to the arms control talks that had opened in Geneva. MX missile supporters on the subcommittee argued that the administration should not be denied a weapon that could be a "bargaining chip" in the arms talks. On the other hand, opponents characterized the missile as "the glass jaw in our strategic forces" and "totally irrelevant" to the arms talks. The resolution would next come before the full committee, which had backed it in the past. Observers agreed the real fight over the missile would occur on the Senate and House floors. Under a complicated arrangement worked out the previous year, representatives of the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democratic-control led House had agreed that the MX legislation would be sent to the floor of both chambers regardless of what action was taken at the committee level. (W Post, Mar 13/85, A4)
NASA's Thomas DeCair, associate administrator for external relations, announced today the appointment of Shirley Green as NASA's director of public affairs. She replaced Frank Johnson Jr., who was appointed assistant associate administrator for external relations (special projects). In her new position, Green would be responsible for planning and directing all NASA activities that provided information to and responded to inquiries from the public and the media. Green came to NASA with 20 years' experience in communications and management. Since 1981, as deputy and acting press secretary to the Vice President of the United States, she was responsible for planning and coordinating media activities for the Vice President on matters of domestic policy, including the task forces on regulatory relief and drug interdiction. She had accompanied the Vice President to 61 foreign countries, coordinating all media activities. Green was a former chairman of public affairs for the Texas Federation of Republican Women, press assistant to Congressman Bob Price, and a recipient of the Ten Outstanding Republican Women award in Texas. She received a bachelor of business administration degree in 1956 from the University of Texas. (NASA Release 85-168)
NASA announced that June Gibbs Brown, appointed NASA's inspector general June 1981 by President Reagan, would leave March 10 to become vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer of System Development Corp. Prior to her NASA service, Brown served as inspector general for the Department of Interior and worked for the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, and had been director of the audit division of the U.S. Navy Finance Center. Brown held bachelor and master degrees in business administration and a Juris Doctor from the University of Denver School of Law. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/85)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
