Conrail, created by Congress from six bankrupt northeastern railroads, argued against a measure proposed by Senator John Danforth that would take $450 million from the Governmentowned railroad and transfer the funds to NASA. If passed, the plan would help compensate for the House and Senate Armed Services Committee's move to cut $566 million from the Air Force budget that was earmarked for NASA and military use of the Shuttle. (W Post, Jul 22/86)
Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a'I0*congressional investigation into whether NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had violated conflictofinterest rules when he awarded Morton Thiokol the Shuttle booster contract in 1973. Dr. Fletcher denied the charges, but said he would seriously consider removing himself from future booster rocket contract decisions. NY Times, Dec 19/86)
A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, an unsuccessful bidder on Shuttle boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stating that the multisegment booster that relied on oring seals were "burdened with design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable operation." According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then chairman of the committee that controlled NASA's budget came from Utah; and that then NASA Administrator Dr. James Fletcher was former president of the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, however, also pointed out that Thoikol needed minimal up front Government cash and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the early days of the program's budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86)
In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
Space agency officials announced that it would cost $625 million to get the remaining Shuttle fleet off the ground. The money would go to salvage and investigation costs ($43 million), spare parts ($46 million), and corrective actions ($537 million). The corrective actions included redesign of the solidfuel rocket booster, changes in the main engine, and changes in steering, braking and other systems, but not escape options for the crew. The Senate Appropriations Committee trimmed the request to $526 million because, it was reasoned, the agency could not spend all of its money before the fiscal year ended on September 30. Other officials from NASA met with President Ronald Reagan to discuss the Nation's launch capability and requested $2.8 billion to replace the Challenger. The request, which was part of a $5 billion to $8 billion total that included expendable launch vehicles, violated the deficit reduction GrammRudman law. Chief of Staff Donald Reagan questioned the need for a new Shuttle that might be outdated within 10 years. President Reagan queried, "Should we be buying the technology of the '70s for use in the '90s?" In grappling with the NASA budget, the President considered a recommendation to bar all commercial and foreign launches from the Shuttle. (W Times, May 16/86; W Post, May 16/86; WSJ, May 16/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
