In a letter sent to the chairwoman of the subcommittee that funds NASA, Senator Howell T. Heflin said killing the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor would cost almost twice as much as building it. NASA and the White House had moved to cancel the $3 billion program, saying the cost of keeping it going wouldn't fit in NASA's tight budget request of $15 billion for fiscal year 1993. Using figures obtained from NASA and from the ASRM's contractors, Heflin calculated that killing the program would cost NASA $2.65 billion through the year 2000. By contrast, he said it would cost $1.29 billion to finish building the rocket, not including $510 million to buy the first six sets of motors. (Htsvl Times, Apr 7/92; Birmingham News, Apr 12/92)
As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
President Bush held a scheduled meeting with NASA astronauts in the Oval Office, followed by an address to Young Astronauts Council in the Old Executive Office Building. (NASA Release 92-12)
State Senator Gary K. Hart of California authored a bill which would require the Department of Commerce to create a special program for assisting commercial space ventures that originate in California. Under the proposal, the Commerce Department would boost California as the place to launch commercial space ventures. (LA Times, May 17/92)
A technical consultant to the House Committee on Space, Science and Technology, said that if the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane is built, it would be assembled in Palmdale, California. Scott Crossfield, a former test pilot, said President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the National Space Council were strong supporters of the X-30. Crossfield said it would cost an estimated $5 billion to $12 billion for the pair of X-30s. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 1/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
NASA delivered a report to the U.S. Senate outlining a shift in emphasis towards smaller, lower cost and more frequent planetary missions. The Small Planetary Mission Plan, which was requested by the Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD and Independent Agencies chaired by Senator Barbara Mikulski, described two proposed missions that NASA had selected for preliminary studies leading to launches in 1996 and 1998. The two missions were the Mars Environmental Survey Pathfinder and the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NASA Release 92-63)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland called for immediate congressional action to shift U.S. research and development from military hardware to products that would compete in the "environmental marketplace" of the future. NASA, she said, should develop "the second-generation Concorde...and leapfrog our competitors in a 21st century industry that will generate a $200 billion market of the future." (W Post, Apr 10/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
A House panel raised legal questions about the National Space Council's handling of a proposal to restructure space program management. Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, chairman of the House Science subcommittee on investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to president Bush that the council's official circulation of the proposal was in conflict with the 1958 Space Act. The proposal, prepared by the Livermore Laboratory's Lowell Wood, also violated the council's charter not to interfere with line management responsibility in NASA. (AvWk, March 9/92)
TRW Inc. said it had named R. Gordon Williams to succeed Daniel S. Goldin, the new head of NASA, as vice president and general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group. Williams, 61, was formerly vice president and general manager of TRS's Federal Systems division, which manages TRW's major space systems and projects for NASA. (UPI, Apr 13/92)
Representative Richard J. Durbin, Illinois Democrat, and Senator Dale Bumpers, Arkansas Democrat, released a GAP analysis that said the space agency was committing itself to more projects than it could expect the country to pay for. "In short, it is chasing too much programs for too few dollars." (W Times, Feb 28/92: AP, Feb 27/92)
It was reported that Vice President Dan Quayle's National Space Council had tightened its control over space activities by dividing NASA's responsibility for the U.S. moon-Mars project among several government agencies. Quayle released a directive, approved by the president, that assigns "major roles" to the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy while establishing NASA as the principal agency. (Mercury News, Mar 14/92)
In an official statement, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly welcomed the nomination of Daniel S. Goldin to be next NASA Administrator. "I am pleased to learn that President Bush nominated Daniel S. Goldin as the next Administrator of NASA....I wish him every success as he comes to this elite organization," said Truly. (NASA Note 92-20)
In a speech to the National Space Club, outgoing NASA chief Richard Truly, who resurrected the Shuttle Space program after the 1986 tragedy, said that the country's space program is in jeopardy and that "the cheap shots" coming from the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, "must end" if the White House and Congress want to maintain U.S. leadership in space. (USA Today, Feb 27/92; W Times, Feb 27/92; W Post, Feb 26/92; Fla Today, Feb 15/92; O Sen, Feb 14, 1992; Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 18/92; Defense News, Feb 17/92; B Sun, Feb 19/92; Space News, Feb 17/92; AP, Feb 19/92; NY Times, Feb 20/92)
