John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
President Clinton declared his support for building a Space Station in partnership with the Russians and received support for the project from key figures in Congress during a White House meeting on November 29.  (W Post, Dec 1/93; RTw, Dec 1/97; AP, Dec 1/97; APn, Dec 1/93; NY Times, Dec 1/93; USA Today, Dec 1/93)
According to reports, the Clinton Administration's new budget would cut funding for NASA's planned Space Station by 40 percent; the cuts were predicted to trigger another major restructuring of the project and more delays. Key Capitol aids said the House had approved $1.35 billion for the program in the next fiscal year, instead of the $2.25 billion NASA had requested, Clinton was reported to be troubled by the massive cost-overruns associated with the project. (W Post, Feb 12/97; AP, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93; UPI, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)
The New York Times reported that a dispute had broken out in the Clinton Administration over Vice President Al Gore's attempts to convince President Clinton to fulfill a campaign pledge to reduce the threat of global warming. Gore urged
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
The Senate endorsed the Clinton Administration's plan to build the Space Station by refusing to cut funding for the 1994 program from $1,94 billion to $500 million.  The latter amount would have been used to shut down the program. (RTw, Sep 21/93; UPI, Sep 21/93; AP, June 22/93; LA Times, Sep 22/93; P Inq, Sep 22/93; NY Times, Sep 23/93)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin announced that the Clinton Administration would continue work on anti-missile weapons but that Reagan's "Star Wars" program was being reduced to small-scale research and renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. In California alone, the cutback threatened more than $1 billion in annual contracts and thousands of jobs, according to economists in the area. (NY Times, May 14/93; LA Times, May 14/93)
President Clinton signed legislation on August 2 authorizing $8 million for planning and design of a $162 million National Air and Space Museum building near Dulles International Airport. (AP, Aug 4/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun urged President Clinton to give a "strong go-ahead" to the building of Space Station Freedom. (B Sun, June 17/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that, according to congressional aids, President Clinton had decided to push for construction of a sophisticated, orbiting space laboratory that would make use of much of the technology already developed for Space Station Freedom. The President appeared to hint at this decision in a June 15 press conference. (LA Times, June 16/93)
In a letter sent to the White House, five senators  pressed the Clinton Administration to maintain tight restrictions on the export of space-launch technology that could be used to develop ballistic missiles. The letter was signed by senators Cliaborne Pell, D-R.I; Jesse Helms, R- N.C.; Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M.; John Glenn, D-Ohio; and John McCain, R-Ariz. (LA Times, Aug 12/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton Administration to rethink its civilian space program, noting that the program had drifted without overall purpose since rivalry with the old Soviet Union had ceased to be a significant factor. The editorial urged the Administration to define what the United States should accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it. (CSM, May 18/93)
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
President Clinton named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration. Mr. Hinson was founder of Midway Airlines. In his new job, Hinson would oversee the safety of the aviation industry and be responsible for initiating and enforcing safety regulations and operating the air traffic control system. (NY Times, May 14/93; USA Today, May 14/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy advisory board released a report stating that "The U.S. government's organization of space activities is not appropriate for the post-Cold War era." The report noted that space bureaucracy must be simplified and centralized and that more technology must be shared between government and industry. It also called U.S. space launch capabilities inefficient and unsafe. (W Post, Jan 5/93; Space News, Jan 5/93)
Responding to Alan Shepherd's June 19 letter on the DC-X (Delta Clipper), Charles Conrad Jr., a former astronaut and staff vice president at McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, defended the concept behind the vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle.  He also noted that by the time the vehicle would be operational it would not be a Shuttle replacement but would provide an adjunct to the space lift capacity in the 20,000-pound-payload category.  Conrad noted that the experimental vehicle was designed to be reusable, like aircraft.  (W Post, Jul 19/93)
Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)
President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)
Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Speaking on CNN's morning news show, Senator Jim Sasser, D-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, called the Superconducing Super Collider a $7 billion scientific pork barrel. He said he would propose cutting it out of the budget along with the Space Station. (AP, Feb 7/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)
Senator James M. Jeffords and a group of House members last month introduced an amendment to the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 to prohibit the Department of Transportation from licensing a payload that would result in advertising from space.  The amendment was in response to a proposal by Space Marketing Inc. of Roswell, Georgia, to launch a mile-long inflatable billboard into space.  The company planned to stuff the billboard in a satellite; after the satellite reached orbit, it would open and the billboard would jump out like "a giant life raft."
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, legendary Army aviator and World War II hero, died at the age of 96.  He was best known for leading "Doolittle's Raiders" in a daring bombing run on Tokyo and other Japanese cities in April 1942.  The raid brought the war home to Japan for the first time and lifted American morale when the country was still reeling from a string of Axis victories.  After the war, General Doolittle served as president of the Institute of Aeronautical Science and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the forerunner of NASA.  (B Sun, Oct 1/93; AP, Oct 1/93; W Post, Oct 2/93)
President Clinton dissolved the Cabinet-level National Space Council as part of staff cuts to reduce the budget. The duties of the space council were to come under the umbrella of a broader policy-making group called the Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by new presidential science adviser Jack Gibbons. (H Chronicle, Feb 10/93; Space News, Feb 15/93)
Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
Writing in USA Today, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, R-Texas, noted that research planned for the Space Station program would help women. Research already scheduled for the newly redesigned Space Station would address several women's diseases, from osteoporosis to ovarian and breast cancer to immune-system disorders.  (USA Today, Aug 12/93)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
White House officials said that President Clinton had decided to proceed with a slightly slimmed down version of the original Space Station Freedom design. The Space Station was expected to cost about $10.5 billion over five years. (RTw, June 16/93; NY Times, June 17/93; USA Today, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
Clinton Administration officials reported that the White House was completing plans to permit the export of U.S. rocket technology that had been restricted out of fear it would be used to develop ballistic missiles,  The proposal to allow the sale of space technology under strengthened safeguards was part of a review of export policy ordered by President Clinton. (LA Times, Aug 10/93)
Executives from two major players in the aircraft industry, United Technologies Corporation and General Electric Company, said that job cuts and productivity improvement programs won't by themselves pull the industry out of its downturn. They were beginning to hint that they would like to team up with each other, perhaps through more joint research and development projects. Such hints might be merely a means of testing how far the Clinton administration would let them bend antitrust laws. However, even the suggestion of cooperation revealed the turmoil in the jet engine market, which was suffering because of slumping airline order and deep cuts in government spending on military aircraft. (WSJ, Jan 29/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
The Washington Post reported that a White House official had indicated that President Clinton intended to retain NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, a Bush appointee. The White House apparently had decided that Goldin was just the type of hard-nosed administrator that NASA needed. (W Post, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93)
The head of the Japanese space agency's office of space utilization said that Japan was unhappy with cutbacks to the Space Station Freedom project. Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa may bring up the issue at a meeting with President Clinton, scheduled to be held in Washington this week. (LA Times, Apr 14/93)
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The Clinton Administration decided to increase funding and continue work on the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider under construction in Texas, according to Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and other sources. Krueger said that Clinton's Office of Management and Budget had budgeted the project at $640 million for fiscal 1994, a 24 percent increase over the current year's spending levels. However, just before he left office last month, outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said that the 1994 funding level would have to be $1.2 billion to keep the project on schedule for completion by the end of the decade. (W Post, Feb 17/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that congressional supporters of the proposed Space Station were warning that the project would face serious trouble if President Clinton supported a radical, low-cost design. Supporters of the Station made it clear that they supported the most elaborate and expensive of the three redesigns developed by NASA. This design, which would cost $13.3 billion over the next five years, would cut more than $4 billion from the cost of the Station, yet it would keep most of the Station's capabilities and make use of much of the work that NASA had done on the project over the last nine years. (LA Times, June 11/93)
The White House provided more details on President Clinton's plans to shift spending from defense to domestic "investment" priorities. The 1994 NASA budget request moved the agency away from big space flight projects involving humans toward development of new technologies with potential for practical use on the ground. The agency's total budget would go to $15.27 billion, an increase of almost $1 billion. Most of the increase would be spent on aeronautics and other technologies, for example, development of a fleet of high speed planes for public transport and high speed computing. (W Post, Apr 9/93)
The press reported that the House Appropriations Sub-Committee on Energy and Water had appropriated $629 million for the Superconducting Super Collider for fiscal year 1994. The Clinton Administration had requested $640 million for the Collider. (UPI, June 10/93)
The Clinton Administration announced that it had launched a complete review of U.S. policy toward cutting global-warming pollution, but had not yet abandoned the stance taken by the Bush Administration. (B Sun, Mar 16/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
Daniel J. Jones, 80, a senior aeronautical engineer who retired in 1973 after 20 years with the Army Material Command, died January 23 after a heart attack. He served in the Navy from 1941 to 1953, and had tours of duty with the naval Aviation Engineering Division in the South Pacific during World War II and with the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington during the Korean War. (W Post, Jan 26/93)
NASA appeared to be receiving little attention from the Clinton Administration. Neither Administration representatives
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
The Senate approved legislation during the previous week requiring the Smithsonian Institution to build a proposed annex to the National Air and Space Museum near Dulles International Airport.  The bill already had passed the House, and President Clinton was expected to sign it. (W Post, Jul 26/93)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
According to Space News, in a March l0 letter to Vice President Gore, Senator Howell Heflin, D-Alabama, argued against canceling the Advanced Solid Rocket Mojtor program. Heflin said he opposed a proposal to close the rocket motor plant in Iuka, Miss; those opposing the closing hoped that the plant eventually would be used to build a hybrid rocket motor for a National Launch Center. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin volunteered to remain at NASA until the Clinton Administration appointed an replacement. He made the offer in a January 14 letter to the White House. Meanwhile he suspended an agency reorganization that he had just begun following months of review. White House officials have just begun to collect names of potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on Goldin's record, according to government officials (W Post, Jan 20/93; Space News, Jan 25-31)
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
Space News reported that European space officials were monitoring news about the fate of the United States Space Station under the Clinton Administration. The 13-nation European Space Agency (ESA) had agreed to spend about $2.8 billion on its Columbus Space Station program. The European program included a habitable laboratory that was to be attached to the Station and related ground equipment. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
