Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the University of North Dakota's Center for Aerospace Sciences (CAS). Goldin visited at the invitation of Senator Byron Dorgan, a member of the Commerce Committee, which oversees NASA and its budget. Goldin was impressed with CAS's new technology and the educational services and programs it conducted for children and the public as well as college students. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 3/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
NASA Chief Engineer Michael Griffin, Director of NASA's former Exploration Office, planned to resign to join Space Industries International, Inc., as Senior Vice President of Program Development. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)
NASA budget cuts and various problems experienced in recent flights aroused concern for the safety of astronauts, according to NASA critics. Despite assurances by Daniel Mulville, Director of NASA's Engineering and Quality Management Division that standards were not compromised, fears of another Challenger type disaster persisted. (AP, Mar 13/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; LA Times, Mar 20/94; Fla Today, Mar 24/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
NASA announced the departure from NASA, effective April 11, of Space Shuttle astronaut Ronald J. Grabe. He was to become Vice President, Business Development, for Orbital Sciences Corporation's Launch Systems Group. (NASA Release 94-57)
Space, Inc., a Clear Lake company, and its vice president Leonard N. Jackson, pleaded guilty in a federal undercover probe of fraud among NASA contractors and employees. (H Chron, Nov 16/94)
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
White House officials said President Clinton was scheduled to name a civilian panel of scientists to independently review human radiation test data in hundreds of thousands of documents uncovered by a government-wide search and to determine whether ethical standards had been violated. Energy Department spokesman Michael Gauldin said the panel members would consist of health physicists, experts on radiology, and specialists in medical ethics. He also said that an interagency "working group" formed to coordinate the search of records in eight agencies and departments was trying to define more clearly what experiments should be included. He predicted it would take "months, perhaps years" to find all the records and analyze them. (W Post, Jan 12/94)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
In the absence of a National Space Council chaired by the Vice President, Vice President Al Gore's office became the focal point for space policy. Gore and the White House seemed confident that the administration had sufficient support to pass the Space Station. (SP News, May 16-22/94)
Lockheed Space Operations Company in Titusville announced that 183 personnel would lose their jobs as a result of NASA budget cuts. Lockheed was the main contractor in a $607 million-a-year shuttle processing agreement with NASA. (Fla Today, May 10/94)
Dr. Thomas S. Burks, executive vice president for research and academic affairs, and veterinarian Dr. Bradford S. Goodwin, professor and executive director for laboratory animal medicine and care at the University of Texas Health Science Center, discussed the scientific necessity of raising genetically uniform rats and mice. They are used as subjects for research throughout the community. NASA used four dozen aboard the Shuttle Discovery. (H Chron, Jan 20/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
Representative Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas and chairman of the Space Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, said he was not sure the President was doing enough to prevent defections among Space Station supporters. Representative George Brown, Democrat from California and chair of the parent committee, threatened to withdraw his support if the President could not get sufficient funds for other science projects. (H Chron, Apr 15/94; National Journal, Apr 23/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, called a closed-door meeting on May 5 to discuss the $30 billion International Space Station. He called the meeting after Administration officials assured him that Space Station costs would not shortchange other NASA programs. Observers said Brown wished to assure that NASA received sufficient funds to conduct its activities. Committee members decided they could take no action until they heard of the decisions of the Appropriations Committee. (Fla Today, May 5/94; AP, May 5/94; O Sen Star, May 6/94; H Chron, May 6/94; H Post, May 6/94; Fla Today, May 6/94; LA Times, May 11/94; Huntsville News, May 11/94)
New Mexico's senators, Democrat Jeff Bingaman and Republican Pete Domenici, sent a letter urging NASA to keep two data facilities at the White Sands Space Network Complex northeast of Las Cruces. A $5 million building planned for NASA data operations remained empty in Las Cruces because NASA had decided to shift activities to West Virginia, according to NASA officials. However, NASA's inspector general said NASA could save $39 million through fiscal year 2000 and nearly $97 million thereafter if data operations connected with the Earth Observing System remained at White Sands instead of being moved to Fairmont, West Virginia. According to a September 5 syndicated column by Jack Anderson, Senator Robert Byrd engineered the change in location. (Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 9/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 10/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep 15/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement in response to the markup of NASA's budget by the House Appropriations Subcomittee on VA-HUD-Independent Agencies. He said that "Given the enormous challenge that Chairman Stokes and the members of his committee had in adequately addressing the many needs of the agencies covered in this budget, NASA is pleased with today's markup." He added that NASA was pleased to comply with the further challenge Stokes presented in the markup. (NASA Release, Jun 9/94; AP, Jun 9/94; W Times, Jun 10/94; O Sen Star, Jun 10/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 10/94; H Post, Jun 10/94; Fla Today, Jun 10/94; AP, Jun 10/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94)
NASA announced a major milestone in the Space Station Program as of February 1, with the signing by NASA and contractor officials of documents ending the Freedom Work Package contracts. NASA had signed these agreements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. Instead, responsibility for design, development, and integration of work on the International Space Station program was being concentrated in a single contract with Boeing Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA Release 94-15)
George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
The Senate voted 64 to 36 to defeat the amendment offered by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat from Arkansas, to end funding for the International Space Station. (W Post, Aug 4/94; W Times, Aug 4/94; Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)
NASA announced that high-speed information technologies it had developed could support physicians in remote locations on a new medical information superhighway by providing them instant access to information and treatment strategies for their patients. The new, integrated computing and telecommunications technologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were scheduled to be demonstrated to members of Congress and the Clinton Administration on September 20 by the National Information Infrastructure Testbed, a non-profit consortium of corporations, universities, and government agencies. (NASA Release 94-156)
In a speech to aerospace executives at the South Bay Association of Chambers of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that "survival of the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also be the rule at aerospace companies. He asserted that defense and space companies must follow NASA's lead in streamlining operations and delivering results for the public. (Daily Breeze, Oct 21/94)
Vice President Al Gore's Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program was described. GLOBE was a joint effort among the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), NASA, the EPA, and private contributors. Funding was proposed in the budget at $13 million: $7 million from NOAA, $5 million from NASA, and $1 million from EPA. The goal was to promote technical education while collecting environmental data. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 13/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, described some of the benefits Americans enjoyed in their daily lives that resulted from space-based research. Among these were insulation techniques used by Meals on Wheels to deliver food to senior citizens, miniaturization and computers, laser technology for use in the information superhighway, and biomedical discoveries. The latter included laser systems used in heart treatment, pacemakers, and body imaging techniques used in breast cancer detection. In addition, the space program created thousands of jobs. Despite the above achievements, Mikulski admitted that NASA in the past had over-promised technology and underestimated cost. NASA needed a clear set of priorities, and space programs must become multinational. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
NASA learned that instead of the anticipated $225 million cut in its Space Shuttle budget for 1995, Congress had cut an additional $141 million, for a total Shuttle budget cut of $366 million. President Clinton had signed the NASA 1995 spending bill, which allocated $3.18 billion for the Shuttle program out of a total NASA budget of $14.37 billion. The effects of the cuts on NASA operations remained to be determined. (Fla Today, Sep 30/94)
NASA was expanding its efforts to make procurement information readily accessible on the Internet. In the procurement reform act signed by President Clinton the previous week, NASA was granted authority to test soliciting bids for mid-range procurement (from $25,000 to $500,000 annually) on the Internet. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
The new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, David Obey, Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion federal spending budget in such a way that NASA had a good chance of getting 98 percent of the funds it requested for fiscal 1995. Efforts to kill the International Space Station project on the House floor remained likely. (O Sen Star, May 12/94; Fla Today, May 12/94; H Chron, May 13/94; H Post, May 13/94; W Post, May 13/94; SP News, May 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
Jack Anderson's column reported that Margaret Barnes, a NASA employee, sent a confidential letter to Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, on September 2, 1993, alleging among other things, that women in NASA Inspector General Bill D. Colvin's office were treated like "second-class citizens." Barnes was called in and berated by Colvin who had a copy of the letter, which was apparently leaked by Glenn's office. NASA sources said GAO had added the Barnes/Glenn episode to its investigation of Colvin. (W Post, Apr 7/94)
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Guy Bluford, the first African-American astronaut in space, served as master of ceremonies of a celebration the week of June 13, honoring the 30th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act. The Tuskegee Airmen participated as NASA honored those known as the "Civil Rights Movement of the Armed Services of World War II." (Metro Herald, Jun 17/94; Washington Informer, Jun 23-29/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
