Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing “increasing budget pressures.” Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one year’s time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, “Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters,” news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Speeds Up Downsizing,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, “NASA To Lighten Pay Load,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, “NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster,” Space News, 22−28 April 1996, 4−5.)
Without holding any subcommittee hearings on the matter, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology voted to trim NASA’s budget for 1997 by US$450 million. NASA operated under a US$13.8 billion budget in 1996. Most of the cuts were from the budget of the initiative Mission to Planet Earth.(Brett Davis, “Panel Sets $450 Million NASA Budget Cut,” Huntsville Times (AL), 25 April 1996.)
Former U.S. Representative Norman Y. Mineta received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, the highest civilian honor awarded by NASA. Mineta had served 21 years in the U.S. Congress, representing California’s Silicon Valley in the House of Representatives. As chairperson of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, he had played a vital role in bolstering the nation’s transportation infrastructure and fostering technological research. Mineta remarked that serving over the long term as the senior member of the House Committee on Science and Technology had given him the opportunity to see firsthand NASA’s significant achievements. When he accepted the award at a private ceremony, Mineta said, “I’m deeply honored to be recognized by NASA for any contributions I made furthering the mission of our nation’s space operations.”
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
President William J. Clinton signed legislation ending funding for the federal helium reserve. The United States, through the Bureau of Mines, had bought and stockpiled helium since the 1960s⎯expending more than US$250 million. Experts estimated that the U.S. government’s helium reserve could supply the world for more than 10 years and the federal government for 80. The legislation to end the reserve, spearheaded by U.S. Representative Christopher Cox (R-CA), closed down the helium facility outside Amarillo, Texas. NASA planned to sell the helium slowly, over a period of 18 years, so that the sales would not destabilize the worldwide helium market. The closure had the potential to affect NASA, the federal government’s largest user of helium. At the time of the reserve’s closure, NASA was using about 70 million cubic feet (2 million cubic meters) of helium annually to pressurize Shuttle fuel tanks, among other uses.(Associated Press, “Clinton Signs Law Killing Federal Helium Reserves,” 9 October 1996.)
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
The Smithsonian Institution named former U.S. Navy pilot and aviation executive Donald D. Engen as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Engen succeeded Martin O. Harwit, who had resigned amidst criticism of an exhibition about the Enola Gay atomic bomb mission. Some World War II veterans had deemed the exhibition too sympathetic to Japan, and some members of Congress had faulted the National Air and Space Museum for deviating from its mission of exhibiting the history of the United States’ aeronautical achievements. Smithsonian employees praised Engen’s appointment, suggesting that he would restore the museum’s credibility.
