President William J. Clinton signed into law H. R. 1654, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, authorizing funding for “a robust space and aeronautics program for the Nation.” Clinton commended bipartisan efforts to pass an authorization bill funding NASA’s priorities, such as building the ISS, improving Space Shuttle safety, and using the Space Launch Initiative to reduce the cost of access to space. However, Clinton criticized the bill for limiting “NASA’s flexibility to pursue a promising commercial habitation module” for the ISS, saying that the bill included several “objectionable provisions” and only one of the 14 legislative provisions that his administration had proposed.(U.S. Newswire, “Clinton Statement on Signing of the ‘National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000’,” 30 October 2000.)
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
Science and business leaders from the United States and Singapore signed an agreement to collaborate on biotechnology research conducted in space. The pact, focused on improving drugs and crops, outlined experiments planned for a 2001 Shuttle Columbia mission. U.S. Senator Christopher Bond (R-MO) called the agreement an “important step toward increasing scientific knowledge.”(Associated Press, “Singapore, U.S. Scientists Sign Accord on Outer Space Research,” 14 January 2000.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
After a lengthy legislative battle, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a US$60 million increase for NASA in its FY 2001 budget. Although the amount was less than the Clinton administration had requested for NASA, the spending proposal marked the end of several years of cost cutting for NASA. Even during a period of budget surpluses, NASA had not achieved the victory without a fight. Some members of Congress, concerned over the delay in the completion of the ISS, had introduced a floor amendment to delete all funding for the ISS. However, the House had roundly defeated the budget-slashing amendment, as it had in previous years, with a vote of 325 to 98. Noting that the ISS was nearly complete, Representative Robert E. Cramer (D- AL) spoke for NASA proponents when he said, “This is not the time to pull the rug out from under this program.”(Tamara Lytle, “House OKs Giving NASA $13.7 Billion in 2001 Fiscal Year,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 June 2000; Gannett News Service, “House Votes Down Measure To Cut Space Station,” 22 June 2000.)
A National Academy of Sciences task force issued a report supporting the development and deployment of the Triana research satellite proposed by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. Congress had authorized the task force in 1999, to investigate the feasibility of Gore’s plan, which called for a satellite to orbit Earth continuously, capturing live pictures of the planet. Gore believed that obtaining the images and making them available on the Internet would increase public awareness of environmental issues. The proposal had sparked a political controversy between Gore and the Republican Congress, prompting Congress to demand that a task force investigate the value of the project. The task force reported that the satellite had scientific merit. White House science advisor Neal Lane praised the study’s results, urging House members to act with “bipartisan Congressional support.” The process of investigation and approval of the project had drawn public attention to the political debate about space exploration.(Warren E. Leary, “Science Panel Supports Gore Satellite Plan,” New York Times, 9 March 2000; Associated Press, “Panel Finds Merit in Space Mission Proposed by Gore,” 8 March 2000.)
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
