Administrator Daniel S. Goldin became NASA’s first head to serve three different presidents when George W. Bush assumed the presidency of the United States. Although some had speculated that Goldin’s tenure would end when President William J. Clinton left office, President George W. Bush asked Goldin to remain in his position indefinitely, while the new administration reviewed possible candidates to replace him. Originally appointed by President George H. W. Bush in 1992, Goldin had instituted vast changes at NASA with his “faster, better, cheaper” approach. During his tenure, Goldin had reduced the number of NASA employees from 24,000 to 18,000 while overseeing the successful building and deployment of the International Space Station (ISS).(Frank Morring Jr., “Goldin Sees Station, Innovation as Legacies of His NASA Tenure,” Aerospace Daily, 8 January 2001; Brian Berger, “Goldin Responds to Presiding over NASA Through Bush Team Transition,” Space News, 23 January 2001; Bryant Jordan, “NASA’s Goldin Likely Gone,” Federal Computer Week, 11 January 2001, http://www.fcw.com (accessed 11 January 2001).)
NASA suspended indefinitely the launch of the climate-monitoring satellite Triana, which NASA had designed to provide imagery of entire hemispheres from nearly 1 million miles away in space. By contrast, weather satellites often remain in low Earth orbit and, therefore, are only able to provide images of continents. Triana was also called GoreCam or GoreSat, because former Vice President Gore had originated the project. Gore had conceived of the satellite in March 1998, choosing to name it in honor of Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Columbus’s ship who had first sighted land. NASA had planned to launch the US$120 million Earth-observation satellite by the end of 2001. However, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives had voted to eliminate the project’s funding from NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2000 appropriation. A conference committee of the House and the Senate had later agreed to suspend funding for Triana and to delay its launch, so that the National Academy of Sciences could review the project’s merits. Although the National Academy of Sciences had strongly endorsed the project, NASA had decided to shelve the satellite project indefinitely, as part of its effort to prioritize scientific expenditures and concentrate its resources on projects such as the HST and the ISS.(Joel Achenbach, “For Gore Spacecraft, All Systems Aren’t Go; Earth Observation Satellite Shelved,” Washington Post, 8 August 2001.)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space held a hearing on safety and workforce issues related to NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. According to newspaper reports, much of the testimony addressed the effects of budget cuts on the safety improvements for the Space Shuttles. Subcommittee members and witnesses reportedly were critical of the budget cuts and concerned about their possibly detrimental effects on Shuttle safety. Individuals providing testimony at the hearing were NASA Deputy Associate Administrator William F. Readdy, Allen Li of the General Accounting Office (GAO), Michael James McCulley of United Space Alliance, Richard D. Blomberg, chair of the ASAP, and Bryan D. O’Connor, former chair of the NRC’s Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Shuttle Safety, 107th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2001; Tamara Lytle, “Experts Fear for Shuttle Safety as NASA Budget Is Trimmed,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
