The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, which has primary jurisdiction for setting NASA’s annual funding levels. The subcommittee hearing was held in preparation for markup of FY 2003 appropriations legislation. Major media reported that subcommittee members were critical of NASA’s plans to eliminate certain programs to achieve President George W. Bush’s proposed reduction of US$1 billion in funding from NASA’s human spaceflight programs. In response to the comments of some members of the subcommittee, O’Keefe noted that, because NASA planned to complete its review of human spaceflight programs later in the year, he could not yet identify the programs that the budget cuts would affect. O’Keefe also said that NASA would provide Congress with a review of its scientific priorities by June and an independent cost assessment by August.(Karen Masterson, “DeLay Calls Plans for NASA ‘Timid’,” Houston Chronicle, 18 April 2002; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Apropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations for 2003, Part I, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 April 2002.)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology concerning NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Administrator O’Keefe also reported a recent independent audit of NASA’s finances, which NASA planned to release to the public the next day. According to newspaper reports, the lawmakers questioned O’Keefe in a tone that was frequently skeptical and even critical. At the time of O’Keefe’s testimony, NASA was already under public scrutiny regarding its budget overruns and financial accounting procedures, and critics had proposed reductions in its budget for human space travel.(Karen Masterson, “Skeptical Lawmakers Quiz NASA Chief About Budget,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2002.)
The U.S. House Government Reform Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations held a hearing, “Financial Management at NASA: What Went Wrong?” Stephen Varholy and Alan Lamoreaux of NASA and Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li of GAO provided testimony to the Subcommittee. The hearing focused on NASA’s methods of financial accounting and on the role of its former auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, in assessing those methods. Kutz reported that NASA’s system of accounting had made it difficult for GAO to assess NASA’s financial records and questioned Arthur Andersen LLP’s ability to assess those records accurately.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Leadership and Systems Needed to Effect Financial Management Improvements” (testimony of Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations; report no. GAO-02-551T, Washington, DC, 20 March 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02551t.pdf (accessed 12 August 2002).)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
