The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
President George W. Bush signed into law an omnibus appropriations bill (Pub.L.No.108-7), setting aside US$50 million to help NASA fund its investigation of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. Taking into account that NASA’s costs could exceed US$50 million to cover the investigation and to correct the problems with the Shuttle program, the law allowed NASA to seek additional funding if necessary. U.S. Senator Bill Nelson (D-FL) initiated discussion about the need for additional funding for the Columbia accident investigation, urging senior members of the Senate responsible for appropriations to include enough money to help NASA avoid further erosion of the already depleted Shuttle funds. The Challenger accident investigation had cost the United States US$75 million.(Frank Oliveri, “NASA Gets $50 Million for Shuttle Investigation,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 February 2003.)
Federal investigators concluded that a series of avoidable mistakes had caused the fatal crash of the chartered King Air A100 carrying Senator Paul D. Wellstone (D-MN) on 25 October 2002. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that the two charter pilots had possessed inferior flying skills, they had twice failed to align the twin-engine turboprop on the proper course for an instrument landing, and they had subsequently permitted the airspeed to drop to dangerously low levels. The craft had stalled and plummeted into the woods, killing all eight on board. The NTSB recommended that the FAA improve inspections of on-demand charter companies in an effort to improve pilot training and in-flight procedures. The NTSB report also recommended that the FAA and NASA create a special technical panel to study the feasibility of “low airspeed alert systems,” which would automatically warn pilots, especially those of small aircraft, of conditions that could lead to a disastrous stall.(Ricardo Alonso-Zalvidar, “Pilots Are Blamed in Wellstone Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 2003. 173)
CAIB Chair Harold W. Gehman Jr. and three other Board members appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss the CAIB’s findings. Gehman testified that budgetary pressures that the U.S. Congress and the White House ultimately controlled had been partly responsible for NASA’s management failures. House Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) concurred that Congress shared some of the blame in the 1 February loss of Columbia but reiterated that NASA needed to make changes. Many of the committee’s questions focused on prospective remedies for NASA’s poor risk management. While agreeing that NASA had a tendency to be overly optimistic in risk assessment, Gehman and other investigators explained to the committee that, because of the age of the Shuttle fleet, risk calculations were little more than estimates. Boehlert expressed concern that NASA was rushing to meet unrealistic return-to-flight dates―NASA had proposed a March 2004 launch date―rather than studying the CAIB report carefully and taking deliberate steps toward returning the Shuttles to flight.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Probe Rips White House, Congress,” Washington Post, 5 September 2003; Patty Reinert and Mark Carreau, “Don’t Rush New Launch, Lawmakers Warn NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2003.)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbia’s mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Board’s ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIB’s office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, “Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews,” Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
