President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The company’s goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, “Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space,” news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007,” MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
