Walter Jacobi, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team, which had come to the United States at the end of World War II, died at the age of 91. Jacobi had worked with von Braun’s team at Peenemuende during World War II, building V-2 rockets. After taking him prisoner, the U.S. Army had sent Jacobi, along with von Braun and 116 other German rocket engineers, to Fort Bliss, Texas, where they had worked for the Army. In 1950 Jacobi had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to work at MSFC, where he had handled the component work and design work of the massive valves that moved super-cold fuel and other fluids in the Saturn rockets. After retiring from MSFC, Jacobi had moved to the U.S. Space and Rocket Center, where he had spent several years during the 1970s in the center’s archives, identifying and translating the von Braun team’s German records and documents.(Shelby G. Spires, “Original Von Braun Team Member Jacobi Dies at 91,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 August 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
