At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
NASA released “Evaluation of U.S.S.R. versus U.S. Output in Space Science,” a study prepared for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
President Kennedy requested Congress to approve legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Final report of House Committee on Science and Astronautics relating to their hearings on “Commercial Applications of Space Communications Systems” released, having among its conclusions: (1)	Because of worldwide interest and potential usefulness of a space communications system, the U.S. Government must “retain maximum flexibility regarding the central question of ownership and operation of the system.” (2)	NASA will not only evaluate the various commercial proposals but will “conduct all space launches and retain direct control over all launching equipment, facilities, and personnel.” (3)	Research and development of military space communications systems should continue to be conducted by DOD but all research and development in space communications “should be conducted under the general supervision of NASA in accordance with its statutory mandate to 'plan, direct, and conduct aeronautical and space activities’ ” as well as evaluate the technical merits of proposed systems.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson began tour of west coast missile and space installations.
Vice President Johnson announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council had reached unanimous agreement on the national communications satellite policy, and unspecified recommendation transmitted to President Kennedy.
Resolutions calling for the creation of an international space year program and an international space agency, both under the auspices of the United Nations, introduced in the Senate by Senator Hubert Humphrey.
Congressman Overton Brooks, of Louisiana, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics since its creation in January 1959, died at Betkesda Naval Hospital.
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, a former aid to Senator Symington, was nominated by the President to be the Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council,
President Kennedy assigned Vice President Johnson the task of unifying the Nation’s communications satellite programs, in a letter which stressed urgency and “highest priority” for the public interest.
House and Senate approved bill to permit Vice President of the United States to serve as Chairman of the National Space Council.
Navy told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that Polaris could be used as a mobile satellite launch vehicle.
President Kennedy signed legislation making the Vice President Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council.
Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, Senator Hubert H. Humphrey as chairman, submitted report on “Coordination of Information on Current Research and Development Supported by the U.S. Government.” It recommended innovations be developed to aid the management and conduct of research.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before the House Appropriations Committee that getting the same information contained in the cloud structure photographs taken by the Tiros I weather satellite would have required thousands of weather ships over the Pacific. With Tiros I, he said, “for the first time man had a complete look at the weather over a large segment of the Earth’s surface.”
Senator Robert Kerr announced that he would introduce legislation to authorize private ownership of the U.S. portion of the proposed worldwide communications satellite system. His bill would create the “Satellite Communications Corp.” which the participating firms would buy.
In testimony before House Appropriations Committee, Hugh L. Dryden revealed that simulated free-flight speeds just under 30,000 miles per hour had been achieved at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Senator Robert S. Kerr, chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told a group at the National Radio and Television Convention that President Kennedy accepted the views of NASA and congressional leaders in approving the manned Mercury-Redstone flight of May 5.
In speech at the American Rocket Society, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
Dr. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center, testifying before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed reports that Nimbus meteorological satellite system was 6 to 12 mo. behind schedule. Dr. Singer recommended the U.S. keep at least two Tiros satellites in orbit until Nimbus was ready.
Senator Estes Kefauver (D-Tenn.) announced nasa proposed patent regulations would “flout the clear legislative intent underlying the nasa Act of 1958.” Urging nasa not to adopt the regulations he contended they would impede the space program, increase monopoly “in an already concentrated industry,” and give private industry the fruits of research financed publicly. Franz Olson, of Aerospace Industries Association, said at the nasa hearing that proposed patent waiver regulations would lead to an increase in inventions through “the proven incentives of the patent system.” Senator Russell B. Long (D-La.) charged the patent proposals would give “patent monopolies” to the industry on developments resulting from publicly financed research. Senator Long said Monopoly Subcommittee of the Senate Small Business Committee would conduct hearings on the proposed regulations in January.
In speech to the National Rocket Club, Senator Barry Goldwater said: “I am convinced that the American people fully endorse space preeminence for the United States. This is our long-range goal as a nation. . . . Space superiority in all its scientific, technological, and military aspects is fundamental to the future well-being, security, and prosperity of the United States . . . “As a new agency, nasa has picked up a momentum, a direction and a purposefulness directed toward long-range research and development which is one of impressive merit . . . “From all I can observe, the relationship between nasa and the Air Force in the space program has proceeded fairly well to date. But I would point out that the Department of Defense is responsible for military affairs, not nasa. nasa is not a military service, and its broad-based program will undoubtedly contribute greatly to our own national military requirements. . . . The point I am trying to make is that the requirements of the United States for military programs in space should not be neglected in any vital aspect . . .”
Filibuster on communications satellite bill (H.R. 11040) continued in Senate, with opponents filing between 75 and 100 amendments by noon. An amendment submitted by Senator Wayne Morse would permit “the enlargement of nasa so we can apply to the satellite system the contract, lease, and license system which has permitted the Department of Defense to do such a remarkable job with defense contracts. . . .”
Congressman George Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on the House floor in acknowledgment of successflli Soviet space flights of vostok iii and iv. Senator Alexander Wiley acknowledged the event on the Senate floor and pointed to need for advancing the U.S. space program.
U.S.S.R. had shown a “change in attitude in recent weeks” on cooperating with the U.S. on development and use of a weather satellite system, Dr. Francis W. Reichelderfer, Chief of the U.S. Weather Bureau, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
Congressman V. Anfuso and Senator H. Humphrey introduced similar bills (H.R. 10203 and S. 2849) to provide for research into and development of practical means for the utilization of solar energy.
George C. Barnhart, pioneer airman and inventor, died in Pasadena. Barnhart held 70 aircraft patents, including one for wing tanks. In 1942, he had turned over his patent for split-edge wing flap, a landing brake used on conventional and jet aircraft, to the Army Air Forces for the duration of the war, thousands of planes being built 1946-51 using the Barnhart flap for which he received no royalties as World War II had (not been officially ended. He had intended to sue the Government for $10 million.
Senator Howard W. Cannon of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences spoke on the floor on the short supply of scientists available to nasa and to its private industry contractors. He proposed a closer relationship between nasa and the universities: “We need to develop and develop from the beginning, space-oriented physicists, space engineers, space chemists, and space biologists.” He cited nasa’s cooperative program with universities established without the benefit of legislation, and said that he proposed to introduce legislation to amend the nasa Act for the purpose of: “(1) to increase the number of undergraduates who wlli make space science and space engineeringtheir primary field of work; (2) to provide nasa with clear directive and the necessary funds to establish an integrated and intimate program of research, fellowships, grants and curriculum specialization with universities . . .; and (3) to establish one or more university-operated space laboratories which wlli stimulate basic research and train professionals. . . .”
Rep. James G. Fulton, senior Republican on the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in an interview: “There’s no doubt our overall space program is slipping despite the high words and fine praise coming from the White House ... If it continues to slip, we’ll be lucky to get a man on the moon before 198°.” _ ...
House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended that Project Anna mapping satellite program be transferred from jurisdiction of dod to nasa. The satellite was designed to give extremely accurate measurements of the shape of the earth, its magnetic field, and distances from one point to another on earth.
Senator Albert Gore (D-Tenn.) told U.N. General Assembly’s Political Committee that U.S. was seeking following goals in space policy: “To be guided by the general principles already laid down by the United Nations for establishment of a regime of law in outer space, and to negotiate an extension of those principles by international agreement. “To conclude a treaty banning immediately the testing of any more nuclear weapons in outer space. “To preclude the placing in orbit of weapons of mass destruction. “To take all reasonable and practicable steps, including consultation with the world’s scientific community, to avoid space experiments with harmful effects. “To conduct a program which is as open as our security needs wlli permit and as cooperative as others are wlliing to make it. “To press forward with the establishment of an integrated global satellite communication system for commercial needs and a cooperative weather satellite system, both with broad international participation.”
Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, told subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that he doubted the launch schedule for first Nimbus satellite could be accelerated and stated that the Nimbus program had never been considered “urgent.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved a bill to revise space research patent laws. Bill allowed private companies to retain title to patents earned under Government contract, with Government retaining a license to use such inventions without cost.
Senator John L. McClellan addressed the Senate on S. 2631, designed to prevent strikes which would “obstruct our vital missile, space, and other programs, the success of which are indispensable to national prestige, security, and well-being.”
National Academy of Sciences awarded the J. Lawrence Smith Medal for outstanding achievement in the investigation of meteoric bodies to Dr. Harold C. Urey of the University of California of San Diego. The award was based upon Dr. Urey’s many publications on the chemical composition of meteorites, only one of his most recent fields of interest. He received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1934. After World War II he launched into speculations concerning the origin of the solar system, the cosmic abundance of the elements, the composition and structure of the moon and the planets, the latter work depending upon his chemical analysis of meteorites.
In joint letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Robert S. Kerr and Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “The world must of necessity admire the remarkable achievements of the Soviet Union in the field of space. A shadow is thrown over the entire space effort through their refusal to admit to failures. . . . “We feel it is important that if the U.S. Government possesses any information relative to unsuccessful attempts by the Soviet Union to launch a spacecraft to Venus, or other planetary probes, that this information should be made available to our committees and to the American people.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of Dr. Howard S. Turner to the Industrial Applications Advisory Committee. Dr. Turner was vice president for r&d of Jones & Laugh-lin Steel Corp. and formerly president and a director of Industrial Research Institute.
Subcommittee of House Committee on Science ana Astronautics issued report on solid-propellant rocket motors for Nova-class vehicles: “If the cancellation of this development program [solids for Nova] is based on the cost factor alone, then the committee feels that nasa should review the events of the past. For it was this approach in the development of our icbm that gave the U.S.S.R. their superbooster and the resultant lead in space exploration which the U.S. is still struggling to overcome. The United States cannot afford a second setback of this magnitude. . . . “The committee is struck by the large amount of manpower and time that both the dod and nasa have devoted to coordination in trying to reach an agreement and the extended delay in starting even the most basic development program.” Committee recommended giving nasa the funding responsibility for continuation of solid-propelled motor effort, since there exists no direct mllitary requirement for the large boosters.
nasa announced appointment of Robert H. Charles as procurement consllitant to the Administrator. Charles previously had served as executive vice president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp.
nasa’s Director of Aeronautical Research, John Stack, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke of nasa support of dod missile programs: “Included in this work are such as Pershing, Atlas, Nike, Nike-Zeus, Eagle, gar-9 and Skybolt. The nasa contributions have been in two areas, one providing critical aerodynamic information for performance determination and control system characteristics and the other in suggesting configuration improvements to improve the over-all characteristics.”
nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes, briefed the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (lor) procedure which nasa announced as the prime mission mode for the initial manned lunar landing.
In statement before the House Space Subcommittee, Grant L. Hansen, Vice President of the Astronautics Division of General Dynamics and Director of the Centaur program, stated that preliminary data on May 9 explosion indicated that structural failure was caused by the “design of the weather shield between the nose fairing and the Centaur itself” and the design of weather shield “was an engineering mistake.” Design of the weather shield was based, he said, upon assumptions that “turned out to be false . . ., very difficult to define by laboratory analysis and without full-scale wind-tunnel tests.” In spite of program delays, Hansen said that the Centaur program had been subjected to “unwarranted criticisms.”
Virginia State Exchange Clubs awarded Distinguished Virginian Award to William J. O’Sullivan, head of the Space Vehicle Group at Langley Research Center. Representative Thomas N. Downing, member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, made the presentation to O’Sullivan in recognition of his concept, design, and development work with the Echo satellite.
13-min. radio program relayed from New York via telstar satellite to Europe, where it was broadcast by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty to audiences in U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries. Program featured message on U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear disarmament by Senator Hubert H. Humphrey.
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, defended the U.S. space program in speech on floor of the House. Arguing that Soviet vostok in and iv manned orbital flights did not justify changes in the U.S. program, he said: “Certainly I will not stand here and say that more and better military space programs should not be undertaken. What I do say is that a considerable effort in this field has long been underway and that the Monday-morning quarterbacks whose teeth start chattering after every Russian ‘spectacular’ might exhibit a bit more faith in those who have the actual responsibility for the defense of the country. . . . “[We should not overlook] . . . the fact that the Soviets have now demonstrated two important capabilities: First, that they have sufficient launch facilities and rocket reliability to launch two manned spacecraft within a short time, and second, that they have the ability to time launches with great precision. These capabilities are an important step toward the development of the rendezvous and docking technique which will be of great value in achieving many advanced objectives in space exploration, some of which may have potential military value. “These, I think, are the formidable implications of their recent feat. But these implications are no reason for us to put our program in a constant state of flux, with projects starting, stopping, and shifting in response to each new Soviet development. Our undertaking is gigantic, immensely complex. It cannot be assembled and disassembled and redesigned and reassembled without losing its direction and momentum, and the space contest itself. . . . “There is a suggestion that the military services should duplicate work now in progress under the civilian agency. There is nothing particularly military about solutions to problems involved in the effects of long-term weightlessness, radiation, and isolation. The capabilities of both civilian and military research agencies should be brought to bear on these problems in a coordinated manner. “On the record, then, it appears that the critics of our space program are not asking that we do twice as much—but that we do everything twice. I do not think the economy will take that, but even if it would—it just does not make sense. “And how about the reciprocal use of the knowledge we are gaining? Science knows no exclusive applications technologically speaking, what is developed by civilians can be used militarily and vice versa. . . . “It seems farily well established that the real cause of all this squabble about the military-in-space stems from an inhouse difference of opinion within the military establishment. The problem is not that our civil space program is retarding the military. On the contrary, it is enhancing it and will continue to do so in the future. The problem is that the military space enthusiasts have not been able to obtain all the green lights they want from their bosses. ... I am confident the controversy will be resolved in time—and expeditiously, I hope.”
In testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Gen. Bernard Schriever, Commander of afsc, discussed the “reciprocal support” between nasa and the usaf, and the national requirement for mllitary space weapons systems. He pointed out that: (1) 102 usaf officers were assigned full-time with nasa as well as 23 Navy and 33 Army; (2) $49 millions of nasa support was funded by the usaf through FY 61 and over $200 millions in FY 62; (3) $270 millions of nasa funds were processed under cognizance of afsc during FY 61; and (4) nasa use of usaf booster, launch, and tracking capabllities and the joint X-15 program further demonstrated “the work nasa and the Air Force are doing together as a team.” Gen. Schriever pointed to the fundamental capabilities of future space weapon systems and the assignment by the Secretary of Defense of major responsibility for mllitary space systems development to the Air Force.
Congressman George P. Miller, chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told the press that “since the orbiting of the Soviet twin Cosmonauts, the agitation [among members of the Senate, professional military societies, and the trade press] borders on panic and constitutes a threat to a program which is not only very important but complex and carefully planned. ... I have been a consistent advocate of a mllitary capability in space for the United States second to none, but I see no reason why our military requirements cannot be met without hamstringing or jeopardizing the civil space program. . . . There has been so much misinformation and misimpression generated about our space program, both the civil and military aspects, that I can no longer remain silent. The record has to be set straight and I intend to do it.” He said he would deliver a major speech on the House floor later this week, when he would place the space program into “balanced perspective.”
Results of a usia poll in Britain showed that 82% of people questioned had identified telstar communications satellite by name, compared to 78% able to identify sputnik i in 1957. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science gnd Astronautics, Robert Mayer Evans, special assistant to usia Director Edward R. Murrow, reported the survey’s results and said they showed “an extraordinary level of awareness” of the communication satellite in its first weeks of existence.
H.R. 12812, blli to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 regarding property rights in inventions by private companies under nasa contract, was reported from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics.
Sharp rise in heating of re-entry vehicles returning from manned lunar missions at speeds of 25,000 mph was described to the subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa. Mr. Ames stated that a simulation study at nasa’s Ames Research Center had “demonstrated Eeat promise for pilot-controlled re-entries during orbital and nar missions, and we plan to extend our work in this area.”
Walter C. Scott, Chief of nasa’s Space Power Technology Program, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said one of the promising developments in solar cells was the possibility of producing thin strips of silicon solar cells on some kind of substrata. If this can be done, the “much lower cost, lower weight and improved mechanical properties wlli be attractive to the space industry and for that matter to the civilian economy. Thin films of cadmium sulfide have been produced in small areas with conversion efficiencies of 3%. It has been stated that if this efficiency collid be increased to 5% and produced in large areas, solar power wollid be economically competitive with conventional sources at rates of 3 to 4 mils per kilowatt hour.”
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, summarized the year’s activities of the committee in speech on House floor: “It has been another busy year for the committee, highlighted by action on the fourth annual budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, now rapidly approaching the $4 billion mark. In addition to the intensive study the space budget underwent, the committee also conducted 26 investigations, issued 16 reports, held 124 days of hearings, and heard 236 witnesses. “Indicative of the committee’s activity is the more than 2,175,000	words of testimony taken this year incorporated into approximately 3,860 pages of printed hearings. . . .”
Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, headed by Rep. Victor Anfuso, opened hearings on the role of women in the space program. Jane B. Hart and Jerrie Cobb, representing the 13 women who completed unofficial space qualification tests at the Lovelace Foundation, testified that women had a real contribution to make and were qualified as astronauts. Jacqueline Cochran, well-known flier, said that “there is no doubt in the world that women will go into space.”
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (iam strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry appointed by the President began their investigation of the “union shop” conflict. During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in FY 1963 funds to begin construction of facllities at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr). Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support facilities. During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere.
Escape-velocity payloads with the nuclear-engine Rift as the 3rd stage on an Advanced Saturn booster wollid be more than double that of a 3-stage, all-chemical Advanced Saturn and higher than that of the Nova 12-mlliion-pound-thrust vehicle, according to testimony given to a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Harold B. Finger, nasa’s Director of Nuclear Systems.
In private audience with Pope John XXIII, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson presented the Pope with a small model of telstar communications satellite.
Senator Hubert Humphrey announced public hearing on improvement of Government management of information and coordination of reporting would be conducted by Senate Government Operations Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations, September 20. Among officials testifying would be Melvin Day, Director of nasa Office of Technical Information. September 14: mariner ii, U.S. Venus probe, continued to transmit signals from interplanetary space to earth on its nineteenth day of flight, thus surpassing record of U.S.S.R. Venus probe which stopped transmitting on its eighteenth day of flight in February 1961. At 8:00 PM edt the spacecraft was estimated to be 3,067,471 mi. from earth and traveling at a speed of 6,463 mph relative to the earth, jpl scientists said the probe appeared to be continuing “right on course.”
Agreement establishing U.S.-Italy cooperative space program, signed in May, was confirmed in Rome by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The Memorandum of Understanding between nasa and the Italian Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial orbit. Generally, nasa would provide the Scout rockets and personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
Speaking on the floor of the Senate, Senator Thomas Dodd supported statements by Senator Cannon on August 20, and added: “The primary goals of our foreign policy, as I see it, are first, the protection of our Nation; second, the maintenance and extension of freedom; and third, the preservation of peace. . . . Our ability to protect our freedoms and preserve the peace depends ... on our military power in-being—on land, on sea, in the air and, tomorrow, in space. ... “I earnestly hope that it will prove possible to maintain our scientific space program and our moon program intact while instituting an immediate program to bolster our flagging military effort in space. . . . “The reorganization of our space effort will require a number of changes. First, and preceding everything else, there must be a change in policy, which clearly and publicly assigns a greater emphasis to the military potentialities of space. . . . “Second, there must be a specific directive to the Defense Department to proceed as a matter of the utmost urgency with the development of military space systems, in particular of manned space vehicles . . . “Third, I believe that while proceeding with the development of specialized military spacecraft, our Military Establishment should be authorized to embark immediately on a launching program of its own for manned space vehicles, perhaps employing modified versions of the equipment now under development by NASA. . . . “Fourth, to support the establishment of military launching and vehicle development programs, our astronaut training program will have to be stepped up, and military personnel will have to be trained in the use of the complex monitoring and control systems that constitute the brain of our entire space vehicle effort. “Fifth, our defense program in space wlli have to be provided with whatever money may be necessary to achieve its objectives, and to overtake the Soviet lead in manned space vehicles. “Sixth, the machinery of cooperation between nasa and Defense wlli have to be overhauled in a manner which gives due consideration to the requirements of defense as well as to the requirements of science. . . .”
Satellite Communications Corporation” bills were introduced by Senator Robert Kerr (S. 2650) and by Rep. George Miller (H.R. 9696), which would amend the nasa Act by adding a new section which would declare that it is “the policy of the United States to provide leadership in the establishment of a worldwide communications system involving the use of space satellites.” The section would create a “Satellite Communication Corporation” which would be privately owned and managed, and which would develop and operate a communications satellite system.
Sir Frederick Handley Page, British aviation pioneer, and chairman and managing director of Handley Page Ltd., died in London at age 76. Inventor of the slotted wing, he provided England with its first bombers in 1915 and his Halifax bomber of World War II, of which more than 60,000 were produced, was a key weapon of raf Bomber Command.
Announced that nasa had awarded contract to Rocketdyne Division of naa for two-year continuation of H-l engine research and development. Preliminary letter contract of $700,000 was signed toward estimated $9,000,000 total cost. H-l engine is used in clusters of eight to power S-I stage of Saturn C-l launch vehicle. During mid-August: Chandler Ross, Aerojet-General Corp. Vice President, told House Committee on Sciences and Astronautics that two Aerojet concepts of recoverable/reusable boosters compared favorably to cost and capability of Saturn C-5. One concept was Sea Dragon two-stage unmanned vehicle with payload capability “well in excess” of a million pounds; and the other was Astroplane single-stage manned vehicle with payload capability of about 550,000 pounds. “In each case the incremental cost savings is of sufficient magnitude to warrant continued feasibility studies of these systems,” Ross said.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reportedly ordered an investigation of alleged government discrimination against women, naming in executive session Congressman Victor L. Anfuso as chairman of a special nine-man, two-woman investigation subcommittee.
First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first transatlantic TV transmission, when telstar experimental communications satellite of at&t demonstrated vast new capabilities. Pictures were telecast from at&t center near Andover, Me., to telstar, then received and placed on all three major TV networks in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover, Me., to telstar, and then relayed to French antenna at Pleu-meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station at Goonhilly, Cornwall. In American relay experiment via telstar, at*t Board Chairman Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in Washington. In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of waving American flag was transmitted via telstar to both France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV networks. First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from usaf Project Score satellite on December 18, 1960. echo i, passive communications satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also had been used as a reflector in communications experiments, the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army Signal Corps.
nasa announced appointment of Walter L. Lingle, Jr., as Special Assistant to the Administrator and, temporarily, as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Formerly executive vice president of Proctor and Gamble, Mr. Lingle served three months as Deputy Administrator of aid just prior to nasa appointment.
Vice President Johnson sent a congratulatory telegram to members of the oscar amateur radio satellite team: “For me this project is symbolic of the type of freedom for which this country stands— freedom of enterprise and freedom of participation on the part of individuals throughout the world.” oscar i was launched with discoverer xxxvi on December 12, 1961.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that the revised usaf solid-propellant development program would cost considerably less than the $60 mlliion originally planned. He said that current program review ordered by Secretary of Defense and nasa Administrator had shown that solid-fuel program was larger than necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of the boosters. Once approved by the Secretary and the Administrator, the new master plan for solid-propellant boosters wollid limit the program to feasibility study, since neither dod nor nasa had specific mission requirements for their application.
Senator Margaret Chase Smith, in a radio interview with Senator Kenneth B. Keating, expressed doubt on the value of space cooperation with the U.S.S.R. A member of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, Sen. Smith said the U.S. had “decided superiority over Russia on really important space development. Russia has the edge over us on thrust power but when it comes to finer scientific space developments and information, we have great superiority over Russia. Perhaps one of our greatest areas of superiority is in the development of miniaturization. I think we could learn something from Russia but there is a question as to just how far we can trust her and what we get in return.”
Senator Howard W. Cannon spoke on the Senate floor on the need for an enlarged military space program. “. . . the major emphasis being placed by present U.S. space efforts has been on the purely scientific exploration of space and on its civilian applications, in priority above and indeed to the detriment of development of vitally needed military capabilities in space. If continued, this could prove to be a fatal mistake .... Unfortunately the present direction of our national efforts in space gives little or no assurance that attention is truly directed to the development of our military capabilities .... Clearly, we ought to have an energetic development program underway, adequately supported with funds, to find means to defend ourselves against attacks that could come from hostile orbiting space vehicles.” Senator Cannon listed several “minimum essential required space capabilities:” (1) near-space operations using manned maneuverable vehicles “capable of self-defense and having the capability of conducting offensive, defensive, and passive support missions;” (2) a standard military-civilian space launch system; (3) unmanned satellites for military communications missions; (4) improved tracking, control, and detection facilities (5) space-located facilities for r&d; (6) space-located bioastronautics research by means of a manned orbiting satellite.
Jessie G. Vincent, automotive and airplane engine designer and holder of over 400 patents, died in Detroit at age 82. Vice president of the Packard Motor Car Co. from 1915 to 1948, Mr. Vincent was codesigner of the Liberty Marine engine in World War I and as an Army major helped get the Liberty engine into production, at which time it was regarded as the world’s finest power plant of its kind.
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program. He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to man’s total knowledge that it wlli benefit and alter the course of his existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of the major benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new and uncharted areas. . . .”
Senator Wiley of Wisconsin urged that Congress before adjournment conduct hearings on the military implications of U.S.S.R. two-man orbital space flights.
Pioneer naval aviator, Vice Admiral Patrick N. L. Bellinger, died. In 1915, Bellinger became the second American flier to be launched by catapult, established flying boat distance record, established altitude record of 10,000 feet, and participated in aerial spotting for artillery fire. In 1916, he made naval tests of live bombing and practical tests of air-to-ground radio communication. In 1917, he made machine-gun firing tests from seaplane and first night seaplane flights using floodlights. In May 1919, he commanded the NC-1 in transatlantic flight to the Azores, damage to aircraft ended the flight there. During World War II, he was commander of the Atlantic Fleet Air Force.
House Appropriations Committee cut a $65 million nasa item for purchase of land at Cape Canaveral and in Mississippi from a supplemental appropriations bill for the balance of FY 1962. The action was taken because the House Science and Astronautics Committee had not authorized the expenditure. Approved was $80 million for development, $5 million less than nasa asked for.
Dr. Launor F. Carter was appointed Chief Scientist, usaf, to take office in July succeeding Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold. Dr. Carter, Vice President and Director of Research for System Development Corp. of Santa Monica, Calif., has been a member of the usaf Scientific Advisory Board since 1955. A psychologist, Dr. Carter has done much work on leadership, perception, and group behavior.
During hearings of the Joint Senate and House Economic Committee, Senator Paul H. Douglas stated that “the public has never really had a chance to consider” the space program and that one third of the members of the American Astronautical Society had indicated in a poll that “a man landing on the moon was not desirable.” Budget Director David E. Bell stoutly defended the space program. Senator Sparkman questioned Senator Douglas: “I wonder whether Congress felt the same way when it put up money for Samuel Morse” to develop the telegraph.
John Rubel, Director of dod Office of Research and Development, testified before subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that it was “highly doubtful that dod would undertake a new weather satellite program at this time,” and stated the military interest in weather satellite development was adequately protected by existing nasa and Weather Bureau programs.
Senator Hubert Humphrey, in hearings of the Subcommittee on Reorganization and International Organizations of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, told Melvin S. Day, Director of nasa Office of Scientific and Technical Information: “Mr. Day, I want to commend you for blueprinting one of the finest intra-agency systems in the Federal government today in the information field and, of course, I speak of nasa. While the work is being done by private contractor, it is you who have set the high standards for performance. . . . We feel what has been done within the agency, from our limited examination, is an outstanding job, and we want to compliment you on it.” During October: Geophysical Institute of University of Alaska reported to nasa that specially instrumented sounding rockets would be desirable for measuring extent of solar cosmic rays associated with ionization of the upper atmosphere. Auroral-zone absorption disturbances make ground measurements difficult.
Representative Joseph E. Karth, chairman of a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced that hearings on four communications satellite systems would begin August 15, to determine whether duplication existed among the projects (Relay, Syncom, Advent, and Telstar).
Special subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics conducted hearings on solid propellants. Chairman David King of Utah was quoted as saying he wanted the hearings to be detailed enough to commit dod and nasa to a definite plan for solid-propellant rockets. Testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator Thomas F. Dixon said that nasa was “giving solid rockets equal consideration with liquid rockets in decisions on future launch vehicle designs. . . . We have provided the Air Force with our requirements for an advanced technology or feasibility demonstration program on large solid rocket motors pertinent to the development of solid rocket-powered launch vehicles. “To make an informed choice of propulsion between liquid propellant engines (where the technology is fairly well in hand) and solid propellant motors (where it is not), it is necessary to advance the technology of large solid motors to the point of actual demonstration firings. The demonstration program we have proposed wlli allow us to make a wise choice between the two types of propulsions because a better understanding of costs and schedules as well as developmental problems wlli be available.”
White House announced President Kennedy would visit military and civilian missile and rocket installations at Cape Canaveral, Fla.; Huntsville, Ala.; Houston, Tex.; and St. Louis, Mo., on September 11-12. President Kennedy would be accompanied by Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNamara, nasa Administrator Webb, bob director David E. Bell, and several Congressmen. Purpose of trip was “to study the work being done in this most important area and in connection with the preparation of the fiscal year 1964 budget. . . .”
Senate voted (63-27) to invoke cloture rule on communications satellite debate, cutting off the filibuster against the bill and limiting each Senator to an hour of speaking time.
Testimony of Feb. 27 by Prof. James A. Van Allen before the House Committee on Appropriations on the relative worth of instrumented unmanned satellites versus manned satellites was released. Van Allen was misquoted on the wire news services to the effect that manned space flight was of limited scientific value in the future.
House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued report based on nasa’s authorization hearings and two days of specific testimony on the Centaur program.
Speaking on the Senate floor, Senator Estes Kefauver reiterated Ms belief that the communications satellite blli (H.R. 11040) “proposed the most gigantic giveaway in the history of this country. It wollid turn over to a govemmentally created private monopoly the benefits of hundreds of mlliions of dollars of taxpayers’ money which have been invested in the development of space and satellite communications technology. ...”
President Kennedy released part of a report submitted earlier by Vice President Johnson, Chairman of the Space Council. The report stated that the U.S. had generated a greater rate of progress in space in 1961 than in any other year but that “it is too early to make definitive comparisons as between our newly developing competence and the capabilities of the U.S.S.R.”
Subcommittee on Patents of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics released its report following three years of study of the operation of the patent provisions of the Space Act of 1958. The report of the subcommittee headed by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario contended the patent provisions that gave the Government title to most inventions resulting from NASA-financed research were damaging to small business, cost the taxpayer money, diluted the national space effort, and made industry reluctant to market the products of such research. Recommended that patent ownership in most cases be turned over to industry, with Government retaining royalty-free use. A minority report by Rep. William F. Ryan pointed out that with almost 95% of Government research money “going to big business, retention of title by the contractors will inevitably bring about concentration of technology and economic power.”
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
The Senate passed nasa authorization for FY 1963 (H.R. 11737) of $3,820,515,520. Amendments submitted by Senator William Proxmire to require competitive bidding on space projects and to establish a presidential commission to study the impact of the space program upon the nation’s manpower were both defeated by lopsided votes. Senate authorization restored $116 million cut by the House.
Alexander V. Topchiev, vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died in Moscow. Winner of the 1949 Stalin Prize and twice winner of the Order of Lenin, Topchiev was believed to have played a major role in the development of new rocket fuels and had attended many important international conferences since 1960. He had recently declared that “war is no longer possible” and had advocated East-West collaboration on nuclear space propulsion.
nasa submitted to the Congress a draft nasa authorization for FY 1963 bill. It would provide legislative authority to support the nasa budget for FY 1963, and authorize nasa to spend $2,968,278,000 for research, development, and operations and $818,998,000 for construction of facilities.
Congressman John E. Moss, Chairman of the Government Information Subcommittee, wrote to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara asking why 1959 Army report “Project Horizon” was not yet declassified. Originally classified “Secret,” the study proposing manned lunar program culminating in 1965 lunar landing had 10 separate security reviews by 4 agencies, but it was still classified “official use only.” Congressman Moss observed that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics had requested declassified version of “Project Horizon” on Aug. 3, 1961, but had never received it.
U.S. patent (No. 3,008,154) was granted to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin for a rocket to be used in detecting strength and polarity of electric fields in clouds. Such data could then be used in control of cloud movements and in effecting weather changes. Patent was first applied for in 1948 but until now was kept secret at request of dod. Dr. Zworykin is a consultant to the Princeton Laboratories of rca and honorary vice president of rca.
North American Aviation expected to pass its peak World War II employment figure of 93,000 persons within the next 90 days, its current corporate employment now being at 90,000. Rocket-dyne Division has grown from 11,000 to 13,000 employees within the past year.
American Rocket Society gave Congressman George Miller of House Committee for Science and Astronautics a special award for his “outstanding leadership in space.”
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on $3.7-blliion nasa authorization request. Administrator Webb, Robert R. Gilruth (Director msc), and Astronauts Glenn, Grissom, and Shepard appeared as witnesses. Mr. Webb outlined nasa’s projected program to be covered in detail in subsequent testimony: (1) total ten year program ahead may cost over $35 blliion; (2) new astronaut training program to include scientists wlli be announced shortly; (3) future manned spacecraft wlli be capable of landing on land or water; (4) nasa is opposed to using astronauts as goodwlli ambassadors, as they are needed on the current program; (5) 92% of nasa’s budget wlli be spent through industry and universities. Astronaut Glenn pointed out that the Nation “must be prepared” for failures in future manned space flights. “We don’t envision every flight,” he said, “coming back as successfully as the three we have had so far ... I hope we wlli always have the confidence in the program that we now have despite the fact there wlli be times when we are not riding a crest of happiness and enthusiasm as we now are.”
Each of the series of weather satellites, Tiros, Nimbus, and Aeros, would not only provide an advance in capability but would extend observations into vital new areas, Morton J. Stoller, nasa’s Director of Applications, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Speaking of Nimbus and Aeros, he said: “With one Nimbus in orbit, about half a day passes before we again see the same area. This will be a reasonably satisfactory time for the observation of such systems as cyclonic storms and hurricanes whose normal life is considerably greater than 12 hours. But, if we attempt to observe thunderstorm cells or tornadoes, systems whose life is appreciably less than 12 hours and often less than 6 hours wlli usually form, move and die without ever being detected. It is for this reason that the Aeros satellite with its capability for focusing on small short-lived storm systems and tracking them continuously, is considered to be an integral component of the eventual operational system.”
Soviet scientists claimed to have discovered the third radiation belt around the earth and published such findings two years before the findings of explorer xii were made public by nasa on January 19, 1962. Academician Blagonravov, Vice President of the International Committee on Space Research, said in an Izvestia interview that the existence of a dense belt with energies of 200 to 20,000 electron volts at a distance of 25.000	to 50,000 miles was recorded by Soviet space launchings in 1958. Such findings, he said, were published by Dr. K. Gringauz and associates in the February and April issues of the Soviet Academy oj Sciences Proceedings in 1960, and in later publications. Commenting on the view that the three radiation belts really formed a single large pulsating band that might be called a “magnetosphere,” Blagonravov agreed that the boundaries might be arbitrary but that the charged particles in each belt had distinctive characteristics and that it would be “inexpedient” to reject the theory of three belts.
Senator Henry M. Jackson in a radio interview said there was evidence that “lives were lost” in the Russian manned space flight program. He urged the Kennedy Administration to challenge the U.S.S.R. to “lay bare” its trials and errors in achieving manned space flight.
Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in press interview that the greatest accomplishment of Soviet vostok iii and iv flight was putting two men in orbit and bringing them close together. “They’re well ahead in that respect. But we can meet that in a couple of years. We’ll be ahead when Titan 3 is ready.”
Experimental new method of producing synthesis of chemicals with low-energy ions was reported by Rocket Power, Inc., a solid-propellant manufacturer. Milton Farber, vice president and director of laboratories, and Dr. Stanley Singer, chief chemist, indicated several new compounds had been produced. Mr. Farber said the ion-synthesis method could produce rocket propellants perhaps 10 per cent more efficient than any now available in U.S. “The key is the speed of the ions. If the beam of ions meets the target chemical at too high a rate, shattering occurs. By controlling the velocity of the ions, they can be made to merge with the chemical, creating a new compound.” Research project was sponsored by usaf oar.
Senator Thomas Kuchel of California, speaking in the Senate, said that the bill to amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (H.R. 12812) would provide nasa a needed flexibility in {>atent regulations, including authorization to secure royalty-free icense or complete title for Government-sponsored research, and he recommended that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hold hearings on the bill.
The Air Force Space Plan, a ten-year blue-print for military space technology, was given to a House committee by Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, dcs/r&t. The Space Plan foresaw a mllitary need for rendezvous, docking, and transfer. The usaf expected to depend on a manned rendezvous vehicle, using the two-man Gemini, built by nasa, as an initial vehicle. The Space Plan was sent to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board for review.
Dr. Arthur E. Raymond was appointed a special consultant to the nasa Administrator. He would be concerned with organization and management of research and development programs, especially those involving advanced research and over-all systems planning. Dr. Raymond retired in 1960 as senior vice president of engineering for Douglas Aircraft Co., having spent 35 years with the company. He served as a member of naca from 19461956.
Mercury astronauts Shepard, Grissom, and Glenn appeared before both the House Science and Astronautics Committee and the Senate Aeronautics and Space Committee, answering a variety of questions on future manned space flight. Dr. Robert Seamans, nasa Associate Administrator, summarized specific nasa program, manpower, and money requirements before the House Committee.
Senator Hubert Humphrey spoke on the floor on the coordination of information between dod, nasa, and aec, and inserted in the record a memo of June 13, 1962, in which he criticized nasa’s information exchanges. He stated: “nasa has developed highly advanced blueprints, so to speak, for information exchange. . . . The blueprints are a long way from realization. . . . [nasa] possesses, moreover, in-house personnel and a principal information contractor with a very high degree of professional competence.”
Tracking network that operated during Glenn orbital flight would for the most part be sufficient to handle the 18-orbit flights to follow, according to Edmond C. Buckley, nasa’s Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. For the Glenn flight, the ground stations had to provide five minutes of contact and communication for every 15 minutes of flight during the 4K-hour mission. For 18 orbits the current requirement was one contact per orbit. This would require repositioning of the two ship stations and adding more telemetryreceiving equipment and command systems to some of the existing sites.
Testimony by nasa Administrator Webb before House Appropriations subcommittee was released in which he declared that the U.S. has given far more than it has received in exchanges of space flight findings with the Soviet Union. By publicly releasing information gained from space flights, the U.S. is “ . . . cooperating with them, but not getting very much in the way of return cooperation,” he said. Webb defended U.S. policy of making space research results generally available: “We are, in this open way, exposing the problems just ahead of us to the largest number of able minds all around the world. This is really the way mankind has made its forward advance. No one can tell from which mind comes the solution to a problem. “I think the progress which can come from this can never be matched by Russia and the nations which do these things in secret.”
According to the Washington Post, usaf second attempt to orbit belt of copper filaments in Project West Ford experiment was apparently inadvertently revealed by Eugene C. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The attempted orbiting was inferred to have been made sometime this summer, failed because of launch vehicle malfunction (first failure and only attempt publicized had been made on Oct. 21, 1961). Of this report, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, Arthur Sylvester, said to the press: “The facts are that only one attempt has been made [to orbit tiny metal filaments] and the U.S. Air Force will coordinate with the National Academy of Sciences on any future attempt.” Confusion had arisen when the Washington Post had reported that the usaf had made an unsuccessful attempt to orbit such a payload during the summer.
In extended action on the floor of the Senate, Senators Russell B. Long, Albert Gore, Estes Kefauver, and Wayne Morse opposed the passage of the Administration’s amended communications satellite system bill (S. 2814) previously brought out of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Senator Long charged that the Senate had been subjected to lobbying “the like of which the Congress had never seen before” on the private ownership of the proposed communications satellite system, and he was questioned by Senator John O. Pastore, the bill’s floor manager.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Senator John L. McClellan recommended establishment of a Senate commission on science and technology to study Government’s growing scientific programs, including the desirability of a Cabinet post for science and technology.
The House of Representatives (342-0) approved the nasa authorization for FY 1963 of $3.67 billion. This was almost three times the nasa budget for FY 1962.
John L. Sloop, nasa’s Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, testifying before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “. . . some of the new solid propellants promise an increase in performance of over 18 percent. ... If applied to our new Surveyor spacecraft designed to land instruments on the moon, this 18 percent increase in solid propellant specific impulse could make possible an increase in the weight of instruments aboard by more than 50 percent.”
Dr. Edward Teller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended a program for establishing a large and independent colony on the moon, as a means of having a working base in space and control of near space from a standpoint of national security. A nuclear reactor should be developed to operate on the moon, eventually to furnish the power to extract water from the moon’s rocks and soil, he said.
John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ordnance Association meeting that a great potential defense capability lay untapped in industry—particularly in heavy, mass-producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of developing and maintaining broad defense and space capability throughout industry had not been adequately realized or defined, Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to wartime production. Such preparedness would mean, at a minimum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of defense technology in areas of natural interest to it. Such preparedness could also involve a broader distribution of space and defense research and development effort, as well as of production, on a systematic basis. . . . “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous demands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and efficient use of them. ...”
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
In address at dedication of the nasa Space Exhibit at the Seattle World’s Fair, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said that “our entire space program now costs each American about 30 cents a week. During the next few years we plan to spend about 50 cents a week per person on space. “However, our space program and its by-products will stimulate a sharp increase in the nation’s productive output which in turn will increase our gross national product, our income, and the Federal Government’s intake . . . “. . . we are hopeful of achieving fruitful cooperation with the Soviet Union in such fields as communications, weather forecasting, mapping the earth’s magnetic fields and space medicine. “We feel that cooperation in outer space may establish a firm basis for greater mutual understanding—which in turn will help in our efforts to obtain disarmament . . . “The responsibility to cooperate also lies heavily on the other great space power—the Soviet Union. I am able to tell you in a spirit of cautious optimism that the Soviet Union appears to realize that—in outer space, at least—there may be something to be gained by cooperatingwith the rest of humanity.”
dod announced selection of contractor for 22 test models of tfx aircraft (tactical fighter, experimental), the Convair Division of General Dynamics, with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation as an associate. Based upon much work at Langley Research Center, tfx fighter was designed in usaf and usn versions, h aving variable geometry wings for flight speeds up to 1,650 mph. Contract which would procure up to 1,500 aircraft was said to be bigger than “any fighter aircraft program since World War II in both numbers and dollars.”
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, in Associated Press interview, was asked: “Mr. Vice President, as chairman of the Space Advisory Council [i.e., National Aeronautics and Space Council], you were intimately concerned in drafting the 5.7-billion-dollar space budget. Former President Eisenhower says the budget is spongy, and there is no hurry about getting to the moon. In view of this recent Russian shot [lunik iv], what is your reaction?” The Vice President replied: “The Administration has submitted to the Congress what we believe is a sane and responsible proposal to insure the maximum efficiency and effectiveness of our space program. I know of no reckless desire in any responsible quarter to get to the moon at all costs and without regard to the consequences to other vital aspects of our national policy. “The objective of reaching the moon is one aspect or our national space program which will be of great benefit to our country, and I think to all mankind. It may be possible by appropriating more money to speed up slightly the attainment of that goal and, of course, we all know it would be mighty easy to slow that goal down. But I don’t think that either alternative would be helping our country. Gaining a short period of time would almost certainly be at the expense of other crucial programs. Slowing down might bring us some one of these days face to face with the shocking knowledge that we had permanently assigned ourselves to second place. “So, all in all, I think the Administration has submitted a program which we can all embrace and both parties can fully support.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	’
dod named Dr. Albert C. Hall, Vice President and General Manager of Martin Co. Space Systems Div., as Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering for Space Technology. Post was formerly that of Special Assistant to the Director (Harold Brown), held by Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau. (dod Release 969-63; Av. Wk., 7/15/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 7/10/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, spoke to the 1963 Annual Conference of the Atomic Industrial Forum in New York on the relationship between Congress and science. Sen. Anderson offered four main reasons for the new level of Congressional concern over the Federal investment in science and technology: (1) cost consciousness; (2) “the belief among some Members that Congress has lost the ability to oversee effectively the vast diffusion of r&d activities for which it appropriates funds”; (3) “concern that the procedures of Congress, in some respects, may not measure up to the demands of ‘big science’ ”; and (4) “criticism of the space program as ‘moon madness’ and ‘lunacy’ gets lumped in with the criticism of heavy spending for research and development.” Sen. Anderson agreed with the aims of those who were cost conscious, although he noted that many r&d programs that had been canceled as “failures” had in fact left a valuable technological legacy to subsequent programs. He agreed that Congress needed more advice on technical matters, but doubted that the need would be solved by Congress hiring its own technical staff; rather it needed more help from specially convened panels; more engineering advice—since the bulk of the Nation’s $15 billion annual investment in science and technology is in the engineering of hardware rather than in science; improved presentations by the Executive Department, including more briefing by the Office of Science and Technology; expansion of channels of information such as Library of Congress, nas, nsf; reports by the scientific and engineering communities to Congress on the state of science and of engineering; and more long-term planning, (iOR, 12/3/63, 21997-22000)	_
nasa Administrator James E. Webb submitted to Sen. Richard B. Russell, Chairman of Committee on Armed Services, nasa’s recommendations on S. 960, bill to establish joint committee to investigate defense and space contracts, and S. 961, bill to amend U.S. Code on procurement to require nasa to establish central file on contract communications. Regarding S. 960, Mr. Webb said “it is not apparent to this agency that more effective machinery is needed for the investigation of the nasa procurement program by the Congress than exists today . . . .” Regarding S. 961, Mr. Webb said “it is felt that current practices provide ample opportunity for the committees of the Congress to review and investigate the handling of any particular procurement action of nasa without resorting to the assembling of a mass of miscellaneous communications in a central file.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/217; Letter, 12/26/63)
A change in the political climate in the last few months had nasa in trouble on its fifth anniversary, according to John Finney of the New York Times: The trouble really began when scientists began to question the validity of the manned lunar landing. “The approach being urged by the scientific critics is a step-by-step program calling first for lunar investigation by instruments and then a manned program that would not divert resources from other fields of scientific research.” It was this apnroach that was being followed until May 1961, when President Kennedy declared the high priority goal of a manned lunar landing in this decade. “Increasingly, the attack on the space budget is taking on a partisan tinge, and the Administration in turn is reacting m a partisan manner. It is significant, for example, that in the House Appropriations subcommittee the votes to cut the space budget were strictly along partisan lines with the exception of Clarence Cannon . . . .” (Finney, NYT, 10/6/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, announced appointment of Robert B. Young as msfc Director of Projects and Industry Operations. Presently Vice President and General Manager of Aerojet General Corp.’s Sacramento Plant, Young would assume his msfc position Nov. 1. (nasa Release 63-184)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics held its organizational meeting, with Chairman George P. Miller of California announcing names and ranking of committee members. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/6/63)
President John F. Kennedy wrote a letter to Rep. Albert Thomas “I am very glad to respond to your letter of September 21 and to state my position on the relation between our great current space effort and my proposal at the United Nations for increased cooperation with the Russians in this field. In my view an energetic continuation of our strong space effort is essential, and the need for this effort is, if anything, increased by our intent to work for increasing cooperation if the Soviet Government proves willing. “As you know, the idea of cooperation in space is not new. My statement of our willingness to cooperate in a moon shot was an extension of a policy developed as long ago as 1958 on a bipartisan basis, with particular leadership from Vice President Johnson, who was then the Senate Majority Leader .... Our specific interest in cooperation with the Soviet Union, as the other nation with a major present capability in space, was indicated by me to Chairman Khrushchev in Vienna in the middle of 1961, and reaffirmed in my letter to him of March 7,1962 .... So my statement in the United Nations is a direct development of a policy long held by the United States Government. “Our repeated offers of cooperation with the Soviet Union have so far produced only limited responses and results .... But as I said in July of this year, there are a good many barriers of suspicion and fear to be broken down before we can have major progress in this field. Yet our intent remains: to do our part to bring those barriers down. “At the same time, as no one knows better than you, the United • States in the last five years has made a steadily growing national effort in space .... “This great national effort and this steadily stated readiness to cooperate with others are not in conflict. They are mutually supporting elements of a single policy. We do not make our space effort with the narrow purpose of national aggrandizement. We make it so that the United States may have a leading and honorable role in mankind’s peaceful conquest of space. It is this great effort which permits us now to offer increased cooperation with no suspicion anywhere that we speak from weakness. And in the same way, our readiness to cooperate with others enlarges the international meaning of our own peaceful American program in space. “In my judgment, therefore, our renewed and extended purpose of cooperation, so far from offering any excuse for slackening or weakness in our space effort, is one reason the more for moving ahead with the great program to which we have been committed as a country for more than two years. “So tne position of the United States is clear. If cooperation is possible, we mean to cooperate, and we shall do so from a position made strong and solid by our national effort in space. If cooperation is not possible—and as realists we must plan for this contingency too—then the same strong national effort will serve all free men’s interest in space, and protect us also against possible hazards to our national security. So let us press on . . . .” (Letter, 9/23/63) “The climate has changed. It is somewhat more favorable.” {M&R, 9/23/63, 14)
16th annual McGraw-Hill Survey of Business Plans for New Plaids and Equipment—1963-66 was cited in Congressional Record by Senator Carl T. Curtis (R.-Neb.). Survey showed that 25% of manufacturers’ 1962 sales were in new products not made 10 years ago; manufacturers expect that by 196613% of their sales wiil be in new products not now known. {CR, 5/8/63, 7630)
Six Republican members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics recommended establishment of a special Congressional committee, composed of members of Armed Services Committee and Science and Astronautics Committee, to re-evaluate the national goals in space. The Congressmen said U.S. was ignoring “the main thrust of the Soviet space aim, which is to dominate inner space through the ability to exercise control over the surface of the earth.” Statement was included in a Committee report on nasa FY 1964 authorization bill. (AP, NYT, 7/29/63,12)
Dr. Glen Wilson, staff member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Missiles and Rochets interview: “Contrary to some published reports, President Johnson is not predisposed to a military emphasis on space. He will judge the requirements of dod and nasa strictly on merit, if his past performance is any measure.” Dr. Wilson recalled Johnson was Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, later was Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences from its inception until he became Vice President. Dr. Wilson stressed that “it must be noted that Johnson was one of the few men on the Hill to recognize the supreme importance of the sputnik i launch, and he instigated an extraordinary session of Senate hearings a few weeks later.” {M&R, 12/23/63, 16)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Maine) read letter from Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) in session, of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, the letter quoting three scientists who estimated that, at present pace, 60 per cent of all physical scientists would be working as nasa employees. Senator Bennett called on Republican members of Committee to see what steps were necessary to “prevent this concentration of scientific brains /"1„„--------A „A Al___________ ha uuvciiiniciit at uic ca^choc - -TA + A /lAV»r»A1*of.1ATtO L V Cl. tc Wli/OlUClVllO i n rl (NYT, 4/25/63) In aiaa speech at Dallas on “Space Policy and Space Management,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc. reviewed the national objectives in space: “First of all, there is an over-all policy objective, which the President has expressed as the determination of this country ‘to become the world’s leading space-faring nation.’ It is worth mentioning that this is a broad umbrella. . . . Suffice to say that the space program is not a one-project design nor a short-run episode. It is a growing, expanding, multi-project program, which I predict will become an increasingly significant part of our way of life. As important as it is, the moon project is not the whole space program; it is just one portion and one phase of an over-all program which has breadth through variety and depth far into the future. “A few features of this broad space policy are: “1. Its objectives are peaceful . . . the distinction as to what is peaceful and what is not peaceful is a matter of intent and is not determined by what agency of the government engages in them .... “2. Our policy asserts that space travel and space exploration are subject to international law and that such activity should be consistent with the provisions of the United Nations charter. . . . “3. It is our policy to seek increased international cooperation in, and mutually advantageous agreements for, the orderly and open conduct of space and space related activities .... “4. It is also our policy that the concept and performance of our space responsibilities shall be maintained and strengthened as a national program rather than a series of separate and unrelated projects. . . . “5. There are inherent risks in space exploration, particularly in manned flight, and they must be recognized .... “6. While we must continue to improve on state-of-the-art competences, it is essential that we strive just as hard to make so-called quantum jumps in technology and performance .... “7. It is a significant element of policy that progress be the joint product of government and private enterprise. . . . “In conclusion, the national space program is an essential and dynamic feature of our economy. It benefits the many rather than the few. It strengthens the nation, both at home and abroad. It looks forward rather than backward. It highlights the contributions of the most able technologists and the most able managers and gives them an unprecedented peacetime opportunity to repay more fully the special bonus they have received by living in this great country. “We can afford the space program. We must afford it. We can be satisfied with nothing less than first place—to the moon, to the planets, and throughout the solar system.” (Text)
nasa officials testified before the Subcommittee on nasa Legislative Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the summary report on Project Mercury that had accused industry of poor workmanship. Dr. George Mueller, Director of Manned Space Flight, and his Deputy, George Low, and Walter C. Williams, Deputy Director for Mission Requirements and Flight Operations, msc, agreed that the bulk of the 444-page report was “a recital of success,” with only one 10-page section listing deficiencies. The committee agreed with the witnesses and considered the matter closed. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/10/63, 60)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator testifying on nasa’s international programs before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the “first substantial fruits of these programs were realized in 1962 and further significant programs were laid down for future years. During 1962, “—the first two international satellites, Ariel and Alouette, were successfully placed in orbit, “—launchings of sounding rockets bearing scientific payloads were carried out in cooperation with eight countries, “—37 countries engaged in special projects in support of our weather and communications satellite programs, “—foreign participation continued to grow in the operation of our global tracking and data acquisition network overseas, “—and, a new nasa international fellowship program was successfully established in our own universities.” Discussing studies of follow-on projects to manned lunar landing, Dr. Dryden listed as “obvious candidates . . . establishment of a station on the moon permitting prolonged occupancy, a manned laboratory orbiting the earth as a satellite, and manned reconnaissance of the planets .... “It seems to us that an orbiting laboratory is a necessary preliminary to manned planetary expeditions .... “Obviously the capsules presently in the program do not have sufficient space available for experimentation and have only a limited lifetime in orbit. Something larger, of longer duration in orbit, and with resupply capability is required. Many exploratory design studies nave been made of the technological feasibility of assembling a large space laboratory in space from multiple launches with one or another of the available launch vehicles. We believe however that technical feasibility alone does not justify a project of this magnitude and cost. We are attempting to grasp the problem from the other end, that is to ask what one can and would do in a space laboratory in specific fields of science and technology with a view to establishing a realistic and useful concept. We hope that such studies will provide the information necessary to justify and support a decision to be made in time for the fiscal year 1965 budget. The program must be designed to fulfill national needs . . . .” (Testimony)	'
Dr. Milton Clauser, former Vice President of Space Technology Laboratories, and Dr. J. P. Ruina? former Director of dod Advanced Research Projects Agency, joined Communications Satellite Corp. as consultants. (ComSatCorp. Release)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and nasa Administrator James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for three women accorded national recognition for space age accomplishments—Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Program and 1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award. ( nasa Release 63-94)
Senator John L. McClellan (D.-Ark.) introduced in the Senate a bill (S. 1290) to establish a uniform national policy concerning proprietary rights in inventions made through expenditure of public funds. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. (CR,4/9/63,5609)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the New York section of the aiaa in New York, pointed out that the U.S. maimed space program involves technical requirements “about 20 times the complexity of the Minuteman program.” For this reason, among others, he said leaders of the space program had recognized from the beginning that leadership could be achieved “only through a sustained, steadily accelerating effort.” He quoted Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, speaking on Apr. 26, 1958, when he said that without this big, long-term national commitment “I’d just as soon we didn’t start”; Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1958 telling the House Select Committee studying the Space Act that the biggest problem was “how we can eliminate this lethal and wasteful not-and-cold blowing that has plagued all our missile projects in the past. I think this lack of steady determination and unwavering support over the years has hurt us more than anything”; and Dr. T. Keith Glenn an, nasa’s first Administrator, speaking at the first nasa budget hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “If our space programs are to be run on an off-again, on-again basis, zigging and zagging with the turn of every new year, then we’d better spend our monev buying telescopes to watch the Russian pioneers in space/’ (Text)
Congressman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke out during committee questioning of Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa Director of Electronics and Control, about location of proposed nasa Electronics Center in Boston area. Miller made his comments after Congressman Thomas N. Downing (D.-Va.) asked Dr. Kelley why nasa had not chosen Langley Field, Va., as site for new center: “Frankly, we’re making this thing right now a question of where are we going to put it because it’s going to be a plum. We’d all like this in our states. But do you want to make a W.P.A. project out of this or are we interested in the space program?” (AP,NYT,4/5/63)
Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) said in press conference he would urge Congressional investigation to determine whether U.S. was channeling too many resources into space programs to the detriment of other Federal programs. Senator Case said he would recommend to Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, that the committee conduct “a pretty thorough review of the whole space program.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/17/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking editorially in Astronautics arid Aerospace Engineering magazine, April 1963, emphasized that: “As satellites extend man’s vision into new dimensions, weather forecasting will make major advances as a science, until we see reliable predictions a season ahead. “This will have far-reaching economic benefits for all. Following are some estimates of cost-savings, assuming that we can predict weather accurately only five days in advance: $2% billion a year in agriculture; $45 million in the lumber industry; $100 million in surface transportation; $75 million in retail marketing; and $3 billion in water-resources management. These estimates of savings are for just the United States. Worldwide benefits would be many times as great.” (A&AE, Apr., 1963)
Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. He discussed the Tiros meteorological satellite system and described the Nimbus advanced meteorological satellite, first of which would be launched in 1963, and said: “Each one of these five elements—orientation, coverage, direct local readout, lifetime and growth potential, represents a major advance over Tiros. Nimbus, including all these, represents an extremely large step forward beyond the Tiros capability. The Nimbus technical difficulties of the past were associated with the development of these five elements. Wre now believe that our major difficulties are behind us. . . .” He described the meteorological sounding rocket program, and said: “In the large meteorological sounding rocket program, it is planned to fire approximately 45 per year. These will be distributed at various latitudes to measure the atmospheric structure in the various climatic regions from the Arctic to the Tropics. “The small meteorological sounding rocket program is aimed at providing a standardized flight article which will meet the requirements at an overall minimum cost. Approximately 100 rockets will be launched per year in this program. (Testimony)
nasa submitted the following written answer to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences in response to question raised by Senator Margaret Chase Smith on the contamination problem in space exploration: “Present plans for lunar spacecraft are to use assembly techniques in clean rooms and under environmental conditions similar to surgical operating facilities. These procedures will not make the spacecraft sterile but are expected to reduce the total population of viable organisms by orders of magnitude below otherwise expected quantities. As stated earlier, the natural environment of the Moon is believed suitably hostile to the propagation of Earth-like organisms to such an extent that any contamination will be contained in very local areas.” (Committee Hearings, NASA Authorization for Fiscal Year 1964—Part I, 598)
President Kennedy sent FY 1964 Budget Request to Congress, recommending nasa appropriation of $5,712 billion. Of this sum, $3.19 billion was for manned space flight, with Project Apollo receiving largest single increase in nasa budget—from $435 million in FY 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “austere”—it would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land an American on the moon in this decade. Total FY 1964 space budget, was estimated at $7,614 billion— nasa, $5,664 billion; dod $1,668 billion; aec, $254.3 million; Weather Bureau, $26.2 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.3 million, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post, 1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
Special Subcommittee of House Committee on Armed Services, established to investigate research and development in the Armed Services, met in executive session, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/136)
Reported that Boeing Co., North American Aviation, and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. had won study contracts on the proposed supersonic transport airplane. The (Seattle) Post-Intelligencer quoted Senator Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) as saying he and Senator Henry M. Jackson (D.-Wash.) had received confirmation of the awards from faa Administrator Najeeb Halaby. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/1/63) During March: Comet Ikeye, discovered by Japanese amateur astronomer Kaoru Ikeye, was most brightly visible in western horizon for about a week before its brightness began to fade as it drew closer to the sun. (Wash. Daily News, 3/12/63)
Under questioning by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden discussed the future space programs to follow the manned lunar landing program: “There are three principal candidates for what might be called the next program. These are the manned orbital laboratory; the further exploration of the moon; and finally, man’s interplanetary travel. “One difficulty is the definition, mercury is a one-man orbital laboratory; gemini is a two-man orbital laboratory; apollo is a three-man orbital laboratory; and all will stay up for the duration of the trip to the moon. “If you are going further, you come to a question, Do you want something for 3 men, 6 men, 12 men, or 20 men ? “One of our problems is to define the requirements and both the Department of Defense and ourselves are making studies. We have agreed there should be only one project for the time being because this will be a 2 or 3 billion project. We have agreed we will not proceed unilaterally. A decision, of course, has to be made as to what, if anything, in the 1965 budget will be in this field or another .... “As to the further exploration of the moon, the definition is a very variable one. You might leave an astronaut out and, figuratively speaking, take camping equipment along for a few days. Or you might convert a whole lunar bug to a freight carrier to extend the length of stay. You can go from that to a lunar base where you try to build a station, as m the Antarctic, that man can occupy for some time .... “All of these things run into the billions of dollars and certainly Congress will be involved in it. “There are people who favor one or another of these projects. I personally favor the manned orbital laboratory as being the next project. What we find on the Moon may change our minds on this, but from present knowledge I feel priority should go to a manned orbital laboratory. Some of this equipment has been in space for a period of a year or more. That is the length of a trip to Mars or Venus and back. “As you know, the matter of making major decisions of this kind in Government is a complicated one and I cannot say at this time when the hardware will be recommended by the administration. One reason for saying the manned orbital laboratory has priority is the possible military application.” (Hearings . . . Independent Offices Appropriations for FT 1964, Part 3,242-243)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics met in executive session and ordered nasa FY 1964 authorization bill (H.R. 7500) favorably reported to the House, (nasa Leg. Act. Rept. 11/107)
House passed H.R. 8747, the Independent Offices Appropriations for FY 1964, which included the $5.1 billion for nasa recommended by the Appropriations Committee. Among the amendments accepted was one which would require Senate approval of any agreement that would use nasa funds in support of joint lunar exploration with Communist countries. Among amendments rejected were ones which would have (1) reduced nasa r&d funds by another $700 million and set limitations of $597,400,000 on Project Apollo and $124,400,000 on lunar and planetary exploration; (2) deleted the facility construction funds for the proposed nasa electronics center ($3,990,000); and (3) reduced the amount for development of a supersonic transport aircraft from $60 million to $500,000. An involved debate preceded passage of the bill, most of it concerned with the nasa program. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D-Mo.), Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, was one of those opposing passage of the nasa funding. He argued that “the appropriation reported out by the committee has been provided largely because of commitments. It is impossible to escape the conviction that the project [manned lunar landing] must eventually be abandoned.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.) led the support of the nasa program, arguing that the nasa budget had already been cut $1.1 billion from that ($6.2 billion) originally presented by nasa to the Bureau of the Budget. Another in support of the nasa appropriation was Rep. George W. Andrews (D-Ala.), who read into the record a letter from Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of msfc. Dr. von Braun argued that a program as big and complex and with such long lead times as the space program must have sustained, consistent support year after year. He stated that of the various major expenditures—rockets, capsules, facilities, etc.— only the Lunar Excursion Module was being designed principally for the manned lunar landing. “All other elements of these programs create what we as a nation most urgently need independent of our lunar landing effort: A national manned spacefaring capability, to sail the new ocean, as the President said.” (67?, 10/10/63, 18260-18309)
At hearings on nasa proposed patent policy before Senate Subcommittee on Monopoly, Committee on Small Business, Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) charged nasa Administrator James E. Webb with tiying to give away “basic, substantive rights” of the public in Government financed research. Mr. Webb cited Section 305 of the Space Act of 1958 authorizing the nasa Administrator to waive Government patent rights, then outlined present nasa patent policy, and explained how proposed policy would extend patent waiver. “A careful comparison of the proposed revision with the terms of the present regulations . . . will show, I believe, that the public interest in inventions which come out of nasa’s research and development contracts is more clearly stated and would, in practice, be fully protected .... “It is evident from nasa’s present waiver regulations and the proposed revision that we are convinced that the public interest is often best served by permitting a contractor or subcontractor to retain commercial rights to inventions made in the course of doing research and development work funded by nasa—provided, of course? the Government acquires a royalty-free license for use of the invention for governmental purposes, and provided, also, that the invention is actually worked, nasa’s policy is intended to encourage use of inventions in two ways: first, by bringing the stimuli of the patent system into play and, second, by withholding the full benefits of waiver until public realization of the fruits of the invention have been achieved. Such a policy offers many advantages over a restrictive policy which would permit contractors to retain patent rights only in the exceptional case. The economy should not be deprived of the substantial benefits of the patent system. Incentives for contractors to conceal and protect new technological developments as trade secrets rather than to disclose them as patentable inventions are not desirable in government contracting for research and development. Historically, patent protection has been one of the rewards for full disclosure and publication . . . .” (Testimony; Wash. Post, 3/15/63)
Richard N. Thomas, professor of astrophysics and chairman of Faculty Committee for Astrophysics of Dept, of Physics and Astrophysics, Univ. of Colorado, was awarded Dept, of Commerce Gold Medal for Exceptional Service. (Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, 5/63,9) During March, April, and May: Total of 227 nasa appearances at 70 hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, involving 246 hours. This involved 546 man-hours of primary witnesses, not including backup witnesses, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/88) Jv/ne 1: Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., returned to U.S. after vacationing in Japan with his family since shortly after MA-9 manned space flight, during which he had been stationed aboard Pacific tracking ship Coastal Sentry. Glenn’s candidness and openness during visit was said to have “boosted U.S. image” in Japan. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/2/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told the Senate that it was unwarranted to assume from Premier Khrushchev’s Oct. 26 remarks that the Soviets had pulled out of the space race. “The competition in space between the United States and the Soviet Union is still intense. It would be foolish indeed if this country were to attempt to reorient its vast space program each time the Soviet Union made some pronouncement about its goals. We should take cognizance of Russian statements but we should not let ourselves be diverted from sound objectives on the ground that competition no longer exists.” {CR, 11/6/63, 20140)
Senator Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.), asked in televison interview about the pace of the U.S. manned lunar effort, said: “I think we might move forward a little more slowly, but I do believe that those who control space, in the years to come, will control the world.” (“Meet the Press,” nbo—TV, 4/28/63)
nasa budget recommendation for FY 1964 indicated that nasa Electronics Center would bo established in the Greater Boston (Mass.) area. (Boston Globe, 1/18/63)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences that “Project Surveyor is designed to make a giant stride in lunar exploration technology beyond that of the Ranger. Surveyor will demonstrate soft landing technology, will survey various landing areas on the lunar surface, and wifi measure physical-chemical properties of the lunar surface in the immediate vicinity of the spacecraft .... “Developments of the Surveyor orbiter were restricted during FY 1963 to permit reprogramming of funds into more critical areas in the Ranger and Surveyor landing programs. Design work has proceeded, however, and has resulted in ... [a system making] extensive use of Surveyor lander components. In FY 1964 we will begin work on the flight hardware. The lunar orbiter will provide complete photo-reconnaissance coverage which will permit us to extrapolate to other areas our knowledge about local spots in which we have landed with Ranger and Surveyor. We will then be able to make selections of potential manned lunar landing sates. In addition, the orbiter will enable use to determine the gravity field of the moon which will affect the Apollo orbits . . . .” (Testimony)
Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R.-Wis.) introduced resolution (H. Res. 473) to create select committee for investigating expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by Government departments and agencies; proposal was referred to House Committee on Rules, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/119)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star quoted Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson:“. . . To reach the moon is a risk. But it is a risk we must take . . . [for] failure to go into space is even riskier .... Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler.” Editorial cited “soundness of what he has had to say about our projected lunar voyages . . .” and added: “The warning is well-timed, especially so because of what some otherwise sensible and perceptive people have been saying about the alleged nonsensicality of flying to the moon when the money could be better spent on such urgent projects as building schools, sewage plants and more and more highways right down here on earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63) April 26: usaf launched Blue Scout rocket from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with unidentified payload. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/63)
Senator Estes Kefauver (D.-Tenn.), Chairman of the Senate Antitrust Subcommittee, told the Senate that nasa proposed regulations would “waive tne Government’s rights to patents on taxpayer-financed research and development in most cases” and urged the proposal be killed. (AP, Chattanooga Times, 2/7/63)
House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices began hearings on nasa appropriations for FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in opening statement before the executive meeting: “I urge that your Committee approve the total amount of appropriations authorized. I should like to point out that even if the full amount requested by the President were authorized and appropriated, we face in these funds and in the plants of the contractors a similar situation to that with our own Centers where they requested 2,000 more people than we were able to approve under the budget restriction. In our manned space program we will be short between one hundred and two hundred million dollars out of the three billion dollars requested by the President. We are prepared to operate with a tight belt, we are prepared to operate without contingencies. However, I do want to point out to the Committee that we are still going to have a serious problem if we encounter any major difficulties in the form of a catastrophe on the launching pad or with a test station. “I should also like to say to the Committee that after the Authorization Bill has been enacted and after the Appropriations Bill has been passed, we are going to prepare an over-all operating plan. We plan to show it to both the House and Senate Space Committees and we will be happy to show it to the Appropriations Committees. With this re-examination and the basis for committing the funds actually appropriated, we will be in a position where we will know what our situation is and whether we will have to ask for a supplemental appropriation . . . .” (Testimony, nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/128)
Memorandum titled “Space Race with U.S.S.R.” from Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, was made public. Dr. Welsh said U.S. space program was in the building stage this year and few space spectaculars could be expected in 1963; U.S.S.R. may attempt the following in 1963: manned orbital mission of eight days, manned orbital rendezvous mission, close-up photographs of planet Mars (with mars i probe), and several unmanned lunar soft-landing probes. Memorandum had been written before launching of Soviet probe lunik, iv, believed by many scientists to have been an unsuccessful attempt to soft-land on the moon. (Text; Av. Wk., 4/15/63, 38)
nasa announced three personnel appointments to Headquarters: Earl D. Hilbum, Vice President and General Manager of Curtiss-Wright Corp. Electronics Div., as Deputy Associate Administrator (for non-manned space flight centers); Robert F. Garbarini, Chief Engineer of Sperry Gyroscope Co. Air Armament Div., as Director of nasa Office of Applications; and Robert W. Long, President of Long Construction Co., as consultant on construction matters to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator. ( nasa Release 63-141)
nasa Director of Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before Space Sciences subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described one laboratory-tested theory picturing the lunar surface as made of finely powdered sand forming “fairy castles” full of caverns and empty spaces, unable to support a weight. Dr. Newell said an equally plausible theory directly opposed this theory. “. . . This means we have to go there and find out.” (AP, Wash. Post, 3/8/63)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking on the Senate floor stated: “The decision to try to land a man on the moon by 1970 does not constitute a crash program .... Failure to decide on a schedule for attempting to reach the moon is equivalent to setting no deadline at all. Work is done best—even by the technical community—which is not exempt from the laws of human nature—when a specific goal is set. An objective of landing on the moon in the 1960’s . . . permits us to work at a challenging pace; yet, does not absorb a greater percentage of the nation’s resources than our country can afford. This is only one percent of the gross national product at current rate .... “Project Apollo does not fit the description of a crash program.- The wartime Manhattan project was a crash program. We used all the resources we could to develop the atomic bomb in the shortest period of time, regardless of cost. We maintained duplicating operations over a 3-year period in the hope that one would work—and one did, in time to help win a war. Apollo is no such project. If it were, we would not have had the controversy over whether earth-orbiting rendezvous, lunar-orbiting rendezvous, or a direct landing was the best way to get a man to the moon. A crash project would have gone into operational stages of all three alternatives to a moon landing .... “The shortage of scientific manpower has not been aggravated in a measurable way by Apollo. Those critics who fear that it has, have not established their case. For example, in 1970, it is predicted that U.S. scientists and engineers will total 1,995,000, of which only 114,700 or less than 6 percent, will work for nasa and its contractors. It should be noted that a substantial portion of those are merely moving over from research and development work on aeronautics and missiles . . . nasa is enlarging its efforts to increase the national supply of scientific and engineering personnel. Last fiscal year, the agency provided graduate science and engineering fellowships to 100 students at 10 universities. In its budget proposal for fiscal 1964, nasa requests authorization for 1,250 fellowships covering 110 universities. “Additionally, the agency has provided funds for 150,000 square feet of research space at five universities; it is asking for funds to provide 400,000 square feet of laboratory space at 11 universi ties.” {OR, 5/23/63,8961-66)
U.S.-Scandinavia approval of Memorandum of Understanding for testing of NASA-launched experimental communications satellites announced by nasa and Scandinavian Committee for Satellite Telecommunication. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, on official tour of Scandinavia, received in Copenhagen the Danish Government’s note of approval, making the Memorandum effective; Norway had approved Memorandum in note dated Sept. 11 and Sweden, in note dated July 25. Under agreement, Scandinavian Committee would provide ground station to receive multichannel telephone or telegraph signals transmitted from U.S. via orbiting communications satellite, (nasa Release 63-205)
National Science Foundation appropriations of $323 million were voted by the House Appropriations Committee, a cut of $265 million from the $589 million requested by the Administration. No funds were approved for new programs. Specifically eliminated were two new programs to improve the Nation’s scientific manpower by (1) encouraging new “centers of scientific excellence” in universities that had unrealized potential, and (2) encouraging more students to go into engineering, mathematics, and physical science. {NYT, 10/8/63, 26)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, wrote a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb asking for an explanation of the statements made at the summary conference on Project Mercury that there had been poor workmanship on the Mercury spacecraft, according to William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star. He was also reported to have inquired about a remark attributed to Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc, that industrial shortcomings included outright falsification, citing an instance where a component used “ ‘black iron where there Should have been stainless steel.’ ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/63) October 4: Atlas F icbm was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb, but blew up during liftoff, (upi, PfYT, 10/8/63, 28)
Senator Wallace F. Bennett (R.-Utah) announced he had asked Senate Committe on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to investigate complaint from three scientists that nasa was using “coercion” to recruit scientists. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/27/63)
Senate passed bill (S. 816) to establish a Commission on Science and Technology to conduct a two-year study of methods of eliminating duplication of research effort, to make results of research more readily available, and to determine whether a Cabinet office should be created to coordinate the Federal scientific effort. Commission would be composed of 12 members appointed by the President, Vice President, and Speaker of the House. Bill went to the House. {CR, 3/8/63, 1962-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/9/63, A5)
Editorial in New York Times (Western Edition), inserted in Congressional Record by Senator William Proxmire (R.-Wis.), said: “. . . Energetic research and development efforts in space are vital, as a report just issued by the President makes clear, but intensive work (and expenditures) in the vast expanse of space studies is far different from—and far more important than—a mere race with the Russians. Whether the $20 billion (or $40 billion) race to the moon is justified on scientific, political, or military grounds, we do not think the matter has been sufficiently explained or sufficiently debated. We hope it will be in the present Congress.” (CR, 2/11/63,1989)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of lewis Research Center, said in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that Centaur liquid-hydrogen vehicle could lift 250 additional pounds of payload because of design improvements in the vehicle. Dr. Silverstein described design changes and testing program undertaken by Lewis, and said that the second and third of the planned 15 Centaur vehicles were scheduled to be launched in last half of 1963.	(M&R, 3/25/63, 17)
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced formation of nine-man Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development. Chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Subcommittee would have following objectives: overall evaluation of scientific research and development throughout the bountry; strengthening of Congressional sources of information and advice on science and technology ; achievement of most effective utilization of scientific and engineering resources of U.S. to accomplish national goals; and Congressional overseeing of the National Science Foundation. (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/133)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reviewed Centaur development in speech on the House floor: “. . . Centaur began as a low-priority, financially austere feasibility study, in competition with high-priority defense programs. As its importance to the national space effort became more apparent, its terms of reference were changed; and, as time passed, its inherent technical difficulties came to the surface; technical difficulties, I might add, that we have learned to expect in most new programs. “Certainly, the original flight schedule of Centaur was overly optimistic. Hindsight also tells us that the complexity of the program was greatly underestimated . . . .” Referring to press articles charging $100 million was wasted in Centaur program, based on gao investigative report, Rep. Miller pointed out: “That report was misinterpreted by the press, and a closer look at it will reveal that no such conclusion was drawn by the Comptroller General. The alleged $100 million waste included $76 million reportedly lost in Hie Advent project, the military communications satellite project .... “While there can be no doubt that certain programs incurred losses because of the unavailability of Centaur on schedule, it is incorrect and unfair to attribute the entire unrecoverable loss associated with the Advent program to Centaur, as the press apparently did. Suffice it to say that the Advent project had its own severe management and technical difficulties which led to its cancellation in June 1962.” He called the Nov. 27 flight test of AC-2 “a significant advance in the development of a new technology upon which much of America’s future space effort depends . . . .”	(67?, 12/2/63, 21906 ff.)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition, outlined nasa personnel requirements for FY 1964. Dr. Seamans said some 73,000 scientists and engineers would be required to carry out the U.S. space program, and 11,300 of these would be employed by nasa. (upi, NYT [West. Ed.], 3/20/63)
Subcommittee of House Committee on Appropriations voted to approve $5.1 billion appropriations bill for nasa in FY 1964, $250,820,400 less than nasa authorizations bill. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said President Kennedy’s proposal for U\S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar flight was “bound to hurt” chances of full appropriations being passed bv House and criticized idea of joint project as impractical. (Finney, NYT. 9/25/63,1,15)
John L. Sloop, Director of nasa Propulsion and Power Generation in Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Advanced Research and Technology: “Propulsion is the key to space exploration and our push to the moon in this decade will depend completely on chemical propulsion. We see a large and continuing role for chemical propulsion in the next decade. The advent of nuclear and electrical propulsion will greatly increase our capability and enable us to use each type in the application best suited to its characteristics. We see much larger chemical propulsion systems than we have today. Some of these may use air augmentation and will be capable of ferrying large payloads economically from earth to manned satellites and between distant points on the earth. We see chemical propulsion packages carried dormant for months on long space missions but ready at the touch of a button or a signal from earth to perform their task. We see chemical propulsion systems for landing and take-off from the moon, Mars, and Venus where compact systems of high thrust per pound of weight are needed. Some may be carried as extra stored energy sources for emergency use . . . .” (Testimony)
Senator John O. Pastore (D.-R.I.), chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee’s Communications Subcommittee, questioned the wisdom of continued Government financing of experimental communications .satellites: “We were led to believe that practically all this work would be done by the private [communications satellite] corporation.” {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, A8)
At the State Department luncheon honoring Astronaut Gordon Cooper, Vice President Johnson remarked: “In 1942, President Roosevelt called together our wartime leaders for the final decision on continuing or abandoning the Manhattan project which produced the atomic bomb. One of the most eminent leaders present heard presentation from all sides. Then, he solemnly gave President Roosevelt his verdict: ‘The bomb will never go off—I speak, of course, Mr. President, as an expert on explosives.’ “In that first, uncertain spring of the space age 5 years ago, some conscientious experts took the same attitude toward Project Mercury. History has proved them grossly wrong. . . . “Hitler once predicted the Nazis would wring England’s neck like a chicken. After the Battle of Britain, Winston Churchill said to Commons, ‘Some chicken. Some neck.’ We have heard some say recently that the civilian space program is only ‘leafraking.’ Considering Major Cooper—considering the vast technological cooperation which made his mission a success—I would say today, ‘Some leaf. Some rake.’” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3299)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, interviewed in Washington Post magazine, Parade. Asked “with all our needs on earth, can we afford to spend $20 billion to go to the moon?” he replied: “We can’t afford not to spend it. Only the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have the resources for extensive space exploration. If we are to lead the free world and insure our own security, we must be first in space. This does not mean that we must neglect other urgent needs. We have ample resources to explore space and do the other things, as well.” Asked “What is our ultimate destiny in space?” he replied: “I don’t know, nor does anyone else. Columbus didn’t find what he was looking for, but I think we’re all pretty glad that he took that voyage. Einstein, when he produced the formula E=MC2, didn’t know that it would change the course of history. “I am sure of one thing—the benefits which will flow from our venture into space will be beyond anything any of us could imagine. “Until now, in space, no shot has been fired in anger. Thank God. My hope is that, in the years ahead, the conquest of space will encourage peaceful co-operation among nations and become a substitute for war. “In the hostile environment of space there are challenges all mankind must share. We—all nations, that is—should go out there together, hand in hand.” (Parade, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
Hearings on nasa budget authorization for FY 1964 began before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Administrator James E. Webb repeated President Kennedy’s declaration of the national goal of making the U.S. “the world’s leading spacefaring nation” and achieving for the U.S. “a position of pre-eminence” in space. Mr. Webb testified: “The mastery of space, and its utilization for the benefit of mankind, will not be determined by any single achievement. Superiority in the space environment with its great advantages and benefits will be won and very likely can be held by that nation which first fashions into a usable system all of the scientific knowledge, all of the technology, all of the experience, all of the space launch and terminal facilities, and all of the aids to space navigation required for safety and regular services. “These are the capabilities and resources which the United States must have, and this budget is designed to make rapid progress toward acquiring them. “moving from our present position to achieve mastery of space requires that we add substant ially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is progressing on both of these fronts. In a complex effort such as this, conducted in a new medium about which much is yet unknown, the scientists and the engineer inevitably must work closely together and grow increasingly dependent upon one another. . . . “The nasa program, therefore, is designed to expand both science and technology. We are moving forward on a broad front. We have avoided becoming trapped in a narrow program—one limited, for example, to developing only the technology needed to reach the moon with state-of-the-art hardware. To do so might well be to find, some years hence, that we had won the battle and lost the war as far as ultimate and enduring superiority in space is concerned. . . .” (Testimony)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said at Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner, Oklahoma City: “Space . . . has gained the lion’s share of publicity—and justifiably so. “When we talk of space and space research, there are those who raise the question that our efforts cost too much. Certainly American leadership in space is not cheap. We are now spending 20 cents per week per capita on our national space program. “Other Americans ask if our space efforts are worthwhile. “I can answer in terms we can all understand. While the space age is not yet 5 years old, more than 5,000 companies and research organizations have been or are now involved in our space effort. We have produced more than 3,200 space-related products, many of which are already being put to use. “But, many prominent Republicans are questioning the value of the program. A former Republican President has referred to our moon project as a ‘stunt.’ “I can answer that simply: I do not believe that this generation of Americans is willing to resign itself to going to bed each night by the light of a Communist moon . . . .” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3243-44)
Senator Edward M. Kennedy (D.-Mass.), addressing Massachusetts delegates to NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference, Washington, reaffirmed his pledge to foster Government contracts for space and electronics industries in Massachusetts, and said: “It is my responsibility as a member of Congress to see to it that nasa lives up to its responsibility and make sure your case is heard. It it nasa’s responsibility to see to it that the bids made by Massachusetts companies get the fullest examination and the fairest consideration . . .” (Boston Record American, 2/13/63)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Science, was the opening witness in hearings on the Government’s role as a patron of science and technology, conducted by the subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Seitz said that the period of almost unlimited growth of Federal investment in science and technology was coming to an end, would have to level off and force some “hard decisions” on choices, and expressed the fear that basic science would suffer in competition with more glamorous hardware projects. For the most part he thought U.S. science wras well ahead of Russia, but noted remarkable progress on the part of West Germany and Japan. (Finney, NYT, 10/16/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in television interview that “with very good luck” the U.S. could land a man on the moon by 1968 or 1969, but he personally thought U.S. lunar landing would be in early 1970’s. Senator Anderson said he doubted reports that U.S.S.R. was not racing U.S. to the moon. (cbs-TV “Washington Reports,” AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/12/63)_	_	_ _
Appointment of Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel to nasa Industrial Applications Advisory Committee was announced by nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Kinzel was vice president for research at Union Carbide Corp. since 1955. (nasa Release 63-31)
faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby announced at news conference that Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner hall joined interagency committee studying supersonic transport development. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A2)
Brig. Gen. Charles H. Roadman (usaf) , nasa Director of Aerospace Medicine, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics' Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. Replying to press criticism of nasa plans to use pure oxygen in Project Gemini spacecraft, General Roadman said: “. . . in our investigations to date we have no physiological information that would permit us to say that 100% oxygen from a physiological standpoint is contraindicated in a two-week mission. This is not to say that there are not many physiologists who would like more information concerning 100% oxygen over a time period, which we thoroughly support . . . .” (Transcript) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in keynote address May 6, cited recommendation by Iowa Summer Study that one or more scientists be included in Project Apollo lunar flights: “To those who have the responsibility for success in reaching the moon, it has appeared that the nature of the Apollo effort requires the training of astronauts who have substantial experience as test pilots in high speed jet aircraft, and to the extent possible engineering training as well. “Meanwhile, it is apparent that the view of the scientists that trained scientific personnel should participate is valid, and that at the earliest appropriate stage in the program scientists will be included on Apollo missions. So far as we can now tell we are obligated to utilize astronauts with the maximum of test-flight experience and highly conditioned reflexes on the first flight of the most difficult of all undertakings. Should training and experience in intermediate flights indicate otherwise we will, of course, take this into consideration in determining the stage of development in manned space flight at which a scientist-astronaut will directly participate. “In its effort to insure maximum scientific benefit from the manned space flight program nasa is doing several things: “First, manned space flights are being used to take scientific measurements in order that they will provide results beyond crew training and technological experience. “Second, efforts have already begun to provide scientific training for the present group of astronauts including geological field trips to enhance their capacity for scientific observation. “Third, a manned space science working group has been established [within nasa] .... This group is already at work in the planning of a program for training scientists for space flight . . . .’’ (Text) Dr. David H. Stoddard, Assistant Director of Medical Operations in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed human factors in manned space flight and said “we are confident that the biomedical needs of our currently approved manned space flight program can be met from within the scope of our existing technology.” (Text) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Director for Systems in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, reviewed U.S. manned space flight program. Describing Project Gemini, he said:	. . the Gemini is more than an experimental spacecraft. At the end of its scheduled developmental flight program, it will be available for missions ranging from scientific and engineering experiments to the ferrying of astronauts to and from a permanent space laboratory. The end goal of Gemini is, therefore, an operational spacecraft which can be launched by relatively small boosters. We expect Gemini to be a useful space vehicle for several years .... The Gemini spacecraft will reach operational status by 1966 . . . .” (Text)	. Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn), Director of Launch Vehicles and Propulsion in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, said: “The nation’s program to achieve pre-eminence in space and to insure that, the United States occupies first place among the nations of this world in science, in technology and in conquest of space is critically dependent on the power of the rocket. “You may have heard much about the ‘booster gap’ and the effect this situation has had on our position vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union started well ahead of us in the development of large rockets, so necessary for manned flight. The Soviets have been ahead of us, and are still ahead of us in their ability to launch reliably large masses to Earth orbit. “However, with the acceleration of our own progress and by the establishment of our program on a sound engineering basis we can, we believe, surpass the Soviets in time and clearly establish and demonstrate United States pre-eminence in manned space flight. . . .” (Text) Reviewing nasa space program, Director of nasa Office of Programs D. D. Wyatt said: “In its broadest context the nasa program can be classified into three complementary parts. First, we have those phases of the program which are aimed at the exploration of the very nature of space .... “The second major element of our program is aimed at the earliest practical utilization of space for the benefit of mankind .... “Complementing our programs to understand and define space is a third major program element aimed at developing and improving the highly complex technologies which will enhance our future capabilities in space . . . .” (Text) John E. Naugle, Director of nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, said: “. . . the scientific program which we have in nasa is a logical extension of the research work which has been underway in laboratories on the earth since the time of Galileo. Just as astronomers once carried their telescopes to the top of a mountain to see better, now we carry telescopes beyond the earth on rockets and satellites. By doing this we see entirely new phenomena and enable scientists to broaden their studies in certain scientific disicplines . . . .” He then discussed scientific results from each of the six scientific satellites launched by nasa since beginning of 1962 (oso i, explorer xiv, explorer xv, alouette i, ariel, and explorer xvii).	(Text) nasa Director of International Programs Arnold W. Frutkin said in May 7 address delivered by J. H. Barnes, nasa Chief of Cooperative Programs, Office of International Programs: “What other nations are doing in space and in particular, what they are doing together, is in fact small when compared with the resources going directly into national programs in the US and the ussr. Yet, what has been accomplished provides substantial evidence of the feasibility, the benefits, and the promise of joint action by the nations in this new field . . . .” (Text) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, described scientific spacecraft now under development, and said: “We must continually assess our progress .... The flight performance of our spacecraft has been increasing dramatically .... The useful life of unmanned spacecraft launched in 1962 has exceed six months and is still rising because most of those intended for long life are still operating successfully. “Our progress with launch vehicles has been equally gratifying. In 1962, 82% of all major nasa launchings were successful. This performance has been paced by the remarkable Thor-Delta which has successfully launched 16 out of 17 spacecraft. In addition, the huge Saturn has scored 4 out of 4 perfect flights. During this time period, both the Thor-Delta and the Scout payloads were increased over 60% at no increase in their $2.5 million and $1 million price tags. These dramatic increases in performance, life, and reliability of spacecraft and launch vehicles represent by far the most effective way to achieve economy in the space program . . . .” (Text) nasa Director of Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said: “There are four principal areas where a continuing and driving program of advanced research is required if this nation is to achieve pre-eminence in aeronautical and space activities in the decades to come. These are energy conversion and propulsion; materials and structures; control, guidance and communications; and space sciences and the environment of space.” (Text) Louis B. C. Fong, Director of nasa Office of Technology Utilization, said on May 8 that the “basic objectives of the [nasa] Technology Utilization Program are:
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported H.R. 7500, nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, to House. Committee’s authorization recommendation was $5.2 billion, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/113)
Resignation of Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator since 1961, announced by Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Mr. Dixon had joined nasa Sept. 1961, when he was named Director of Office of Launch Vehicles. Before that, he had been Vice President for Research and Engineering of North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. He was resigning to return to North American as assistant to the president. (nasa Release 63—42; naa sais Skywriter, 3/8/63,1)
Dr. S. Fred Singer, Director of National Satellite Weather Center, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition that reports from Tiros weather satellites were being used by Soviet scientists in their weather research. Launching of a weather satellite “is probably an immediate Soviet objective.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. n/46, 3/28/63; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/27/63)
Proposal by nbc to television industry to televise Astronaut Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 in color would not be adopted, Executive Vice President of nbc News William R. MeAndrew acknowledged. Proposal had been rejected, science reporter William Hines said, in February by officials of abc and cbs networks, but nasa had been quietly trying to persuade them to accept the proposal. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Rural Electric Cooperatives Association's annual meeting in Las Vegas, said: “In less than 5 years, our country has assumed a solid and secure place of leadership in developing the peaceful and practical uses of outer space. Where once we were, in the judgment of some, lagging behind, today we are, on the basis of clear evidence, forging ahead. Our efforts in space are in no way dictated by a policy of duplicating the activities of the Soviet. We are not engaged in a race with the Communist scientists—we are engaged in a race to extend the horizons of man’s knowledge and to increase the benefits which will better the lives of all men who live on this earth ....’' {CR. 2/18/63,2299)
U.S. Senate paid tributes to the late Senator Robert S. Kerr (D.Okla.) who had been Chairman of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (C7?, 3/1/63,3156-79)
Editorializing on cuts made by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics in the nasa FY 64 appropriations, New York Times said: “Now for the first time it is taking a closer look at nasa’s activities and is making a belated attempt to reduce the waste and duplication uncovered there. “This approach should have been utilized all along. Instead, the committee’s largesse and laxity encouraged nasa to act as if there were no limit to what could be spent in the skies.” (NYT, 6/28/63, 28)
In the Senate debate on the Independent Offices Appropriations bill, Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) made a motion that the nasa appropriation be cut an additional $519 million—a flat 10% cut in each of the three nasa budget categories: research and development, construction of facilities, and administrative operations. “Simply stated,” the Senator said, “the purpose of the amendment is to allow time to reevaluate the goal of trying to reach the moon in this decsde and to Proceed on s, more Helibe rate find thoughtful basis.” (CR, 11/19/63, 21270-299)
Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.). General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and was Chief of the Army Air Corps when he retired in December 1935. In 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and Strategic Value of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Jules Verne, the Bible, and Army Field Service Regulations as sources, one of the pioneering concepts of the military application of aeronautics. General Foulois served on the naca (1929-30, 1932-35), and is currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation. (CR, 2/28/63, 2975) During February: nasa Goddard Space Flight Center plans for second-generation Oso satellite—known as Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory, or Helios—were outlined at Philadelphia technical meeting by Goddard’s A090 Project Manager A. J. Cervenka. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63,48)
Senator Russell Long (D.-La.) introduced bill (S. 1436) “to prescribe with greater particularity the conditions under which proprietary interests of the United States in inventions may be waived pursuant to section 305 of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958.” Bill was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/64)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson quoted in article in Washing4- s\/,n T~i /ii 7/» < ojima ao	f Vi a m atitia/1 Irninv* lotirlm Of TMVyfltlTM • l/(/ / v IVM/y if OU/O UO Ijttj All^ \JX. 1/11V lilUiUllV/U. iUllUA KAllVAUlg	Will • “To default would be as catastrophic as if we had defaulted exploration of the atom.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut $95.5 million from nasa proposed FY 1964 budget, based upon recommendation of Committee’s Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. Today’s reduction brought Committee’s total reduction to $488.88 million, cutting requested $5,712 billion authorization to $5,223 billion. (NYT, 7/10/63, 12; upi, Wash. Post, 7/10/63)
At nasa Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony, held at Smithsonian Institution, 23 individuals were singled out for outstanding contributions to the civilian space program. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated that U.S. space policy was clear: “With or without cooperation from any other country, we are going to the moon, and we are going to make that trip as soon as we can. . . . We would like to do this through international cooperation. Leaders of both parties have sought cooperation under two administrations. The moon represents our major space goal for this decade, and if cooperation is possible we are willing to share this goal as well as others.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb summarized the five years of space achievements and looked ahead: “From the first two United States satellites, Explorer I and Vanguard I, launched early in 1958, we learned that the earth was slightly pear-shaped rather than being the sphere it had been thought to be. We also learned that the earth was surrounded by a zone of radiation, called the Van Allen Belt after its discoverer Dr. James Van Allen. “In addition to these first satellites of scientific significance, we have orbited highly successful weather and communication satellites, probed the area of Venus, put men into orbit and brought them safely back to earth, and sent thousands of sounding rockets into space to study the earth’s environment. From these and other experiments installed in more than 100 satellites and deep space probes, we have succeeded in vastly expanding knowledge and understanding of our own planet earth and of the solar system of which it is a part .... “Looking ahead through the remainder of this decade, we have set our sights on a truly global weather satellite system, advanced communications and navigation satellites, space observatories for astronomical and solar studies, and a manned expedition to explore the moon . . . .” Awards were presented by Mr. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Diyden, and Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Eight cash awards totaling $12,200 were divided among 14 nasa employees for inventions and scientific and technical contributions: Robert L. Trimpi, ialrc, $3,000; Charles H. McLellan, lorc, $2,000; James H. Schrader, Lane, $1,500; Jesse M. Madey and Xopher W. Moyer, gsfc, $1,500 shared; James B. Newman, frc, $1,200; Hershel M. Nance, msfc, $1,000; Lee B. Malone, Charles E. David, and Harold R. Lowery, msfc, $1,000 shared; and Frank L. Clark, Charles B. Johnson, Wayne D. Erickson, and Roger I. Buchanan, iaRC, $1,000 shared. The nasa Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement went to Dr. Dean R. Chapman, arc, for his research on tektites; to Dr. Ernst D. Geissler, msfc, for contributions to Mercury-Redstone, Saturn, and Nova boosters; and to Dr. John C. Houbolt, formerly of LaRC, for work on lunar orbit rendezvous. The nasa Medal for Outstanding Leadership was presented to Charles J. Donlan, nanc; and Dr. Walter TTaenssensann and Dr. William A. Mrazek, msfc. The new nasa Public Service Award, given to persons not employed by the Government, was presented to Jack N. James and Robert J. Parks, jfl, and John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Cape Canaveral, (nasa Releases 63^-217,215; Wash. Post, 10/2/63; Webb, Text; Program, Honor Awards Ceremony) October 1: nasa Administrator James E. Webb appeared on Voice of America, “Press Conference usa.” Speaking pf President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program, Mr. Webb said: “. . . after the ratification of the test ban and one day after Mr. Gromyko proposed that we agree not to put into orbit multi-megaton weapons, the President followed with a suggestion that had five elements. Most people have centered on only one of them.” The five elements were (1) measures against war by accident or miscalculation; (2) measures against surprise attack; (3) measures to curb the nuclear arms race; (4) exchange of information and persons; (5) U.S. consent to Gromyko’s proposal to negotiate an agreement not to orbit large nuclear weapons. “And then he added as a sixth item, we should also explore, now mark you, he said explore, possibilities for cooperation in manned space flight and then set a clear indication that he was not thinking of a limited exploration, that rather he was thinking of a broad exploration . . ., that we could even go step by step to the planning of a joint expedition.” Speaking of the preparations for the President’s U.N. speech, Mr. Webb said: “. . . I myself personally attended a meeting in the White House called by Mr. Arthur Schlesinger, perhaps a month ago, to consider things that the President might want to discuss at the United Nations. And I did myself on the day before Mr. Gromyko’s speech have a long talk with the President, maybe 35 or 40 minutes, about the whole space program in which we discussed this. And I think I should say that he had his office phone me in St. Louis on Thursday afternoon after Mr. Gromyko made his speech to read me the language that he then decided he would use, because it seemed such a natural follow-on to Mr. Gromyko’s proposal.” (Text)
Reported that Senator Strom Thurmond (D.-S.C.) told closed session of Senate that U.S.S.R. was deploying antimissile missiles capable of intercepting Polaris missiles and possibly even Minute-man missiles. Senator Thurmond spoke in favor of speeding up U.S. Nike-Zeus antimissile missile development, but Senate roll call vote (58-to-16) cut a proposed $196 million authorization for Nike-Zeus from the military spending authorization bill for FY 1964. Senate Armed Services Committee had added the Nike-Zeus funds to the Administration’s proposed bill. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/13/63)
nasa Director of Meteorological Systems Morris Tepper told House Committee on Scieiice and Astronautics that tiros v and tiros vi (launched in June and Sept. 1962 respectively) were still providing good data. Tiros data “continue to be used by the Weather Bureau for weather analysis and forecasting, storm tracking, hurricane reconnaissance, etc. The Weather Bureau disseminates its analyses and warnings widely .... “The Meteorological Soundings project has continued throughout the year as planned. The project at Goddard Space Flight Center which utilizes the larger meteorological sounding rockets continues as it has in past years with excellent results. In addition, we have initiated at the Langley Research Center a project which will develop and utilize the smaller meteorological sounding rockets. We expect to have this well underway by the end of this Fiscal Year . . . .” (Testimony)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, presented before House Committee on Science and Astronautics an account of nasa’s use of FY 1963 funds. Explaining $170 million decrease in launch vehicle costs because of lunar-orbit-rendezvous decision, he said nasa had deferred developmental phase of Nova very large launch vehicle and was conducting “further studies on the requirements and design concepts of a large launch vehicle consistent with optimum post-lunar-landing usage .... We are continuing [M-lj engine developments [for Nova], since it is a long lead time component, but have reduced the level of contractor effort to reflect the removal of a firm operafinrml firmnrr	^ V1V11U1 l.lllllllg •	•	•	• Speaking on space sciences, Dr. Seamans said: “Extensive study of the biological science area has demonstrated that specific recoverable satellite flights should be undertaken for the purpose of acquiring data on the effects of space environment on living matter. We are, therefore, undertaking such a bio-satellite program and have increased our estimated funding requirements in this area by $13.9 million in this fiscal year.” On communications satellites, Dr. Seamans said: “We re-examined our Communication Satellite program quite carefully in the light of the creation of the Communication Satellite Corporation and the reoriented activities of the dod following the cancellation of the Advent project. From this programmatic re-examination we have concluded that principal nasa effort should be focused on the research and development problems associated with the synchronous altitude class of communication satellite. We have, therefore, dropped the low altitude mutliple passive satellite project, Rebound, and advanced intermediate active satellite projects from hardware development consideration at this time. As a result of these decisions, we reduced our communication satellite program by $35.2 million . . . .” (Testimony)
Senator Clifford Case (R.-N.J.), in interview taped for radio and television, urged public spotlight on awards of multi-million-dollar defense and space contracts to prevent “political payoffs” and other improprieties. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/63)
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Sys-temSj testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics : “During fiscal year 1963 the feasibility of using active communications satellites to relay television, telephone conversations, teletype, facsimile, and data over transoceanic distances has been demonstrated with Telstar and Relay .... Aside from these demonstrations, which have public appeal, and are necessary to show that our satellites perform as we say they do, hundreds of engineering tests have been performed, the results of which will enable the United States to design better satellites and ground stations for an operational, global communications satellite system. In addition, we have accumulated a considerable amount of radiation data, and have obtained better information on the damage to solid state components, such as solar cells, transistors and diodes, from which we will profit in the design of all kinds of satellites in the future . . . .” (Testimony)
Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences voted (6 to 5) to delete nearly $5 million requested in nasa budget for FY 1964 for proposed electronics research center. Vote was tentative, "“ti<iinrr fijiai mmmittee action on nasa FY 1964 request. (ATT, •
James A. Van Allen, speaking at science hearing of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “The spectacular nature of many space achievements, especially those involving human passengers, is such that the space race stirs the enthusiasm of all but the most obtuse or superstitious persons, and makes possible widespread support by the tax-paying public.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/23/63)
President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Dr. Edward C. Welsh “acting temporary chairman” of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. As Vice President, Johnson had served as nasc Chairman. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/10/63,370)
Sen. A. S. Monronev (D.-Okla.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Aviation of the Senate Commerce Committee, speaking at the Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Washington, said that the Government’s plan of cost sharing for the development of the supersonic transport aircraft ($1 billion, the U.S. putting up %, the aviation industry the other y4) was “a firm figure that must be considered final .... “I am afraid that many of our finest businessmen still hope to consider this project in the nature of a defense contract. This effort must stand alone as a civil aviation need . . . .” The Senator did concede that if the market turned out to be for 100 aircraft instead of 200, the Government “might be able to give the companies some bail-out on this.” (NYT, 10/81/63, 58)
In nationally televised interview, Congressman Chet Holifield (D.-Calif.) said that funds for the $20-billion manned lunar program could be better spent in raising living standards on earth— on schools, hospitals, housing. Prestige value of landing a man on the moon was not worth the cost. Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said that even if these funds were not spent for landing a man on the moon, the funds would not be spent on raising living standards. “If we would stop everything we’re doing in space tomorrow. T think von would find there would be still Dlentv of people who would vote no on a program of better roads, better hospitals, better education.” (cbs-TV “Washington Report”; upi, Wash. Post, 4/9/63)
Senator J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) said in Tufts Univ. William L. Clayton Lecture that Project Apollo should be abandoned and money thus saved spent on down-to-earth causes such as education: “This allocation of priorities is a recipe for disaster, an unrecognized and powerful endorsement of the wrong side of the race between education and catastrophe (Boston Globe, 5/3/63,18)	'
General Accounting Office (gao) released report on nasa’s Centaur booster which was sharply critical of both Government and contractor performance. Done at the request of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and submitted to them on March 29, 1963, but not released until Oct. 3, the report charged that poor management and program slippage had added $100 million to the cost of the program. The most significant charge in the report was that nasa and the contractor—General Dynamics/Astronautics—had in their possession in 1960 data from which could have been predicted the failure of the first test flight in 1962. The only immediate reply came from Julian Scheer, nasa’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning: “On Sept. 30, 1962, we moved the Centaur project from Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville to the Lewis Research Center because we knew we had problems. Still, we hope to fly Centaur by the end of this year.” {Wash. Post, 10/4/63; Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63, 25)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb issued statement to press: “The record shows that Congress has consistently taken the necessary action to support the space program, and I am confident that this Congress will continue this record. Although the report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics is a major milestone on the road to approval of the 1964 nasa Budget, it is still too early in the consideration of this budget by Congress to draw firm conclusions as to what the final result will be. The House subcommittees have given the nasa programs a most careful review, accumulating data from hearings which will total more than 4,000 pages of testimony. Their devotion and attention to details has been impressive, but in my opinion the overall result of their actions is an inadequate level of support for a program that is urgently needed, has achieved a high level of success, and is now giving this nation the promise of early preeminence in all phases of space exploration and use. In the areas reduced, nasa will present a strong case for restoration as the legislation proceeds to enactment. “After its many details were brought under close scrutiny, and the possibility of postponement of many of these examined, the Committee has endorsed the program and the way it is being carried out but decided to defer approval until subsequent budgets in a number of important areas. My view is that the necessary resources should be authorized this year, rather than have important segments postponed with the consequent introduction of uncertainty at many levels in the government-industry -university team now engaged in this urgent national effort. “At the reduced level of funding recommended, we will certainly have to slow up or postpone a number of programs and direct a reduction in the scheduled level of effort in the plants of our contractors where 90% of the work of the space program is done. Unless an adequate level of support is restored, momentum already attained with great effort and difficulty will be lost and the stretch-out required will add to the final cost of the work required to carry out the program.” (Statement)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, inserted the Goddard Historical Prize Essay for 1962—“Early U.S. Satellite Proposals,” by R. Cargill Hall—into the Congressional Record. Chairman Miller pointed out that “in space affairs we cannot afford to be shortsighted or wrong” and asked that proposals of 1946-49 be considered in the light of the current discussion on the U.S. space program: “What if the United States had launched a satellite in 1952 or even 1954? Would history have been different? . . . Would not the image of the U.S. in the eyes of the rest of the world have been spared the historical blemish of Sputnik, the appearance that we were not the scientific and technological leader in the world ? ... If we would remain free and maintain peace on a small and troubled planet, America had better make sure that superior space science and technology are on our side.” Prize historical essay reviewed proposals by the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force’s rand Corp. for for the launching of earth satellites, proposals turned down by Department of Defense officials as not having “scientific or military utility.” Goddard Historical Essay Competition is sponsored annually by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. {CR, 10/7/63, A6277-6284)
Addressing National Rocket Club in Washington, Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “To me, the most important indirect benefit we are gaining [from the space program] is probably the least tangible, the least measurable, and yet the most far reaching in effect insofar as our future national growth is concerned. I am referring to the impact our space program is having upon our educational programs and institutions. The fact that NASA places demands upon and draws from almost every academic discipline has produced a stimulus in universities and colleges that is unprecedented in peacetime .... “What is important to understand is that scientific research and development is for the first time in our peacetime history being organized within one agency to accomplish a national goal. The achievements of our immediate space objectives are, of course, of paramount importance. But, I have little patience with the critics who cry out that our tax money is being thrown away in the exploration of space, or that going to the moon will result in the neglect of our problems here on earth. “It should be obvious to those critics, if they take the time for a short historical review, that many years of experience have shown that the indirect payoff in human terms for technical innovation is many times more valuable than the original investment . . . .” (Text)
President Kennedy transmitted to Congress the 1962 report on UJS. Aeronautics and Space Activities, stating in Preface: “The year 1962 was a period of acceleration, accomplishment, and relative progress for the United States in its space leadership drive. In both numbers and complexity of space projects, the past year was the most successful in our brief but active space history.” In accompanying message, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson told Congress that, during 1962, U.S. “generated a greater rate of progress in space than did the U.S.S.R. [However] . . . the records of the two countries were closely similar in regard to the ratio of space successes to space failures.” (Annual Report for 1962; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/29/63, A2)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.,-nasa Associate Administrator, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined status of current nasa activities, described proposed nasa program for FY 1964, and presented nasa budget estimates for FY 1964. (Testimony)
Ford Foundation announced a grant of $300,000 to take young engineering professors from the university campus into industry for one year to give them experience in “manufacturing, marketing, financing, and other considerations that influence engineering decisions in practice.” The program would cover three years and would involve some 60 faculty members. Program would be directed by Clarence E. Watson, former vice president of Columbia Broadcasting System Laboratories. Another $200,000 grant was made to the Univ. of Tenn. to take outstanding scientists and engineers into parttime teaching. (NYT, 11/7/63, 41)
Boston Globe carried article which cited leading electronic industrialists who endorsed nasa’s placement of an Electronics Center in the Boston area. .Public discussion had been triggered by Wall Street Journal article which said that “electronic and other scientific Yankee businessmen are looking critically at a proffered Federal gift [nasa proposed electronics center].” Ephron Catlin, executive vice president of Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, commented: “The story completely misrepresents the true feeling of the vast majority of the business and academic community in this area. “Almost the entire area is in favor of the center, and in fact, working for it . . . .” {CR, 2/11/63, A663)
National Aeronautics and Space Council considered nasa-dod coordination in Project Gemini and space stations. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, nasc Chairman, said after the meeting: “Coordination is a natural and effective enemy of duplication .... I am encouraged by the coordination already being exhibited between these two agencies in these important fields, but continuing attention is required if this country is to fulfill its destiny as the leading space-faring nation.” (nasc Release)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences voted to delay nasa proposed electronics research center until nasa provided detailed study justifying need for center and for its location in the Boston area. (Finney, NYT, 6/14/63, 12)
Alton B. Moody, Chief of Future Aplications Satellites in nasa Office of Applications, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. He summarized nasa accomplishments and plans in two areas—navigation satellite systems and data collection satellite systems—and said: “Both of these projects illustrate the operating procedure adopted for Future Applications. Before a flight program will be undertaken, several questions must be answered affirmatively: “1. Is there a requirement? “2. Is the requirement sufficient to justify the expenditure of the funds needed? “3. How would such a system operate? “4. Is the design feasible and within current state-of-the-art? By answering these questions serially, we are not committing funds very far downstream and can turn back at any point if the results are unfavorable.” (Testimony)
At nasa FY 1964 Budget Briefing, nasa Administrator James E. Webb acknowledged reported combustion instability in F-l engine: “It isn’t iust going to turn out to be a problem; it is a problem, and it has been a problem with every engine as I understand it that has ever been developed. We will solve the problem.” (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/23/63)
Raytheon Co. announced appointment of D. Brainerd Holmes as senior vice president, effective Oct. 1. (NYT, 8/6/63,8)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began full committee hearings on proposed nasa budget for FY 1964 and authorized expenditure of $3.9 million for nasa proposed electronics research center. However, Committee deleted references to Boston area as site in FY 1964 budget authorization and also directed nasa to first undertake detail study of “geographic location, the need for, and the nature of the proposed center.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/95; Quincy [Mass.] Patriot-Ledger, 6/25/63; Boston Traveler, 6/26/63) ./une %5: nasa announced receiving from eight nationally known artists 60 sketches made during Astronout Cooper’s MA-9 mission under nasa Artists’ Cooperation Program. Sketches were preliminary to finished paintings, which would be exhibited and from which reproductions would be made. MA-9 was first event which nasa invited artists to cover; other nasa activities of historic interest would be recorded by artists, (nasa Release 63-140)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegates would meet in March in Rome to work out “detailed arrangements to carry out proposals for co-operation in space.” Meeting would immediately precede meeting of cospar, also in Rome, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964, Transcript; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/17/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Adminis-strator and Director of Manned Space Flight, told Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics that current cost estimate of Project Apollo was $20 billion or less. (Transcript)
John L. Sloop, Director of Propulsion and Power Generation in nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified on nasa high-energy propellant program before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “Our interest in high energy propellants dates back to the middle-forties. A large amount of research on high energy propellants was conducted by naca. This research contributed to the development of the RL-10 engine. It also led to the choice of oxygen-hydrogen for the upper stages of Saturn I and Saturn V . . . . “Let me assure you, however, that we are not thinking or dealing in the past. I firmly believe there are many opportunities ahead to use high energy propellants in space exploration .... One phase of high energy propellant research in the 1953-1959 period is just beginning to reach fruition and offers significant potential gams in payload for existing vehicles and future vehicles. More work remains to be done . . . .” (Testimony)
Three-stage solid-fueled West German rocket launched from Cuxhaven, Germany, reached 65-mi. altitude and returned to earth by newly developed parachute technique. Rocket was designed by and launched under direction of Berthold Seliger, who called test “a partial success—I meant the thing to hit 93 miles high.” Seliger, who helped develop Germany’s V-l and V-2 rockets, said new rocket was developed from V-2. First major German rocket launched since World War II. it would be used in space research and possibly in development of antimissile missile, (trpi, Wash. Post, 5/3/63)
H.J. Res. 787 to provide for erection of a memorial statue to the late Dr. Robert H. Goddard was ordered favorably reported to the House by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The legislation would require that nasa erect a bronze statue of Dr. Goddard in central Massachusetts, the memorial giving appropriate recognition to Dr. Goddard’s 1914 patents, first liquid-fuel rocket flight, and other pioneering achievements, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/196 and 11/198)
Article by nasa scientists Dr. Homer E. Newell and Dr. Robert Jastrow in Atlantic Monthly inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Replying to scientists critical of pace set for landing men on the moon, the authors said: “This question requires a further exploration of the motives underlying the U.S. space effort. Is it primarily a scientific program, or is it motivated by a broader concern with the national interest ? Looking back to the overwhelming support given the new space program by the Congress in 1961, it seems clear that this support was not tendered for scientific reasons primarily, but came from a deep-seated conviction that the expanded program will make an important contribution to our future strength and security. We believe that this is the reason why the people have supported the enlarged space program. That brings us to the point on which we take issue with some of our scientific colleagues, who complain, ‘The scientific exploration of the moon has been accorded a secondary priority in the lunar program.’ This remark is based on the premise that science should have top priority in the space program. However, while science plays an important role in lunar exploration, it was never intended to be the primary Objective of that project. The impetus of the lunar project is derived from its place in the long-range U.S. program for the exploration of the solar system. The heart of that program is man in space, the extension of man’s control over his physical environment. The science and technology of space flight are ancillary developments which support the main thrust of manned exploration, while at the same time they bring valuable returns to our economy and our culture. The science which we do in space provides the equivalent of the gold and spices recovered from earlier voyages of exploration. It is the return to the taxpayer for his investment in his nation’s future. But the driving force of the program is not in scientific research alone, valuable though that may be in the long run. Thus, the pace of the program must be set, not by the measured patterns of scientific research, but by the need for a vigorous response to the national challenge . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/31/63, A4874-76)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “The F-l engine development program has an impressive list of accomplishments. A year after the contract was signed full-scale components were undergoing tests, and in 27 months complete engine systems testing had begun. Full thrust and full duration tests have become routine. The engine has been gimbaled during hot firing. We expect successful completion of the Preliminary Flight Rating Tests this year .... “When design of the F-l was begun in 1959, combustion instability was known to be a potential problem. Accordingly, early in the program tests of various injectors for the thrust chamber were conducted, and a design was selected which had not experienced unstable combustion. For about a year, from mid-1961 to mid-1962, engine tests were conducted without this phenomenon occurring. Then, on June 28 last year we were testing development engine #008 on the test stands in California. A test run which was scheduled for the full 2y2 minutes running time was interrupted after 106 seconds of satisfactory performance by a rupture of a valve casting. The rupture was traced to combustion instability. Since this occurrence, several cases of combustion instability have taken place. “This phenomenon is not unique to the F-l, but has occurred in the development of most liquid rocket engines .... “We are presently concentrating on combustion instability and are making progress. With the contractor at Rocketdyne, we have made an exhaustive survey of all test data having a bearing on the problem .... “To summarize, the F-l engine development over the last four years has made satisfactory progress . . . .” (Testimony) March 18: Frederick R. Kappel, at&t board chairman, said in speech before New York Chamber of Commerce that telstar ii communications satellite would be equipped with instruments “far more resistant to radiation” than telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar n would be launched by nasa at at&t expense. (NYT [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, former nasa Director of Manned Space Flight and now a senior vice president of Raytheon Co., said in a TV interview on abc that the manned space flight program needed a single manager with great freedom of action. The only way to run a large program, he said, “is to put the project manager in such complete charge . . . that he makes policy with very little approval above.” (NYT, 10/7/63? 23)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson defended the space program as a major bulwark of U.S. posture. In a speech to the Massachusetts Associated Industries in Boston, the Vice President said: “If we want to maintain the credibility of our claim to the superiority of a free political system—and a free private enterprise system— we cannot seriously entertain the thought of precipitating now so massive a disillusionment as would follow a political default on our commitments in space exploration.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/25/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . The past year has been an exceedingly active one for our manned space flight program. It was not only the year for accomplishments both in Project Mercury and in the initial Saturn test flights, but it was also a year for decisions in the rest of our program. “The lunar orbit rendezvous technique was selected for Project Apollo, and our preliminary program plans were translated into firm and decisive schedules. Every major hardware element has been placed under contract and construction of the required facilities is well under way. “In the current year we plan to carry forward all of the activities I have just described. By the end of this year much of the preliminary testing required in our program should have been completed and we should be well under way in the program designed to achieve not only a manned lunar landing in this decade,but also pre-eminence in manned space flight for this Nation.” (Testimony)
House Resolution 504 to create a select committee to investigate expenditures for research programs conducted by or sponsored by departments and agencies of the Federal Government was reported to House floor from House Committee on Rules. (CR, 8/28/63, 15297-98)
Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition: “nasa is committed to a hard, driving effort to transfer the useful fruits of our research and development effort to the private sector of the economy in as quick and as useful a way as possible. “We are committed, first, because the Space Act requires it. nasa is directed to ‘Provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning its activities and the results thereof.’ “We are also committed because we are mindful that a large part of the Nation’s r&d effort is occupied by the Federal agencies; and that it is essential that the maximum value be wrung out of this part of the total effort. “The requirements for space exploration begin in the field of anatomy and run through virtually the whole gamut of scientific and technological interest, through new power sources to zero gravity. Further, those things which are made for space travel receive no compromises from that harsh environment. Which is to say that a very large part of the total space work is at the very leading edge of the state-of-the-art; and that in another large part of the state-of-the-art must be extended. “It is reasonable to think that an effort of such size, range and sophistication, extending over a number of years, cannot fail to have major scientific and economic consequences: consequences that begin as scientific and technological advances and then are converted into new techniques of manufacture, new systems of organization, and new products and services. The space effort will be, we think, altogether comparable in its effect on the American economy to that of World War II. Our objective is to maximize, to facilitate, to speed up this effect. . . . “We are aware that past experience indicates severe problems in the transfer of government research and development efforts to private use. However, we feel that the Nation’s well being requires a major effect to determine whether these problems can be solved.” (Testimony)
President Kennedy appointed Willis M. Hawkins, Jr., vice president and general manager of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., to position of Assistant Secretary of the Army for Research and Development, replacing Finn J. Larsen who resigned July 31. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/63)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director of nasa Procurement and Supply said in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “ . . . nasa is trying a new contract system which we hope will accomplish the incentive objectives. The base fee in the contract will be lower than the usual fee. Criteria will be set up in the contract for evaluation of the contractor’s performance. These criteria may include reduction and control of costs, excellence of performance, delivery on schedule, and other points. Periodically a nasa board, also specified in the contract, will evaluate the contractor’s performance and may award some higher fee, up to a set maximum, if the facts justify an increase . . . .” (Testimony)
Dr. Lyman J. Briggs (1874-1963), Director Emeritus of the Bureau of Standards and a former member of the naca (1933-45), died in Washington, D.C. He began his government career in 1896 as a physicist in the Department of Agriculture, originating the centrifuge method of classifying soils, organizing the biophysical lab in 1906. He joined the Bureau of Standards in 1917 and became its Director in 1933; his early research resulted in improvement in the accuracy of large naval guns, the invention with Dr. Paul R. Heyl of the earth inductor compass (used by Lindbergh) , and air viscosity experiments leading to improved propeller designs, naca Report No. 207 by Briggs, G. F. Hall, and Hugh L. Dryden (on “Aerodynamic Characteristics of Airfoils at High Speeds,”) issued in 1924 was considered a major contribution on airfoils at near supersonic speeds. In 1939, the White House named Dr. Briggs as chairman of the original Uranium Committee to study the military use of atomic energy, which led to the Manhattan Project and Hiroshima. For his work on the proximity fuse during World War II, he was awarded the Medal of Merit by President Truman. Dr. Briggs retired in 1945, but continued research including confirmation in 1959 that pitched baseballs could curve as much as 17 inches in 60 feet. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A5)
In an article in the September issue of Aerospace magazine, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out some of the many advantages to be gained from the lunar project: “. . . The lunar project has forced us to develop many competences which have military as well as non-military significance. These are competences which we would have been slow to develop were it not for this national moon objective. For example, rendezvous technique so basic to our moon project is essential to detecting and examining other spacecraft which may be hostile. Life protective measures are essential to a useful police force in space for maintaining the peace. Powerful rockets, reliability of space equipment, development of control and guidance systems, experience with manned spacecraft, etc., are all spin-offs from the lunar project, which help build our defense capability.” (Text, Aerospace, Sept. 1963)
House Appropriations Committee voted $5.1 billion appropriation for nasa in FY 1964, $612 million less than the Administration request and $250 million less than previously authorized by Congress, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the 1970 target date for landing a man on the moon could not be met unless Congress restored the $250 million cut, either by putting it back now or by approving a supplemental request in Jan. 1964. Furthermore, Webb said, the FY 1965 budget would have to make up the “shortfall” from the original Administration request for $5.7 billion. Rep. Clarence Cannon (D.-Mo.), Chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said he had wanted the nasa budget cut further to $4.9 billion, tbat the Subcommittee on Independent Offices had wanted $5.3 billion, and that the $5.1 billion represented a compromise. He predicted House approval, said: “Although it’s only a token cut, it shows the attitude of the Committee and the House towards the space budget.” Rep. Albert Thomas (D.-Tex.), Chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Independent Offices, said the cut had nothing to do with President Kennedy’s proposal for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar landing program. “There was simply one big thing. Everybody wants a tax cut, and many people want a reduction in spending. Of all the spots, this was a good one to cut.” (NYT, 10/8/63,1)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said in commencement address at Univ. of Maryland: “We are not reaching for prestige in space—we are reaching for peace. And this is considerably more urgent than many realize or others will yet admit .... “In exploring space, we are exploring the environment of the earth itself. We are finding paths through a new dimension—and historically civilizations have stood or fallen according to their ability to move through a dimension. “We seek to make space an instrument for peace and the development of mankind. But if we abandon the field, space can be preempted by others as an instrument for aggression. “And in a world of competing social systems, we would be naive indeed if we failed to recognize how bleak the future would be if this new dimension became the realm of tyranny. For your children, and your children’s children, an iron curtain would be drawn across the pathway to the- stars . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/18/63, A3867)
Soviet Army newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket failure, the first public mention of a rocket launching failure in the U.S.S.R. No date or program was named, only a report of heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pulled out a starting plug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six seconds before the rocket exploded. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A35) During November: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in the 10011 ft A /?/> mo /to innn	tlio '■	*	'	OKf \y lllUgU/JUiA Ol VUV \JIV11VA il Plnofrin	OQirl • “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick. “Our national activities in space research and exploration are no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seriously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to the planet Venus—or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars. “We have come a long way. In the new Age of Space which brings us together, we are destined to go a Tong way further. Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler. I confidently believe that the developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the history of man.” (Challenge, Fall 1963,24—5) The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 production units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sounding rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data gathering is part of the overall European effort in support of the iqsy worldwide programs. As part of the program, the Mar?[uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two aunching series. The first series was currently in progress, scheduled for completion by mid-December; the second would be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, sin, Jan., 1964) During November: jpl scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Roland L. Carpenter reported in Science magazine on recent radar experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking station in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found to be quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice as rugged as Venus. The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as 88 days. (Science Service, NYT, 11/6/63, 33)
Letter from Harold S. Geneen, it&t President, to Sen. Warren G. Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, and Rep. Oren Harris, Chairman of House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, was made public. Replying to rca Chairman David Sarnoff’s April 2 letter to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, and to Former fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow’s May 31 letter to President Kennedy, Geneen said he “must respectfully disagree with General Samoff’s suggestion that the merger [of international communications carriers] should be compulsory and include all international communications facilities, both voice and record, under the Communications Satellite Corporation.” Reasons against such merger: it would run counter to historical Government opposition to monopoly in any field; it&t believed that private enterprise should not abandon field to which it has made substantial contribution; and it&t believed that ComSatCorp was established as “a private corporation and intended ... to be a carrier’s carrier” rather than competition for carriers using its services. “The real problem, as we see it, is rather to strengthen competition than abandon it ... . “We have also urged that the international record communication carriers be permitted to merge, as a means of offsetting American Telephone and Telegraph’s dominant position in international voice communications . . . .” at&t also issued statement opposing rca Chairman Sarnoff’s proposal to create single communications company: “. . . The present arrangement ... is a good one. It is based on the principles of good service and sound economics and is working well. We see no reason to experiment with substitutes of doubtful merit . . . .” (Smith, NYT, 6/20/63) Ju/ne 19: faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles: “First, technically, a superior supersonic transport is feasible. “Second, it is an expensive aircraft to develop, but not fantastically so, and certainly not beyond the resources of the greatest industrialized nation in the world. “Third, there is a market for an American transport of perhaps 200 to 250 first-round orders. If we do not develop an American sst, then the entire market, which could be something like 400 planes during perhaps a decade of first-round buying, will fall to our overseas competitors. Among the purchasers would be the airlines of the U.S., which would be forced to purchase planes produced overseas in order to remain competitive. “Fourth, in the event that we did not proceed with sst development, the Nation would default its position of preeminence in international commercial aviation—with all that would entail in practical terms and in less measurable terms of confidence and prestige . . . .” (Text)
Commenting on Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova’s space flight in vostok vi, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson said: “I’m not surprised. There isn’t any reason why women can’t go up into space. . . .” Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “It doesn’t surprise me that the Russians want to pull another spectacular by putting a woman in space. It shouldn’t interfere with our scientific program. I don’t want to downgrade their achievement, but it doesn’t mean we have to follow suit . . . .” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63) Jwne 17: nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, observed Soviet manned spacecraft vostok v and vi were traveling in two different orbital planes: “It appears unlikely that sufficient fuel could be taken aloft by either of these Vostok spacecraft to effect a rendezvous.” (Transcript)
Lt. Gen. Thomas P. Gerrity (usaf), dcs Systems and Logistics, Hq. usaf, testifying before the Subcommittee on dod Appropriations of the House Appropriations Committee, stated that usaf was going to modify as space boosters at least 15 of the 64 Thor irbm’s being withdrawn from the U.K. but was dismantling the 45 Jupiter missiles that were withdrawn from Turkey and Italy. Rep. Daniel J. Flood (D.-Penn.) recalled that this Subcommittee had been in the thick of the original Thor-Jupiter controversy, asked “what is the peculiar, special, and significant and distinct thing about the Thor missile which would argue that 15 at least be modified” while Jupiter missiles were being discarded as “garbage.” Gen. Gerrity replied that the reason was quantity rather than quality, that usaf had had more experience with Thor, and “We have launch facilities for the Thor but do not have launch facilities for the Jupiter.” Rep. Flood pressed Gen. Gerrity on “the marked physical distinction [between Thor and Jupiter] which would rush you into this conclusion?” The General did not recall a marked distinction. Rep. Flood asked “did nasa twist your arm and insist they get Thor instead of Jupiter ?” Gen. Gerrity said he knew “of no such circumstances.” (DOD Appro-riations Hearings, House, 88th Congress, 1st Session, Pt. 5, 973- •
Commenting on action of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Committee’s Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, (D.-N.M.) said Committee approved nasa appropriations requests whenever they “made sense in terms of National objectives. On the other hand, some projects failed to get committee authorization because they are in need of further explanation .... “If an Apollo landing on the moon were to be the end of the line, then the attitude of the Congress toward nasa expenditure will be one thing. But if space is here to stay, and we believe it is, then our attitudes would be something else again. When we are asked for funds to cover a variety of advanced research projects and new engines and vehicles beyond those occasioned by Apollo, it is hard to be enthusiastic in supporting these projects in the absence of clearly stated national goals.” (Missile/ Space Daily, 8/2/63)
Testimony of Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara before House Committee on Armed Services Feb. 2 was released, in which Secretary McNamara said: “A substantial amount of funds [for FY 1964] is requested for dyna-soar. I mention this only to say . . . that technology as it applies to space advances so rapidly that we must expect many changes in programs before they are completed. I personally believe that rather substantial changes lie ahead of us in this dyna-soar. “I say this, in part, because of the gemini development, gemini is a satellite project carried on up to the present time by nasa, on which has been spent to date about $300 million, and for which they will request $300 million in 1964, toward a total program cost of $800 million; it will provide a capsule capable of carrying two men into earth orbit . . . . “gemini is a competitive development with dyna-soar in the sense that each of them are [sic] designed to provide low earth orbit manned flight with controlled re-entry, dyna-soar does it one way, and with flexibility, and gemini another .... “[The nasa-dod Project Gemini joint planning committee] . . . will insure that the military requirement for near-earth orbit is properly taken account of in the gemini project. “We don’t have any clear military requirement, or any known military requirement, per se. But 1 think we do have a requirement for environmental testing and experimentation in nearearth orbit. “We are very much interested, therefore, in the Gemini project. When we become more familiar with it and understand its potential I suspect it will have a great influence on the future of DYNA-SOAR .... “I guess that we will find that gemini has a greater military potential for us, even though a rather ill-defined military potential, than does dyna-soar, and, moreover, that it will be available much sooner than dyna-soar ....	' “I think the dyna-soar project can work out satisfactorily. The real question is, what do we have when we finish it. It will cost to complete, in total, including funds spent to date, something on the order of $800 million to a billion dollars. The question is, do we meet a rather ill-defined military requirement better by proceeding down that track, or do we meet it better bv modifying gemini in some joint project with nasa . . . .” (Hearings on H.R. 2440, pp. 465-67) During March: Space Orientation Center, designed for briefing Marshall Space Flight Center visitors and new employees and operated by the Historical Office, was opened at msfc. (Marshall Historian; Huntsville Times,3/6/63)
At nasa Budget Briefing Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans commented on rumor that nasa planned another Mercury flight after the Cooper flight scheduled for April: “You will note that the Mercury and one-day [manned orbital] effort is presumed to be completed in fiscal ’64. We have a flight scheduled for this April. ... In planning flights of that importance we always have a back-up possibility. We do have two back-up capsules as well as the two back-up Atlas boosters that could be used in the event that we don’t obtain all the information that we anticipate obtaining in the Cooper flight. . . .” (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript, 1/17/63)
President Kennedy visited San Antonio and Houston. In San Antonio, he participated in the dedication of the new $6-million Aerospace Medical Health Center at Brooks afb. “Too many Americans make the mistake of assuming that space research has no value here on earth. Nothing could be further from the truth,” the President said, and then went on to enumerate some of the advances in medical science and technique that had come from space research. Referring to the reduced nasa budget passed by the Senate the previous day, the President said: “There will be pressures for our country to do less and temptations to do something else. But this research must and will go ahead. That much we know. That much we can say with confidence and conviction .... “Our effort in space is not, as some have suggested, a competitor for the national resources needed to improve our living standards. It is instead a working partner and coproducer of those resources.” (Wicker, NTT, 11/22/63; Kiker, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 11/22/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed his first 26 months in office on abc television interview. Referring to his participation in major national decisions, he referred to pushing ahead with the large rocket booster program and the accelerated space program decisions in which he participated as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. (Wash. Post, 3/27/63; Wash. Eve. Star, -3/27/63)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.-Minn.) spoke on the Senate floor about the results of the Senate Committee on Government Operations’ five-year fight for more comprehensive, integrated technical information programs in Government. The Senator said that useful programs were now at last underway in all major Federal agencies; he particularly cited the Science Information Exchange, which as of June 30, 1963, had a roster of 75,000 research proposals and projects in the life sciences and physical sciences. {CR, 10/9/63,18128)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, speaking at the Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, said the space age was “one of the great movements in human history . . . . Our ability to maintain the peace and deter aggression depends on keeping ahead—or at least abreast—of any other nation in space technology.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/22/63)
Questioned at nasa Budget Briefing about nasa’s substituting pickaback rendezvous target for Agena stage in Project Gemini flights, Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans said: “That is definitely by the boards We did study that kind of possibility. We feel it is very important to have a program where there will be two separate launches. We will put up the Agena. . .” as target object in Gemini flights training astronauts for Project Apollo lunar orbit rendezvous, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964 Transcript)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in address before aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting in Dallas: “The age of space is, for all regions of America, a second industrial revolution, a revolution that is bringing a new future, a new degree of participation, a new scope of contribution for every region of our country, and for every segment of our society.” Regarding Project Apollo, he said that “to reach for the moon is a risk, but it is a risk we must take.” Failure to do so would be “even riskier.” (upi, NYT, 4/24/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted in Congressional Record an art'cle from Missiles and Rockets, which said: “The United States has gained more knowledge of outer space than the Russians because we’ve done a better overall job with our unmanned satellite program. We are using unmanned vehicles to help predict weather around the world, to improve navigation, to make possible international television and other communications, and to keep track of what the enemy is doing to establish missiles and other weapon systems aimed at us. “Not only have we learned more about the planet Mars through unmanned space research, but we’ve gained much knowledge of the vast reaches of space in between and beyond .... We’ve pursued unmanned space research down far more streets and alleys than have the Soviets. “For the most part, our unmanned satellites are yielding knowledge that will assure success with manned flights into space in the future. For that reason, if no other, it is easy for the unmanned satellite program to be overlooked, its significance lost in the international competition of manned flights. This is a pity, for what we do in unmanned space exploration today is the very foundation on which we will build future manned space exploration. “In saying this we are not being partisan to the claim so often heard these days that we ought to forget about the manned program and explore space only with unmanned vehicles. We regard the controversy as a mere tempest in a teapot that will prove meaningless in time . . . .” (CR, 8/20/63)
nasa testimony before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Appropriations on Aug. 19,1963, indicated that at that time nasa officials saw little prospect for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration, William Hines, of the Washington Evening Star, quoted from testimony released today. Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator and chief U.S. space negotiator, said: “In my discussions with Blagonravov, the question of cooperation in manned space flights was mentioned in the early part, but was pretty well dropped as something that was not practical . . .” because among other reasons, of “the very high degree of classification the Russians attached to their space program. . . .” Summing up, Dr. Dryden said: “I do not foresee in the near future any prospects that the Russians, any more than ourselves, will see a clear way to co-operate in a manned lunar landing.” nasa Administrator James E. Webb agreed: “Up to now, there has been no evidence whatever that we will gain anything significant from it.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/63)
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Tex. Within two hours of the President’s death, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had taken the oath as the 36th President of the U.S., aboard Air Force No. 1, the Presidential jet aircraft. (NYT, 11/24/63, El)
nasa announced rca Service Co. had been selected to negotiate contract for operation and maintenance of satellite data-acquisition stations—two near Rosman, N.C., and two near Fairbanks, Alaska. One station at each location would be operational by Sept. 1963; other two stations were expected to be operational m 1964. Facilities would be first high-capacity data-acquisition stations, supporting Oao, Pogo, Ego, and Nimbus satellites, (nasa Release 63-138). ■June 19: nasa Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden received international aspects of the U.S. space program at a luncheon meeting of the National Capitol Section of the aiaa. Dr. Dryden was awarded the First Annual von Karman Memorial Citation and a letter from Vice President Johnson was read which said, in part: “A few more Hugh Diydens—appropriately placed about the globe—and we would have a world of peace, honor, and progress.” Preceding Dr. Dryden’s address Mr. Robert F. Packard of the State Department reviewed U.S. policy with regard to space. (Letter; Citation; Text)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testified on the nasa-dod Gemini Program Planning Board before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics. “The nasa-dod Agreement on Gemini was put into effect by Secretary McNamara and Administrator Webb on January 21, 1963. This agreement represents another important example of the manner in which both the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are striving to maximize the technological productivity of national space flight programs such as the Gemini. I think it is significant that in announcing the agreement, Mr. McNamara and Mr. Webb emphasized the national character and importance of the Gemini project and reiterated their intentions to insure that Gemini is utilized in the national interest and to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort in this area as in all others .... “I think it is important to point out here that increased dod participation in the Gemini does not alter the peaceful and experimental character of the program. We are driving forward to advance the technology of manned space flight, including rendezvous and designated docking and to study and understand man’s effectiveness under prolonged conditions of weightlessness. In carrying out this program, nasa continues to be solely responsible for the management of the Gemini project. . . .” (Testimony)
Senator Howard Cannon, speaking on Senate floor, said: “. . . It is my personal belief—and a belief held by many other people knowledgeable in the field—that our entire scientific effort in the decades ahead might well run aground because of an insufficient supply of trained technical personnel. “. . . I again ask this body to consider the shortage of engineers and scientists to be a matter of most vital national urgency; and I reiterate my resolve to see that the legislative branch does not default in its obligation to take action in this area.” {CR, 2/7/63, 1949-50)
Senate Appropriations Committee completed action on nasa’s FY 1964 appropriation by approving a $5.19 billion nasa budget. This was only $90 million more than approved by the House of Representatives. It had been thought that the Senate would raise the House figure to about $5.3 billion. The Senate Committee also retained its version of the Pelly amendment, forbidding a joint lunar program without consent of Congress. (Finney, NYT, 11/14/63,21)
Senator Warren Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, in nomination hearings on incorporators of Space Communications Corp., said that the corporation would have no bearing on decisions regarding nasa research in communications satellites, but that nasa would have responsibility to justify continued communications research as being in the National interest. {Space Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
Aviation executives criticized Government plans for the supersonic transport in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. C. R. Smith, president of American Airlines, objected to the provision that industry pay one quarter of the development costs, wanted Government to pay all the costs and defer decision on how to recapture some of the costs until after the prototype had flown. John Stack, vice president and director of engineering of Republic Aviation Corp. and former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, complained that competition with the British-French Concorde would force U.S. industry to set up management and assembly lines prematurely. Stack urged that a manufacturer be chosen to begin work on a prototype next spring and that the one-year-long second design phase be eliminated. He also supported the steel-and-titanium mach 3 concept as more efficient than an aluminum mach 2 + aircraft presently favored by faa. (Clark, NYT, 10/23/63, 9)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.), minority member of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, asked that the Committee investigate alleged waste in the space program to determine how much money has been wasted, by whom, and whether some projects have fallen so far behind that money earmarked for them m the FY 1964 budget can be cut out because it cannot be spent within the fiscal year. He requested that the investigation be undertaken immediately so that it can be finished before Congress takes final action on the nasa budget. (Troan, Wash. Danly News, 10/5/63)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, speaking before the Air Transport Association Engineering and Maintenance Conference in Washington, said: “While much has been said about the Congressional cuts in the nasa budget request, it is noteworthy that the debate was not on cutting back the program. Rather, it was on how much should the increase be. This is, I believe, the key to the public outlook on space.” (Text)
In commencement address at MacMurray College (Jacksonville, 111.), Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . We are more masters of the future than of the past but we allow the hand of the past to rest heavily upon us ... . “At today’s pace, the sum of human knowledge is being doubled every decade. On a relative basis, the class of 1963 may well be three centuries of learning ahead of the class of 1933. But we are asking a generation capable of going to the moon to live in a world ordered and fixed by generations which scarcely knew the model T—and that makes no real sense . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/4/63, 9438-39)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Associate Administrator, testified on nasa facility planning before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology. “There are several basic agency guidelines under which the Program Directors establish tlieir facility requirements. In addition to money constraints, always present, every effort is made to meet requirements through modifications to existing facilities and the use of government owned facilities and sites in lieu of new construction and land purchase. As a result, facilities and sites which otherwise might be obsolete or unused become effective tools for the conduct of our program. I think nasa has an unusually fine record in this respect . . . .” (Testimony)
at&t informed ComSatCorp that it would prefer to rely on satellites rather than additional undersea cables to meet transatlantic communications needs in the near future. In letter from James E. Dingman, at&t Executive Vice President, made public Dec. 10 by ComStatCorp, atat’s basic position was reiterated: need exists for both cable and satellite circuits; however, at&t would prefer to use satellite circuits across the Atlantic until there are approximately as many satellite channels as cable circuits. (ComSatCorp Release w/ltr)
Sir Charles (C.P.) Snow, British scientist and author, said in New York interview that pace of U.S. lunar program was “probably a mistake,” an “all-out” effort in race with U.S.S.R. Most dramatic scientific achievements of next decade, he said, would be in molecular biology. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/21/63,11) Jv/ne 20-21; In hearings conducted by House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby outlined details of proposed Government-industry project to develop supersonic transport, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/93 and 11/94) June 21: Addressing Conference of National Organizations in Atlantic City, nasa Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Dr. Joseph F. Shea said that “now that the costs are rising as predicted, the country is reappraising the commitment [to land men on the moon in this decade]. Such discussions are entirely proper. Indeed, the resolve with which we carry out our national activities is frequently strengthened [by the] tempering in the heat of debate . . . .” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Vice President for r&d of Space Technology Laboratories, named to new position of nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, succeeding D. Brainerd Holmes who would resign Sept. 1 as Director of Office of Manned Space Flight and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Centers. ( nasa Release 63-162)
Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences, testified at the initial hearing held by the House Select Committee on Government Research. Dr. Seitz warned Congress against starving basic research and individual or small-team research “in order to divert funds for research which appears to be more spectacular from a popular standpoint .... There appear to be signs of such diversion in the present session of the Congress.” As evidence of this trend, Dr. seitz pointed out the relative size of the cuts in the nasa budget compared with the cuts of the National Science Foundation. Also, he pointed out, even the nasa cuts were heavier in space sciences than in manned space flight or applications, nasa, he thought, should play a role like that of the Office of Naval Research ten years ago, offering broad support to basic research in chemistry, physics, astronomy, and other sciences. (Loorv, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 11/19/63)
Senator Clinton Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautics and Space Sciences, questioned nasa FY 1964 request of $55 million for space communications research. He indicated he would oppose spending Federal funds to support research that would ultimately benefit Communications Satellite Corp. and would question the incorporators about possible overlapping of spending. (Space Bus. Daily, 3/12/63,305)
New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics of the 88th Congress: Democrats—Richard J. Patten (N.J.), Richard Fulton (Tenn.), Don Fuqua (Fla.), Neil Staebler (Mich.), and Carl Albert (Majority Leader-Okla.); Republicans—Donald Rumsfeld (III.), James D. Weaver (Pa.), Edward J. Gurney (Fla.), and John W. Wydler (N.Y.). (nasa AC; AP, Wash. Post, 1/25/63)	^
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
Dr. Arthur R. Kantrowitz, Vice President of avco Corp., interviewed in U.S. News & World Report, said the moon was “set up as the priority target in our space program” because, at the time of the decision, “it was the most obvious goal .... But I think that, while it does provide us with a center for vigorous activity, it precluded other imaginative things that we might be doing, because it absorbs so much of our funds .... “I am one of those who favor, as our next objective, the permanent manned station in a low orbit around the earth .... It would give us a chance to learn to live and to work in space. It would give us a chance to achieve a larger vision of the potentialities of space .... A laboratory like this would enlarge man’s horizons in an important way. . . .” Dr. Kantrowitz said there was “certainly a possibility of going to the moon via a manned orbital station,” and that this might be the Soviet method. Asked if U.S. should be working on this approach in addition to lor, he said: “If we had two approaches, I would be willing to bet that it would accelerate our moon program, because there is a chance that either of these approaches will run into serious difficulties. Having two baskets for our eggs would seem to me to be a much more reasonable thing. Note that before the expensive later phases are reached by either approach a choice may be necessitated for economic reasons. “Furthermore, we might find after we’re deeper into the space program that there are more exciting things to be done than landing a man on the moon.” (U.S. News, 4/15/63,64-66)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition resumed hearings on nasa FY 1964 budget authorization, with testimony by Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., and Leo D. Welch, Chairman. Asked whether ComSat Corp. would conduct its own r&d or depend upon NASA-sponsored research, Mr. Welch said, “We plan to do both. We plan to contract for design studies, [and] we obviously plan to take advantage of the work done by nasa.” Mr. Welch said space communications system may link U.S., Europe, Japan, and Latin America by 1967. Dr. Charyk said ComSatCorp. expected initial planning to take about a year and development of hardware about another three years, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/1/63) 741-603 0—64-----12 April30: dod announced U.S. would deploy icbm’s at rate of one a day during rest of 1963. Announcement came as 100th Minuteman site was turned over to sac at Malmstrom afb, Mont, (dod Release 612-63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking before American Editorial Cartoonists’ meeting in Washington, referred to complaints that excessive costs of Project Apollo and other U.S. efforts would “undermine the dollar .... But we are not told what would happen to the dollar—or to America—if space were defaulted to the Communist . . . .” “The question is which kind of philosophy, democratic or Communist, will dominate outer space ? “I, for one, don’t want to go to bed by the light of a Communist moon.” {Wash. Post, 5/12/63; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/12/63)
Charles H. Zimmerman, nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology: “Our goals are to provide the research and advanced technology which will: “1. Enable our aircraft industry to produce aircraft which will, to the greatest practicable extent, make the convenience and speed of air transportation available, and economically feasible, to the people of this country; “2. Enable our armed services, working with our industry, to develop military aircraft superior in performance, in utility, and in requirements for logistics and manpower support to those of any other country. “In working toward these goals, we coordinate our efforts closely with the Federal Aviation Agency, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies . . . and with the aircraft manufacturers and their customers .... “Aviation no longer offers the glamor and excitement which so strongly influenced its growth in its early years. We are not striving for speed and altitude records. Men have circled the earth at orbital speeds. The X-15 has flown practically out of the atmosphere. Our objective now is transportation, economically feasible transportation for commercial purposes, militarily superior transportation for military purposes. I would like for you to consider our program as directed toward maintenance and enhancement of our leadership in air transportation . . . .” (Testimony)
nasa announced it would sponsor study to determine interest in system of “practical” satellites to collect data from remote areas of the earth. If warranted, study would be followed by a feasibility and design study. A possible use of data collection satellite was in oceanography, using instrumented floating buoys distributed over ocean surface to measure characteristics of the sea. Satellite would interrogate each buoy, store information, then transmit it upon command. Similar application was tracking of icebergs, using transponders planted on ice formations. Study would be under cognizance of nasa Future Applications Satellites unit, which was also investigating nonmilitary uses of navigational satellites, (nasa Release 63-55) • Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) questioned whether a planned space electronics research center should be located in Boston or in fact, whether one was needed at all. He said New Jersey has outstanding qualifications for such a center and it and other states should be considered a possible location—if the center is actually needed, nasa has already selected the Boston area as the site of the center. (Boston Herald, 3/18/63)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, sent letter to all Committee members and to Panel on Science and Technology, saying: “The Subcommittee will explore plans and programs to accomplish the best orientation and use of science and its resources .... [For example], what standards may effectively be applied to determine the need and the priority for scientific research, how much may be evaluated as conforming with national scientific policy and goals, and what proper levels may be established for basic, applied and developmental research.” (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. II/17)	‘	.
Company began final razing of World War II tnt manufacturing facilities at Plum Brook Station. At the' height of production during W W II, 12 tnt production lines were in operation and 6,000 employees were at work. The 6,000-acre site now is the home of a nuclear research reactor and numerous rocket engine test stands, (lrc Release 63-65, Lewis Chronology, 7)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, addressing Governors’ Conference at Miami Beach, said: “In the world of today, we must recognize that the winds and the waves are with us. This is the time for us to steer straight and true toward the horizons we have for so long hoped to reach. “But we should also recognize that favoring winds are rising at home. Our record in space is a prime example. We started late. We moved too slowly at first. “But the record shows now that where the Soviet Union has successfully launched 43 payloads into orbit, the United States has launched 144. “Our ratio of sucesses to failures in launchings prior to 1961 was only 1 to 1—but it has now reached the ratio of 5 to 1. “The Soviet continues its lead in the ability to launch heavier weight into space. But we are pulling far ahead in developing practical uses of space with weather, communication, and navigation satellites. “We are not racing for prestige in space. We are engaged in a deadly serious race for peace—and for control of our own destiny. This is a race free men must win . . . .” (Text, CR, A4759-60)
nasa Director of Procurement Ernest W. Brackett, testifying before Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Date Acquisition of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “During fiscal year 1962, approximately 90% of funds appropriated by the Congress were spent by contracts as compared to 64% in fiscal year 1960. In fiscal year 1964, the percentage of funds going to contractors may increase further . . . .” (Testimony)
In press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current lunar probe [lunik iv], do you think we will beat the Russians with a man to the moon ?” He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We will have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill race at best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians are making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not spongy, and I think that we would have to make the same ourselves. “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe, to be ahead at the end of this decade, and that is where I think we ought to be.” Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars and that enormous sums were being wTasted in the space program (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March 291, President Kennedy said: “. . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a decision that the United States would not continue to be second in space. We are second in space today because we started late. It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year, that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think we should continue to do so. “President Eisenhower—this is not a new position for him. He has disagreed with this at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position. It is the position I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a slow pace in space, I don’t think so. “This Administration has concentrated its attention since it came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of the reasons why you could not possibly put in the cut which has been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we now have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent. In a whole variety of ways—in the Navy we have added about 46 vessels, and strengthened ourselves in defense and space . . . .” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 4/4/63)
W. C. Mentzer, United Air Lines Vice President, told Wings Club in New York that projected British-French supersonic airliner was a challenge to U.S. If this country accepts challenge, it must be prepared to accept “two specific obligations . . . : First, to develop an intelligent long-term program of subsidy, and second, to encourage an economic environment in which the supersonic transport eventually may thrive.” (NYT, 5/14/63)
In letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.), ranking minority member, recommended the committee carefully re-examine U.S. space activities and resource allocations “because I think the priority given the manned lunar program is inure of an issue now than it was 2 years ago .... “It is interesting to note that criticisms expressed concerning the allocation of funds within the space budget, and the amount of the total budget, are coming from members of both political parties as well as from some scientists and engineers who are not identified with either party. “I do not, therefore, regard nasa’s budget for fiscal 1964 as a partisan matter . . . .” (Letter, 5/10/63, m CR, 5/13/63, 7803)
Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) announced he had requested Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert to investigate the reported usaf memorandum asserting nasa planned to construct facilities which would duplicate those of usaf, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	...	.
Addressing meeting of Aviation and Space Writers Association, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Co. Aerospace Div., Lysle A. Wood, proposed: (1) orjttting weather control station that could provide a “better foreign aid program than any of our efforts to date”; (2) orbiting industrial laboratories to supplement Government space laboratories; (3) orbiting cardiovascular laboratory for studying and treating selected patients in space environment; (4) research by chemists and others for substances, compounds, and organisms “for which we do not recognize a need or desire because we cannot imagine the possibility of their existence”; and (5) orbiting vehicles as new medium of advertising. He suggested that U.S. would benefit from commercial ventures into space, and such benefits could help pay for scientific and military programs. (NYT, 4/19/63, 86)
Republican study group of House Appropriations Committee said projects costing $10-$15 billion should be cut from FY 1964 budget appropriations request of $107.9 billion. Although they did not specify where the cuts should be made, Rep. Frank T. Bow (Ohio) suggested in press conference that cuts could be made in the space program and in foreign aid. {Wash. Post, 3/5/63: Wall Street Journal, 3/5/63)
Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., a vice president of Grumman Aircraft, replying to question during testimony before Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said first U.S. astronauts returning from the moon would bring back about 100-(earth)-pound sample of lunar terrain. {L.A. Times, 3/20/63)
Urging a “breakthrough” by cab and faa “toward more economical AnowitiAno in IQ rtncvanmu* tn OA naoOQmrm*^ r*Qr»rro rtf rtrtTTlTTlOnmQ 1 opoi UiHOliO AAA XU p««MVllgVi	UA ptMAJOUgVA A	va waaaaaava vawa aircraft, Sen. Thomas J. McIntyre (D.-N.H.) pointed out that in 1958 “the passage of the Federal Aviation Act provided the basis for such [design] studies. . . . Originally, of course, such studies were the province of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, set up as early as 1915. Senator Ralph Flanders said, in 1955:
Testifying at Space Posture Hearings, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Lawrence L. Kavanau, Special Assistant for Space, dod ddr&e, said: “It is . . . important to understand that, within the Department of Defense itself, a ‘space program’ does not exist as a separate entity. Space and space-related projects are integrated, on a functional basis, throughout our program structure. The basic objective in any functional area is to develop and exploit those capabilities which will provide the maximum military effectiveness for the foreseeable future.” {Space Posture Hearings. 2/28/63, 174)	'
At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award for Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Research ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions to knowledge of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international programs in the atmospheric sciences.” Other awards: Charles Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society, presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorology and to stimulate the interest of young people in the field, for establishing Weather-wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimulation he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chairman of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N. Lorenz of mit “for his introduction of concepts leading to a better understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented to rca Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology through its role in producing the successful Tiros meteorological satellites”; ams Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, presented to Herbert C. S. Thom, Chief Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, “for a quarter century of contributions to applied meteorology, including furnished climatological estimates to the armed forces during World War II, major contributions to the problems of statistical analysis of climatological data, development of wind design data, and development of a much improved formula for calculating annual and seasonal energy use for domestic heating”; Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, presented to Prof. Konrad J. K. Buettner, Dept, of Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Washington, “for his distinguished and continuing studies on the influence of the atmospheric environment on man.” (ams Release)
nasa Director of Electronics and Control Dr. Albert J. Kelley made public two- studies conducted by nasa on need for electronics research center and letters from nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Rep. George P. Miller and Sen. Clinton P. Anderson. Letters and studies pointed out that electronics difficulties comprised greatest single cause of failures in spacecraft and rockets during past five years, nasa had no highly developed skill in design of electronic components, and new center was expected to fill that need. (Loory, N.Y. Herald Trib., 7/14/63)
New York Times editorialized on the four-vote margin of the Senate defeat of Sen. Fulbright’s amendment to reduce FY 1965 Project Apollo funds by 10%.	“. . . The narrowness of the margin may be illustrated by the fact that if there had been abstentions by the Senators from even three of the states having direct economic interest in the most rapid prosecution of the moon race—say, California, Texas and Florida— Senator Fulbright’s amendment would have been adopted. . . [Senator Fulbright] lost his battle on the authorization bill, but he will have another chance when the bill actually appropriating the funds is considered. The new mood in Congress suggests that this battle may produce a decision to scrap the artificial 1970 deadline. . . {NYT, 6/30/64)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
In letter to chairmen of Senate and House space committees—Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) — NASA Administrator James E. Webb detailed findings of committees investigating failure of ranger vi lunar probe. Although the committees had not yet identified any specific cause for failure, Mr. Webb’s letter outlined five major faults in the spacecraft: 1.	The two onboard TV systems “were more complex than required and were not completely redundant. They included a number of common components in which a single failure would lead to disablement of both television systems.” 2.	“Possibilities of failure . . . increased as a. result of practices employed in the design and construction of the spacecraft. . . .” 3.	Preflight ground testing “may have obscured potentially dangerous situations which could have enhanced accidental triggering of critical control circuits.” 4.	The antenna for transmitting the lunar photographs had never been tested with the TV transmitters. 5.	“Because of reluctance to risk possible damage to the space vehicle, pre-launch systems verification was not complete. . . .” (Loory, htns, Wash. Post, 4/3/64, 8)
In keeping with NASA reorganization, subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were revised as follows: Manned Space Flight; Space Sciences and Applications; Advanced Research and Tracking; and Science, Research, and Development. (NASA lar
In an editorial, Robert Hotz, editor of Aviation Week and Space Technology, said: “There is a . . . good possibility that the national space program may get its most severe shellacking to date if some plans currently finding favor within Administration executive circles are, in fact, implemented. One of these proposals would slice the scientific programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to the bone and concentrate the NASA budget on the Apollo manned lunar landing program. Some portions of the scientific community have been making this charge without much justification for several years. If NASA does virtually abandon its highly successful scientific exploration program now, the howl from scientists will rise in a swift crescendo. It would be a major mistake to make such a drastic switch in what is now a pretty well-balanced NASA effort.” (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,11)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said Rift program should be reactivated because “mechanical difficulties which impeded early work on the nuclear propulsion reactor for space have largely been overcome.” He said success of recent nuclear reactor test for Nerva strengthened his view that NASA and AEC receive funds in the coming fiscal year “so that we can develop in a properly phased development program an operational nuclear propelled rocket.” He pointed out the need for “proper consideration to nuclear energy in planning new space missions. It is obvious that this is a necessary step and one that will require restoration of target dates for an actual flight test of a nuclear rocket system.” (SBD, 10/5/64, 179; M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
General B. A. Schriever (usaf) addressed an Air Force Association squadron in New York City on the subject of “The Air Force in the Years Ahead”: “A major consideration in long-range planning today is the rapid pace of technical progress. Since the early days of World War II we have been caught up in a massive technological explosion. One of the most important military products of this explosion is the intercontinental ballistic missile, which today forms an increasingly important part of our nation’s strategic forces. . . . “In addition to its direct contribution to our national security the Air Force icbm development program has created much of the technology, hardware and facilities that have been utilized in the nation’s space program. Most of the nation’s space shots to date have been launched by military boosters from Air Force facilities. The Titan III Standard Launch Vehicle, which is currently under development by the Air Force Systems Command, is based on the technology and experience gained in icbm development. “The Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program is the logical next step in military space development. The mol is required, to help us answer basic questions about man’s role in space, such as the length of a time a man can safely remain in orbit, his ability to make full use of his faculties in space, and his ability to perform a useful military function there. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 43-R-32)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former U.S. Senator William H. Benton (now U.S. representative to UNESCO in Paris) as saying: “If you wish, I can show you photos of military bases taken from outer space. I will show them to President Johnson if he wishes.” Mr. Benton said Premier Khrushchev suggested that U.S. could maintain adequate inspection of Cuba with satellites and therefore should discontinue its aerial reconnaissance flights over the island. (Middleton, NYT, 5/30/ 64,D
AiAA 1964 James H. Wyld Memorial Award was presented to Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) head of usaf Titan III development program, for his work on Titan III launch vehicle, aiaa 1964 Propulsion Award was presented to David Altman, United Technology Center vice president, for his contributions to science of propulsion. (A&A, 6/64,87; aiaa “Honors & Awards”)
At conclusion of Ranger management hearings by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that testimony “indicated to me that there was a serious loss of NASA liaison or NASA management. This, I think, is primarily the question that is before the subcommittee, having arrived at the conclusion . . . that the professional, technical people at Cal Tech are extremely able people. .. .” (M&R, 5/11/64,15)
John Stack, vice president and director of engineering at Republic Aviation, predicted that early in the 1970’s a traveler flying westward in supersonic transport will be able to keep up with the sun: “Whether it is a Mach 2 plane or a Mach 3 or better, you could leave London at 8 A.M., arrive in New York at 8 A.M., refuel and be in Los Angeles before 8 A.M., refuel again and be in Hawaii at 8 A.M.” (upi, NYT, 1/8/64, 13)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in hearings before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that for Project Gemini “the year 1963 was, quite frankly, one of development headaches. It was the year of development and qualification testing of Gemini’s many equipments. The program is now largely over the development hump, however, and all Gemini spacecraft and launch vehicle subsystems will be fully qualified in 1964. Significant in 1963 also were a number of hardware deliveries. ... “In 1964, three vitally important flights will be made—the third one manned and orbital. The year will be characterized by production, test, and delivery of spacecraft and launch vehicles. . . .” Questioned about return to earth and landing in Project Gemini, Dr. Mueller and George Low said that plans now called for the two-man Gemini spacecraft to land on water rather than dry land. NASA had been investigating both procedures, and paraglider for land recoveries was still in development stage. Paraglider would be “available” at about the time of the last two Gemini flights but “not necessarily scheduled.” Dr. Mueller added that water landing also would be “characteristic” for manned Apollo flights. (Testimony; Finney, NYT, 2/19/64, \9-,M&R, 2/24/64,21)
George Friedl, Jr., was appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, succeeding Earl D. Hilbum, who was recently named Deputy Associate Administrator. Since 1962 a management consultant in Santa Ana, Calif., Friedl served from 1960 to 1962 as Chairman of the Board and President of Matthews Corp. and from 1956 to 1960 as Corporate Vice President of Litton Industries, Inc., and General Manager of its Electronic Equipment Div. (NASA Announcement 64-140; nasa Release 64-157)
House Appropriations Committee cut off developmental funds for the aec’s Pluto low-flying, nuclear-powered missile, proposing the missile be mothballed until dod decided whether it needed the weapon. Having gone through nearly 10 years of development costing $196 million, Pluto was nearing the flight stage. The committee provided $1 million to mothball it. aec had requested $8 million additional funds to get the missile to operating stage. (Finney, NYT, 6/12/64, 1, 23)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting in executive session, approved the NASA Electronics Research Center report selecting the Boston area for the center. (NASA LARIII/32)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Assistant Director for Flight Operations of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, was appointed flight operations director for the second Gemini-Titan flight (GT—2), an unmanned suborbited flight scheduled for autumn. Kraft had been responsible for flight direction in Project Mercury and in the first Gemini-Titan flight. For the GT—2 mission he would replace Dr. Walter C. Williams, who resigned from NASA last March to become Vice President and General Manager, Manned Systems Div., Aerospace Corp. (nasa Release 64-185)
nasa Administrator Webb submitted a report on long-range studies in space exploration to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking. Emphasizing that “all decisions on future missions must be national, not solely NASA, decisions,” the report outlined “the areas of space mastery that require serious attention by the Nation,” surveying all categories of space exploration—including scientific, weather, and navigational satellites, manned and unmanned flights to the moon and the planets. The report said that “development and operation of manned space stations in earth orbit will be a necessary preliminary to extension of manned operations in space,” described feasibility and design studies being made for manned lunar bases. (Text, 1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 4, 27292804)
Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, opened hearings on problems of the Government-Science relationship. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.), Subcommittee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would inquire into (1) geographical distribution of Federal r&d contracts and grants, and (2) allowance of indirect costs by those performing basic research for the Government, (nasa lar III/85)
afsc issued annual report of its 1963 highlights and accomplishments. In preface summarizing and evaluating significant activities, AFSC Commander General B. A. Schriever said: . . In 1963 afsc made maj or contributions to the nation’s defense and space exploration programs. These included delivery of ballistic missiles at an average of one per day, completion of vital early warning and air defense systems, first flight of the transport aircraft which will make world wide airlift a reality, and delivery of the launch vehicles which made possible the orbital flights of Commander Schirra and Major Cooper. . . . “Cancellation of the X—20 DynaSoar program in late 1963 and assignment to the Air Force of responsibility for development of a near-earth Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) represent a shift in emphasis from reentry technology to on-orbit experiments. MOL, which is designed to provide a means of obtaining hard, factual data concerning man’s capabilities in operational space vehicles, is among afsc’s most urgent projects. . . .” (afsc Release 42-R-24; afsc 1963 Ann. Rpt.)
Vice president of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail A. Lavrentev’s disclosure that U.S.S.R. had been forced to abandon attempt to drill through the earth’s crust was reported by Howard Simons in Washington Post. Soviet drillers reached depth of about 20,000 ft. near Caspian Sea when economic and technical difficulties forced them to give up the project. Lavrentev said Soviet scientists now were “seeking more effective methods of drilling and shoring up the hole.” Project was akin to U.S. Project Mohole, directed by National Science Foundation, which would attempt to drill through sea floor to penetrate earth’s crust and sample the mantle beneath. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/21/64)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D—Ind.) proposed on the House floor that NASA establish a Midwest office, similar to its North Eastern Office and Western Operations Office. “. . . The benefits of such an office to NASA would be great and certainly it would be a step in establishing a work ing relationship between NASA and the Midwest. It would also assist NASA in exploiting the potential of the Midwest. . . . “I cannot stress enough the need for a more equitable geographic distribution of our defense and space activities. It is in the national interest that steps be taken to spread these activities throughout the country. My proposal for a NASA Midwest office would be a step in that direction.” (CR, 3/11/64,4725)
The Federal Aviation Agency (faa), following up Defense Secretary Mc; Namara’s announced deactivation of 19 airfields, called attention to the procedures by which surplus military airfields could be transferred to state or local public agencies for development as civil airports. The procedures were established by the Surplus Property Act of 1944 and its amendments. More than 600 airports had been transferred to state and local agencies under this statute since the end of World War II. (faa Release 64-108)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908, the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. “Yet, prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development of aeronautics—the force which was to dominate warfare for the next quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of American design and manufacture had entered combat operations during World War I. “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled military aircraft and 5%-ton V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster in World War II. “In the late 40’s, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demonstrated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country in 1926, and despite the memory of V—2’s raining on London during the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our exclusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb advantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our ballistic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become first in space. “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging effort? . . . “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recommended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal. “The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. . . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50) February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current nasa series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. altitude, with 11 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
Westinghouse engineer Harry L. Thurman, Deputy Director of laser program in Westinghouse’s Defense and Space Center in Baltimore, told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles that laser may someday be used to cook meals in microseconds. Citing many present and future applications of laser, Thurman said industry spent $1,000,000 on laser research in 1960 and estimated Government laser contracts alone in 1964 would amount to $27,000,000. (Roberts, Balt. Sun, 5/7/64)
D. Brainerd Holmes, vice president of Raytheon Corp. and former director of NASA manned space flight program, was interviewed in the Boston Globe. Asked if he still thought the 1970 manned lunar landing goal was realistic, he replied, “The timetable now is tougher than it was, but still possible.” (White, Boston Globe, 4/16/64, CR, 4/21/64, A2002-03)
Senator Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) said in interview that aircraft manufacturers must bear the 25% share of supersonic transport development cost, rejecting the 10% formula advocated by Eugene R. Black in recently reported study. Senator Monroney said usaf should be assigned task of developing sst’s engine and the airframe manufacturers should join together to build the sst body. He said the builder of the aircraft would “have the greatest property ever owned in aviation, a superplane good for at least 20 years. They’ve got to take some risk.” (Steif, Wash. Daily News, 2/27/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, that Scout space vehicle had not been performing with desired reliability. Ground tests and modifications were conducted, and when a test vehicle was fired the fixes were shown to be “adequate.” Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), replied that “if NASA spent half as much money on solids as it did on liquid vehicles, the solid rocket program would have 100 per cent reliability.” Discussing Surveyor lunar probe, Dr. Newell said first nine Surveyors would be reduced from 2,500 lbs. to 2,100 lbs., and it was hoped flox upper-stage Atlas-Centaur space vehicles would be available to launch the subsequent Surveyors. (SBD, 2/20/64,279)
Senator Wayne L. Morse (D.-Ore.) said on Senate floor that “the most recent developments in the strike of the Florida East Coast Railway by the 11 nonoperating railroad unions, which is now in its second year, point to the strong likelihood that we will have a major shutdown of the vital construction work at Cape Kennedy by tomorrow night. . . . “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration has just announced that, contrary to the recommendations of the President’s Board of Inquiry last October, it will permit the Florida East Coast, operating its trains with strikebreakers, to use the 18-mile spur newly constructed by the Federal Government to move freight into Cape Kennedy. . . . “This NASA decision, announced just yesterday, will, I fear, lead to new labor trouble in the Cape Kennedy area, for the FEC strike still continues. . . .” (CR, 2/5/64,2035-36)	,
In Warsaw at the luncheon of the International Academy of Astronautics (iaa), Rep. George P. Miller (D—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, expressed the intent of the U.S. to engage in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes as instituted in National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 and implemented by NASA. Prof. C. Stark Draper of mit was re-elected as president of iaa for the coming year. In Missiles and Rockets interview while in Warsaw, Rep. Miller said that “the U.S. would be happy to open up negotiations with Poland on space projects.” A possible means of such cooperation, he said, might be incorporation of Polish scientific experiments on U.S. satellites and sharing of data they would acquire, a program such as U.S. already conducts with U.K., France, and Italy, (nasa Hist.; M&R, 9/14/64,
HF—24 fighter-bombers designed by a team of 18 German aeronautical engineers and manufactured in Bangalore at the Hindustan Aircraft Co. were reportedly being delivered to the Indian government. The chief of the team designing the HF—24 was reported to be Dr. Kurt Tank, principal designer for Germany’s World War II Luftwaffe, (nana, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Wdbb, addressing Texas Technological College, said that the role of NASA was “essentially the same as that of its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Both were created in an atmosphere of chagrin and deep concern because prior to World War I and following World War II the nation had forfeited early leadership in a new field of technological opportunity—aeronautics in 1915 and space in 1957. In recommending the creation of naca in 1915, a committee of the Smithsonian Institution presented a Memorial to the Congress which began: ‘This country led in the early development of heavier-than-air machines. Today it is far behind. . . .’ “This was at the outset of a war in which, despite the fact that the Wright Brothers had first demonstrated powered flight at Kity Hawk in 1903, the United States had no aircraft design or manufacturing capability of its own. No aircraft of American design or manufacture flew in Europe during World War I, and it remained for naca, in the years which ensued, to provide the basic research and development upon which achievement of ultimate U.S. air supremacy, civil and military, was based. . . . “The advent of Sputnik I in 1957 revealed that once again, this time in space, the United States had neglected a clear opportunity for technological leadership and to overcome the deficiency, the President and the Congress turned once again to the formula which had proven so effective in aeronautics for more than 40 years. It created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration as a research and development agency charged with restoring the nation’s leadership in space by developing the rockets, the spacecraft, the facilities, the scientific knowledge, and the operational skill required. And like naca, nasa has fulfilled its mission to the extent that we have now reached a point of parity in space with the Soviet Union. . . .” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was planning to hold further hearings on the NASA proposed electronics research center, although Committee Chairman George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) had described NASA Administrator Webb’s report to the Congress as “very comprehensive.” (M&R, 2/17/64,17)
Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) stated in Portsmouth, N.H., press conference: “I don’t feel safe at all about our missiles, to tell you the truth. I wish the Defense Department could tell the American people how undependable the missiles in our silos actually are.” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announced that Senator Goldwater’s charge was “completely misleading, politically irresponsible, and damaging to the national security. There is no information, classified or otherwise, to support the false implications that our long-range missiles cannot be depended upon to accomplish their mission. . . .” (NYT, 1/10/64,1,14)
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved $764 million for advanced research and technology in NASA’s FY 1965 budget authorization, a cut of nearly $30 million from NASA’s request. The Committee restored $10 million for initiating construction of electronics research center, which the Advanced Research and Tracking Subcommittee had cut. (Wash. Post, 3/13/64)
Plans for formation of National Academy of Engineering were drawn up by committee of 25 leading engineers appointed by nas president Dr. Frederick Seitz. The committee, which would seek Congressional charter for the proposed academy, elected Dr. Augustus B. KinzeL, Union Carbide Corp.’s Vice President for Research, as chairman, (nas-nrc Release)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight began hearings on Project Ranger. Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that “the action that precipitated these hearings are letters which Mr. Webb addressed to the chairman of the two space committees” (March 31 letters to Senator Anderson and Representative Miller outlining problems with Ranger spacecraft). (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified: “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year 1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and •the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY" 1964 are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further delays- It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of exploring the moon with men within this decade. “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our program to the reductions imposed for FY 1964 indicates that this will likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is not the case. “In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in the appropriation for FY 1964, we have already sacrificed the margins and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assurance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say is that we have a ‘fighting chance.’ “To sum up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds which the President has requested, there is nothing left to sacrifice except the National goal itself. “. . . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the pace, the momentum, which the supplemental, appropriation and this authorization request will provide. “. . . Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we can do it for less than $20 billion. . . . [But] if the program is further curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which achievement of our goal is delayed. “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar exploration would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits obtained. . . (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, held hearing on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal research and development, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Earl D. Hilburn, said it was NASA’s policy to “locate and fully utilize the best technical competence available wherever it might be.” It was not NASA policy to award contracts on a geographical basis, Hilburn said, but NASA tried to “provide opportunities for and encourage all qualified industrial firms, universities and non-profit organizations to participate in our program.” He added: “NASA makes every effort to award negotiated procurements to contractors who will perform a substantial proportion of their work within labor surplus areas.” (nasa lar III/89; SBD, 5/6/64,30-31)
Dr. George M. Knauf, NASA Acting Director of Space Medicine, described before Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics the procedures which NASA had followed for coordinating with USAF in bioastronautics-space medicine programs. Upon suggestions of this Subcommittee, NASA had “made a determined effort to coordinate our program with that of the Department of Defense so that all unwarranted duplication of effort would be eliminated.” Further, to assure that the coordination would be on a continuing basis, NASA established Space Medicine Liaison Office at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks afb. nasa also obtained assurances from Army, usn, faa, and U.S. Public Health Service that NASA was not duplicating work being carried out by those agencies. (Testimony)
Following Senator Goldwater’s charge that U.S. missiles are undependable, unnamed official sources at Cape Kennedy pointed out that newest U.S. ICBm’s—Minutemen and Titan II’s—can be fired in less than a minute’s notice, have been successful in nearly 7 out of 10 test firings, partially successful in 2 out of 10, and completely unsuccessful in only 1 out of 10 firings, (upi, NYT, 1/10/64,14)
Invention of pocket-size x-ray unit, smallest in the world, was announced by iit Research Institute. Device was invented by Dr. Leonard Reiffel, vice president of the Institute, and developed by James J. Ezop, Institute physicist. Besides uses by doctors for home calls, Dr. Reiffel said the instrument would be useful in testing mechanical parts in aerospace hardware. {Chic. Trib., 4/14/64)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed Lunar Orbiter in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1963, die Lunar Orbiter was defined and a contractor selected. This program will move into high gear this year and will require $49.3 million in Fiscal Year 1965 to meet its targeted first launch in 1966. This will be a tight schedule but because of the importance of this mission in support of Apollo, every effort will be made to meet that date. . . .” Questioned by Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), Dr. Newell said NASA was thinking about adding five Lunar Orbiters to the five already approved. The proposed increase was because the Lunar Orbiter “will be a most important spacecraft not only for the support of the manned lunar landing effort, But for continuing research on the moon, on its geodetic properties, and experiments on radioactivity of the lunar surface.” Of the recently orbited echo ii passive communications satellite, Dr. Newell said: “The echo n has shown some scintillation in tfye radio wavelengths which might indicate that it has some defect in shape—perhaps a tear, maybe a dent, or something of that sort. However, it shows no such scintillation on the optical observations, which is puzzling. It remains, however, a completely adequate reflector so that whatever distortion in shape may have occurred has not interfered with its usefulness.” (Transcript)
General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan III program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are undertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite program. . . . “The next major step toward the achievement of future space capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the usefulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the environment in which they will be used. . “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and a wide range of other roles. . . (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, amplified his concern for solar radiation danger in Project Apollo manned flights in 1969-70, saying it would be a “sound” decision to delay the Apollo flight into the 1970’s to increase safety. “We don’t know all there is to know about these flares.” He repeated that adding shielding to Apollo spacecraft could impose weight penalty, added that NASA was “intensifying” its study of solar radiation. (SBD, 1/21/64, 104)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Denver Post reporters that the manufacture of the mol spacecraft would be delayed until the Defense Dept, presented an “acceptable definition” of the program. He said that President Johnson was reviewing the 1966 budget which contained $155 million for mol, but that the money would not be spent until Air Force objectives in space were defined and accepted. (Partner, Denver Post, 12/22/64)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accomplished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion nasa budget for fiscal year 1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added year of delay. (Text)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7, 1964] in which he had proposed a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacrifice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmonizing mol and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the total space effort. “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space Committee in raising questions about mol and Apollo-X was to accomplish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either project.” New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration was the letter’s implication that it would be difficult to defend the proposed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administration could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT, 12/20/64,45)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special hearings “to emphasize our interest in seeing that there is progress” in advanced propulsion systems. At opening session, representatives of four industrial firms recommended development of nuclear rocket power be accelerated and amplified. Officials testifying were George H. McLafferty, United Aircraft; William C. House, Aerojet-General; Dr. Woodrow E. Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory; and Dr. Theodore B. Taylor, General Dynamics. (SBD, 3/19/64, 433; M&R, 3/23/64, 12)	....
Speculation about why Soviet voskhod i space flight was terminated after 24 hours was proferred by experts around the world. U.S. space engineers generally indicated Soviets operated according to plan by terminating flight when they did. However, officials of other Western countries speculated voskhod i was brought down prematurely, for reasons variously given as illness among the crew, faulty radio transmitter, and improper orbit. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said, “We knew the shot was coming and we had information it would involve a week— that’s why they had the doctor along.” He suggested technical problems had caused premature ending of trip. Some sources pointed to Soviets’ own announcement the previous day, which referred to “conditions of prolonged flight.” At least one press analysis, in retrospect, said vosk-hod i was perhaps ordered back to earth because of political events in the Soviet Union—Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being removed from office by Presidium of the Communist Party Central Committee, an occurrence not made public until Oct. 15. (Ubell, N.Y. Her. Trib., 10/14/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 10/14/64; Time, 10/30/64, 37)
Senate-House Conference Committee on H.R. 11296 filed its Conference Report on the Independent Offices Appropriation Bill for FY 1965. Committee recommended 85,250,000,000 NASA appropriation, which was 850,000,000 less than Senate-passed bill had provided and 850,000,000 more than House Committee had recommended. One amendment, regarding use of funds for a manned lunar landing by U.S. and another country, was reported in disagreement. (House Rpt. 1781)
Bill to authorize appropriations to NASA for FY 1965 (S. 2446) was introduced in the Senate by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, and referred to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, (nasa lar III/9)
First meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, with representatives of 15 nations, adjourned after four days. In its session, the committee approved rules of procedure, appointed Committee Chairman (John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp vice president for international affairs), and heard progress reports on development of global commercial communications system. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 10/4/64, 74)
Senator John Stennis (D.—Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:	* “In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is straining at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are moving into a medium where relatively little is known. As we move into such a medium we are confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future, I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR, 8/5/64)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs by National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff members. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said the executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet scientific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the U.S. “must keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 30)
CAB Chairman Alan S. Boyd told House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce’s Public Health and Safety Subcommittee hearings on recent jet airliner crashes that investigation showed air turbulence no more hazardous for jets than for other airliners. (Witkin, NYT, 1/9/64, 52)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, recommended in letter to President Johnson that USAF Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs be merged. Jointly operated national space station program would best utilize U.S. resources, according to his letter which Aviation Week cited in its Dec. 7 issue. Senator Anderson argued that $1 billion could be saved over* five-year period if mol were canceled and usaf funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; nasa Archives)
NASA’s equal opportunity employment activities were commended on Senate floor by Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R.—N.Y.). Senator Javits introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA indicating specific measures taken in broad-based equal opportunity program, especially in Huntsville, Ala., and Wallops Station, Va. (CR, 1/30/64, 1328-29)
Sen. Kenneth B. Keating (R.—N.Y.) discussed in the Senate NASA’s program of research in aircraft noise abatement. Senator Keating introduced in the Congressional Record letters from NASA on its past and present noise research and said: “NASA spending on aircraft noise abatement research has increased by 628 percent since 1962, rising from $148,000 in that year to $247,000 in 1963, to $931,000 in 1964. The Space Committee . . . has tentatively approved a sum of $1.4 million for this program next year, a decision which I strongly support. . . .” (CR, 5/22/64, 11344-46)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that DOD would establish a Contract Audit Agency whose principal function would be to consolidate the activities and the 3,600 personnel of various units formerly engaged separately in auditing defense and space contracts. He estimated that this would result in a “manpower” saving of $1.8 million. (NYT, 12/13/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, discussed NASA organization, management, procurement, and programing. “The management and programing processes . . . require continuing program support, assuming reasonable accomplishment by NASA compared with our stated goals. Little that we start in one year is completed in that year. On the average, flight projects require three or more years prior to launch, while total programs have a life of ten to fifteen years. The governmental process for allocating resources can lead to a funding pattern at odds with this inherently long-duration need. We plan to accomplish major objectives over the period of a decade, but we must tailor our actual accomplishment to those resources that we receive annually. “A budget of $5,445 billion, in our estimation, provides the necessary increment of resources to support the technical program .... This is divided into $141 million, requested as our FY 1964 supplemental, and a $5,304 billion budget for FY 1965. During the preparation of this budget, we were asked by the President to make major cost reductions, in part by introducing improved management practices. This was done prior to submission of the President’s budget, and the estimated cost savings are therefore reflected in our budgetary request. . . . Within these estimates, we propose to carry out this year’s increment of NASA’s program of aeronautical research, advanced technological development, space hardware development, and space exploration.” (Testimony)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “In the field of military applications of space, our views as to the future remain unchanged. We believe that we must vigorously exploit the most likely avenues of interest, though we are not yet able to be definitive enough to describe man’s military space role adequately to project specific weapon systems. . . . “The Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program, which replaced the Dyna-Soar, is a research program aimed at giving man the opportunity to operate in space so that we may determine whether and when the manned space vehicle will be militarily significant. The mol program will provide much of the supporting knowledge for indicated future manned space systems. The timing of the program is based upon a technical decision that our primary need is to know what functions man can perform in orbit, before exploring, as completely as Dyna-Soar would have, the problems and techniques of controlled reentry. This latter will now be studied on a more limited developmental basis.” (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) announced nomination of Richard E. Horner, Senior Vice President of Northrop Corp., as aiaa president for 1965. Mr. Homer served as the first Associate Administrator of NASA (June 1959-July 1960) and before that as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development. (NYT, 10/8/64)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
House Appropriations Committee reported $46,785,867,000 military appropriations bill for FY 1965. Report said: “The committee explored in detail the question of missile dependability. . . . [The committee] is inclined to conclude with the Secretary [of Defense] that the missile force we have programmed can be depended upon to carry out its military mission under all of the conditions we can foresee.” The committee also proposed appropriation of $47 million for initiating development of a new manned bomber. (Raymond, NYT, 4/18/64,1)
House Appropriations Committee voted to approve $5.2 billion in funds for NASA in FY 1965, $245 million less than the requested $5,445 hillion ($5,304 billion for FY 1965 and $141 million FY 1964 supplemental combined by the Committee). The appropriation was contained in FY 1965 Independent Offices Appropriations Bill. (Finney, NYT, 5/19/64,1)
In Senate debate, Senator Frank Lausche (D.-Ohio) criticized NASA’s refusal to divulge to congressional space committees its documents concerning the selection of Boston as the site of the Electronic Research Center. He called NASA’s consideration of requests of other states for the installation “a mere front” hiding the fact that the decision had already been made. Senators Keating and Javits (R.-N.Y.), and Case (R.-N.J.) joined Lausche in criticizing NASA’s refusal to divulge the contents of its site selection studies. (CR, 6/2/64, 11951-52; upi, Boston Globe, 6/2/64)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Military Operations Subcommittee heard testimony from NASA witnesses regarding military communications satellites. In response to questioning, Leonard Jaffe, Director of Communications and Navigation Programs in NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) and Robert F. Garbarini, Director of Applications in ossa, said NASA had not participated in current dod-ComSatCorp negotiations for possible dod use of commercial comsat channels. ComSat Act of 1962 designated NASA as technical advisor to ComSatCorp. “We are aware of the negotiations and we expect to be informed so that we can respond under the act,” Jaffe said. (Av. Wk., 4/13/64, 32)
Missiles and Rockets published interview made last summer with Dr. Eugen Saenger, who died earlier this month. Dr. Saenger, whose World War II concept of rocket sled-launched orbital bomber was later influential in design of X—20 (Dyna Soar), had said: “I am assisting a German group within Eurospace in looking into the economics of space transportation. We are considering reusable vehicles. Dyna-Soar is assumed to be the necessary first step. . . . We consider it essential to develop an aerospace plane able to lift off from Earth, go up to orbit in the form of an airplane with wings, return like the Dyna-Soar along a glide path to Earth and land like an airplane so it can be re-used.” He said he had modified his chemical rocket-sled idea into steam-rocket sled and had developed such a rocket. “It'develops 30 tons of thrust. We ran hundreds of tests on it. We would use it to accelerate a stage to subsonic or perhaps supersonic velocity.” Dr. Saenger described Egyptian rocket development, which he had assisted until late 1961 when West German government asked him to stop: “I was asked in the spring of 1960 by the Egyptian government to give lectures at Cairo University and help the country by doing consulting work on meteorological sounding rockets. . . . “It’s a rocket only for vertical launching and liquid fuel. There is no guidance. Although in principle the rocket could be launched into an inclined flight, there is no way of knowing with accuracy where it will impact. So I can’t imagine how it would be used for military purposes/’ (M&R, 2/24/64,35-38)
Journal of the Armed Forces noted that Philip Bono, with Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co., had redeveloped Itha-cus (formerly Icarus), his study concept of a spacecraft which could move 132 tons of cargo or 1,200 troops anywhere in the world in 30 or 40 min. Ithacus was formerly conceived for launch from fixed land site, but under the new concept, there would be seaborne launch from nuclear aircraft carrier of Enterprise class. This would reduce vulnerability of the system. (Haggerty, JjArmed Forces, 7/11/64, 2) *	Council of Defense and Space Industry Associations (codsia) formed under sponsorship of Aerospace Industries Association, National Security Industrial Association, and Electronic Industries Association. Council would operate solely as coordinating and communicating vehicle between Government and industry, not as master association. (// Armed Forces, 7/11/64,15)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics approved H.R. 10456, NASA’s FY 1965 authorization bill, for $5,193,810,500, which was $110 million less than the $5,304 billion NASA had requested. Of this amount, $4,327,950,000 was for r&d; $248,335,000 was for CofF; and $617,525,500 was for Administrative Operations. (H.R. 10456; NASA lar III/48 and III/49)
Discussing U.S. supersonic transport program, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president Dudley E. Browne told American Bankers Association’s conference in Philadelphia that Lockheed had proposed “increased use of Government capability to underwrite both risk and financing, balancing this with sufficient risk assumption and financing by the contractor to justify returning him a reasonable profit. . . . “Whatever final plan is adopted, the banks will be called upon to play a significant part. “When they are, I think they will find themselves participating in a program whose magnitude they have never encountered before, a total program cost that may run into something like $8 or $10 billion, may involve loan limits for aircraft of as much as 20 years in place of the present 10 or 12, and may require supplemental participation of other financing organizations like insurance companies. . . .” (Clark, NYT, 2/2/64,90)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara testified in military posture hearings before House Committee on Armed Services, emphasizing that U.S. missile and bomber force was neither too large nor too small for today’s “damage limiting” military strategy. He pointed out that missiles are more reliable than bombers, being mechanically reliable, capable of surviving enemy attack, and able to penetrate enemy defenses in war-time, while the bombers are vulnerable to enemy attack and less likely to reach target enemy defenses. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/64)
Senators Albert Gore (D.—Tenn.) and Ralph Yarborough (D.—Tex.) said dod negotiations to lease channels from ComSatCorp were grounds for repeal of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962. Labeling the law a “giveaway” of a national resource, Senator Gore said it would be “remarkable and bizarre” for the Government to lease the system. “We will be paying for using what we have given away.” {Wash. Post, 3/26/64)
Dr. Allen E. Puckett, vice president of Hughes Aircraft, said world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird, being built for ComSatCorp, would be completed in less than one year and ready for launch a month later. Early Bird was a first step toward global telecommunications and was a commercial version of Hughes’ Syncom satellite. (Miles, L. A. Times, 7/1/64)
Aerospace Corp. confirmed rumors that Walter C. Williams, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and veteran of 24 years’ service with NASA and naca, had resigned to become vice president of Aerospace Corp. and general manager of its Manned Space Systems Div. Williams’ resignation was effective March 16.	(Houston Chron., 3/15/64; Houston Post, 3/17/64; NYT, 3/16/64, 34; msc Roundup, 4/1/64,1)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed National Capital Section of aiaa and questioned whether hazard of intense solar radiation in the 1968-70 period might postpone Project Apollo lunar flight. He pointed out that 1968-70 is period of maximum solar activity in the 11-year solar cycle, and radiation intensity might require “very substantial shielding for the Apollo capsule.” This raised question of whether heavy shielding imposes too great a weight penalty on Apollo. Citing recent scientific recommendation that there was “relatively low probability” of Apollo crew’s encountering solar flare, he questioned whether maintaining the schedule would be worth such a gamble. (Finney, NYT, 1/16/64, 1; SBD, 1/16/64, 80-81)
Findings of survey on distribution of Federal research and development funds, conducted by Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, were made public by subcommittee chairman Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.—Conn.). Said to be first definitive, Government-wide survey of this subject, survey showed that during FY 1963 California received 38.4% of the total $12 billion spent by the Government on R&D, New York received 9.2%, and Massachusetts, 4.6%. Nine states accounted for 70.9% of the total, and the 41 remaining states had less than 2.5% each. Regionally, Pacific Coast states received 41.8%; Middle Atlantic states, 15.7%; Mountain region, 8.7%; South Atlantic, 8.5%; East North Central, 6.6%; New England, 6.1%; West South Central, 5.5%; West North Central, 3.6%; and East South Central, 2.8%. (Finney, NYT, 9/11/64)
Wilbur L. Pritchard, Group Director of ComSat Systems, Aerospace Corp., before Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations, was first witness to speak out against military usage of commercial comsat system. Speaking both for himself and for Aerospace Corp., Pritchard said military requirements would be so different from commercial requirements that either the national security would be sacrificed or ComSatCorp would have to charge such high rates that there would be no savings to the Government. He proposed alternative system based on simple spin-stabilized satellite, capable of growth and expansion to accommodate increased needs of military satellite communications. (Av. Wk., 3/30/64, 15; SBD, 3/27/64,479)
House Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics issued a report on its hearings on the repeated failures in the Ranger spacecraft program. The committee concluded that NASA provided too little direction on Ranger, while jpl was too resistant to following NASA orders when they were issued. To strengthen management over JPL, the committee recommended: (1) JPL should be restricted to doing the work of a center rather than that of an industrial contractor; (2) a general manager with industrial experience should be appointed as deputy to jpl director to be in charge of complex projects such as Ranger; (3) NASA should streamline its relationship to jpl to achieve jpl responsiveness to NASA direction. (Text; Finney, NYT, 6/17/64; Wash. Post, 6/17/64)
Patent for system of space communications using x-rays has been granted to Henry R. Chope, executive vice president of Industrial Nucleonics Corp., Columbus, Ohio. The l^-lb. transmitter employed radioisotope as source of energy, (nyts, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 3/7/64)
Welcoming Dr. S. Dillon Ripley II as eighth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Senator Claiborne Pell (D.-R.I.) quoted Dr. Ripley in the Senate:
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, noted on Senate floor that 100th flight of X—15 was made yesterday. “During the past 4^ years the program has achieved a very commendable record, providing a wealth of research data for the aeronautical and space program of the United States. The past accomplishments of the X-15 program reflect a superb job of management, flight-test operation, and cooperation between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Air Force, and the Navy. . . . “The X-15 program not only has contributed to the increased confidence of designers of current high-performance aircraft but, in doing so, has focused attention on a few areas which require additional research. The planned program will be directed toward these areas. This program is providing information for the next logical step in the NASA’s flight research program, the hypersonic. “In addition . . ., the X—15 program is going to produce information of value, I believe, to the development of supersonic commercial airplanes. This data will include flight controls, materials and surface temperatures.	, “The lesson from the X—15 is that cooperation among agencies having an interest in a project pays off.” (CR, 1/29/64,1358-59)
House passed H.R. 11296 by voice vote, making FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion for NASA. Because Senate had not yet acted upon NASA authorization legislation for FY 1965, Congressional rules permitted any member to block appropriations on a point of order. Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) objected to the construction and administrative operation appropriation—because of $60 million included for electronics research center in Boston—and his objection was sustained. Then Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.—Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, objected to remainder of the NASA appropriations, thus blocking any attempts to cut them further. (NASA LAR ni/102; CR, 5/21/64,11241 ff)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center with members of the subcommittee. Rep. Teague said at msc that the manned space flight budget for FY 1965 “is a tight budget and we have a good program. No major cuts are foreseen.” (Houston Chron., 2/16/64; Houston Post, 2/16/64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that some of the byproducts of space research included cure for some types of stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month on one cubic foot of synthetic chemicals mixed with water, and “fail-safe” method of producing oxygen and food for orbiting space stations through electrolytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. (AP, Houston Chron. 2/26/64) Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) noted in the House that House Committee on Science and Astronautics had approved NASA’s report providing for electronics research center in the Boston area. “There is, in my mind, still considerable question as to the need for this center. Furthermore, there is considerable question in my mind as to whether, if such a center is needed, as opposed to developing additional electronics capability at existing centers, the criteria used for selecting Boston as the site were sound. . . .” {CR, 2/25/64, A878)
NASA submitted report to Congress on patent legislation: to House Committee on the Judiciary on H.R. 4482, to provide administration in the public interest of property rights to inventions resulting from R&D financed wholly or partially by public funds; to Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 1290, to establish uniform national policy for proprietary rights to inventions made through expenditure of public funds; and to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on S. 1444, to amend National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to waive proprietary interests of the U.S. in inventions, (nasa LAR III/19)
Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, announced agreement with National Academy of Sciences that the academy would serve as adviser to the Congress. In recent years nas, created a century ago by act of Congress, has established active working relationship with Executive Branch. Today’s agreement was to establish similar relationship with the Congress. Agreement was result of recommendation by Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development, chaired by Rep. Emilio Q. Dad-dario (D.-Conn.), which has been investigating relationship of science and Government. (Finney, NYT, 1/3/64, 9; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/3/64)
Dr. Donald F. Homig, Director of President’s Office of Science and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in its hearings on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal R&D. Dr. Hornig said Congress was cutting administrative overhead funds in Federally financed research at universities, and universities were forced to divert funds from other needs to help pay for Federally sponsored research. “Since the university has many scholarly functions to perform, while Federal funds are devoted generally to the sciences or to areas within science, it does not seem to be in the national interest to pursue a policy which diverts private funds from the education of students or the performance of scholarly research in non-scientific areas.” Dr. Homig stated Federal support of research in past decade had produced “a dispersal of university strength,” adding that Southeast and Mountain regions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years ago. (nasa lar III/102; NYT, 5/22/64,8)
At request of Senator Wayne Morse (D.-Ore.) and by unanimous consent to motion of Senator Mike Mansfield (D.—Mont.), Senate requested House to return H.R. 10456, NASA authorization bill for FY 1965. Senator Morse was requesting record vote on the bill; action of the previous day was taken without quorum call and with only voice vote. (NASA LARIII/126; CR, 6/23/64,14234-35 and 6/24/64, 14392)
At aiaa former American Airlines’ vice president William Littlewood said problems of sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction of supersonic airliner from 1970 target date to some time between 1975 and 1980. Problems of practicability and noise would have to be solved before supersonic transport became reality, Mr. Littlewood said:	(Finney, NYT, 7/2/64, 28)
In the Letters to the Editor column of the New York Times, Dr. Martin Summerfield, AIAA Vice President for Publications, took issue with sources quoted by NYT to the effect that Communist China would not be able to produce military nuclear-tipped rockets for another decade or even a generation. “As for rocket secrets,” he said, “there are none, either in theory or design. All one needs is a reading knowledge of English, French, or German, and a good collection of recent technical journals.” He said it was a serious underestimate to believe that the Chinese could not plan and execute an efficient research, development, and production program for practical missiles of medium range and a further underestimate to believe they were not close to their objective. (NYT, 11/8/64; A&A, 12/64,10)
In interview with Space Business Daily, Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) cited two factors he believed would improve NASA’s relations with House Committee on Science and Astronautics this session. First, committee members now have more knowledge of NASA’s problems and needs, having visited NASA installations and learned first-hand about NASA’s activities. Last session, he pointed out, 10 of committee’s 31 members were new to space legislation. Second, NASA was perfecting its procedures of informing Congress, improving the information flow and clarifying its justifications. (SBD, 1/16/64,80)
Dr. Eugen Saenger, eminent European space scientist, died at 58 in West Berlin. Dr. Saenger was best known for his World War II study “Rocket Propulsion of Long Range Bombers” and his post-war theoretical investigations of photon-powered rockets. He was one of the first to investigate use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel and of metal powders mixed with rocket fuels. Formerly head of Institute of Jet Propulsion Physics in Stuttgart, since last May he held chair of space flight technology at Berlin Technical Univ. Of him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said: “He didn’t see the goal of human endeavor as travel just in our planetary system. He wanted to see travel to the outer galaxies. He made very extensive studies in this field, which one day—maybe 40, 50 years from now—may be looked at very seriously.” (NYT, 2/11/64,39)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles in NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking: “. . . space vehicle research, first of all, produces knowledge that permits the accomplishment of new missions. When the knowledge resulting from research is obtained well in advance of the planning of new missions, we may proceed with confidence that the missions are feasible. For this reason, the generation of new knowledge through research should, when possible, precede developments that are beyond the current state of the art. Only when the pressures for immediate development are extremely great, as has been the case in these first years of our national space program, are we justified in violating the principle of order in favor of expediency. When we possess adequate research data, we not only are confident of the feasibility of any new missions for which we may wish to plan, but we also . . . lay the basis for improved reliability and efficiency and for reductions in the weight and cost of the space vehicles required for these missions. The truth of these principles has been demonstrated many times in the past by costly developments which either had to be abandoned for lack of the necessary technical capability to complete them -or which could only be salvaged by crash research programs. “We must, therefore, strive through research to develop new knowledge that will make new space missions possible, if and when national policy should dictate that any one of these missions must be accomplished. At the same time we must conduct the research required to ensure the success of on-going projects, and we must also strive through research to pave the way for increased reliability and efficiency of space vehicles of proven feasibility. . . (Testimony)
Edmond C. Buckley, Director of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We are requesting $274.4 million to support the Tracking and Data Acquisition program in fiscal year 1965, as compared to $307.7 million in fiscal year 1964, a decrease of eleven per cent. The reason for this decrease is that most of our .new station construction requirements in all three networks, were funded in fiscal years 1963 and 1964. . . .” Mr. Buckley pointed out that the largest single item in ot&da budget for FY 1965 was $106.9 million for equipping the manned space flight network for Projects Gemini and Apollo. (Testimony)
Four-man panel of former dod r&d directors, under auspices of Scientists and Engineers for Johnson and Humphrey, responded to Republican charges that Democratic Administration had “neglected and stifled innovation. . . .” Panel said: “We favor maintaining a substantial base of defense research and development which is essential if we are to maintain the flow of new ideas and new devices. But support of R&D does not mean the innovation of a large number of operational systems without regard for military requirements or without ample attention to technical and operational feasibility. Senator Goldwater and his advisors have ignored the fact that many of the projects cancelled during previous administrations had proved unfeasible or too expensive in relation to the military benefits they would yield. . . .” (SBD, 11/2/64,5)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Deputy Director, ddr&e), disclosed in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on Military Operations, that dod planned to use one of the Syncom communications satellites for experimental communications, probably between Hawaii and the Philippines. (Finney, NYT, 3/19/64,14)
Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) inserted in Congressional Record a Wall Street Journal article on the “declining demand” for engineers, and said: “According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current slump in demand for engineers results primarily from uncertainty about future spending on defense and space programs. Although the defense budget for the next fiscal year calls for a reduction of only $1.3 billion, the space budget is $200 million above last year’s appropriation. If this minute shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring about a severe curtailment in the demand for engineers and other skilled technicians, it makes one wonder what will happen to our economy when there is more than a token cutback in defense outlays....” (CR, 2/27/64,3666-67)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power, discussed nuclear rockets before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	. . our major effort is in the reactor area. It includes analysis and experimental work on all of the components and subsystems of our reactors with sufficient evaluation and testing to give the greatest possible confidence in the successful operation of the graphite reactors that will form the basis for the first nuclear rocket engines to be developed in the world. We are, however, not overlooking the potential advantages provided by the metallic tungsten reactors. We are, therefore, conducting a program to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of these systems. “Our nerva engine and non-nuclear component technology work has made substantial progress in those difficult areas of engine technology that require extension of presently available information so that system development can eventually be undertaken rapidly and with a high degree of confidence. “Sufficient facilities are available or are being constructed for the conduct of our presently planned program. Tests to be conducted in our reactor facilities during this year should clearly demonstrate the success of the solutions we have designed to avoid the mechanical problems that have been encountered in the past and should demonstrate the operating capabilities of graphite reactors. Our advanced concept work is fundamental in nature; it is long term; but it is being pursued because of the high, theoretical performance potential of these advanced ideas for nuclear rocketry. “Out of this over-all nuclear rocket program, I am convinced, will come a new family of rockets that will open the way to more extensive space travel than is possible with the chemical combustion rocket systems upon which we are now completely dependent. Although new in capability, the nuclear rockets we are now developing are logical follow-ons to the chemical rocket systems and, therefore, do not involve basically new test, development, and system technology or scientific breakthroughs. These nuclear rocket developments must be actively pursued to ensure that this country is not prevented from undertaking missions involving higher velocities, energies, and payloads than are required for the early Apollo manned lunar landing mission.” (Testimony)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) discussed the work of his research and development subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. One current activity: “The National Academy of Sciences is undertaking several studies for us through a 14-man committee headed by Dr. George Kistiakowsky, science advisor to former President Eisenhower. It will look into such questions as what is the level of basic research that should be supported Federally to maintain the nation’s security, economy and industrial strength. . . .” (M&R, 8/10/64, 26)
U.S. News and World Report commented on President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory: “President Johnson has now committed this country to a vital and far-reaching race against Russia for military supremacy in space. “It is a strategic decision regarded as important as any since World War II. “The race actually has started. At this point it is largely silent and secret. But both powers are known to be conducting military missions with unmanned satellites, and results are described as striking and enormous. “Next, both countries will make major strategic moves by putting up space stations with military crews. Beyond that, plans are being readied for armadas of orbiting platforms and fleets of space planes— and, in case of hostilities, possible confrontation in space. “The U.S. goal: to make certain Russia is denied control of space that might enable it to tip the balance of power here on earth. . . .”	(U.S. News, 9/13/65, 10)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
Walter R. Dornberger, vice president in charge of research for Rell Aerosystem Co., wrote in the company’s bimonthly magazine, Rendezvous, the United States was spending too much for space exploration. As a start to cutting costs, Dornberger proposed developing space boosters that could be recovered and reused, (ap, Milwaukee ].,
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address before American Nuclear Society-Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington, D.C.: “If anyone doubts the impact that science and technology have had on society, in just the past 20 years, he need look only at the new industries employing many thousands of people which have come into existence during that time—industries based solely on the evolution of new products and services. These include—and i mention only a few —television, the computer, the jet engine and nuclear energy. “Some of these industries have sprung from the application of a single invention or chain of scientific thoughts. “During these past 20 years, too, we have seen in the United States the creation of a constructive partnership unknown in our previous history—a partnership of government, university, management, labor, science and citizen—a partnership devoted to maximum development of science and technology not for the narrow interest of any single group, but for the common good. “To witness the space launchings at Cape Kennedy, as I have, is to see this partnership in action. . . .” Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said; “As chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, I am particularly concerned with the atom’s work in space. “In 1961 our first operating space radioisotopic power source was orbited. And in 1965 our first space reactor was operated in orbit. “The atom will soon become a major power source for our space program—an auxiliary source for spacecraft and life support systems and a necessary source of propulsion for extended space exploration. “I can, in fact, foresee the time when our space efforts will be able to continue only through use of rocket and nuclear power units transported and assembled in space. . . .” (Text)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Independent Offices, paid tribute to NASA on the floor of the House: “. . . too much credit cannot be given the top management of the Space Agency . . . “To this group of distinguished gentlemen, must go the credit of spending some $17 billion without the slightest breath of scandal attached to the many thousands of transactions.” (CR, 6/11/65, 12829)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded two parallel one-year contracts to two firms to study feasibility of developing a drill for probing some 100 ft. below the moon’s surface: Northrop Space Laboratories received $509,992; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Defense and Space Center, $570,624. Astronauts on post-Apollo lunar missions would use the drill as a geological research tool to bore holes for geophysical measurements, (msfc Release 65-194)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was one of four persons named honorary chairmen of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program at Clark Univ. The other three were Mrs. Robert H. Goddard; Dr. Charles G. Abbot, former fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; and Mr. John Jeppson, executive vice president of the Norton Co. and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Clark Univ. Mr. J. L. Atwood, president of North American Aviation, was named general chairman of the Library program. (Goddard, 7/65)
Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) expressed concern on the floor of the Senate about advances in Soviet strategic weaponry and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which compared Soviet and American development of large solid rocket motors: “First, the development of rockets has received a high priority continuously in the Soviet Union for 20 years, since the end of World War II. “Second, the Soviet effort has been broadly based and produced several generations of vehicles with increasing performance capability. “Third, solid-propellant rocketry is playing a major role in current Soviet operations and in their future plans. “Fourth, U.S. intelligence has suffered a major failure if the Soviet missiles in the May 9 parade were not fake. “An early review of U.S. intelligence and military planning operations by both the Congress and the administration definitely is in order if the Soviets are operating large solid rockets.” {CR, 7/8/65, 15359-61)	"
Department of Defense should, without further delay, commence full-scale development of a manned orbital laboratory (Mol) project, recommended a report by the Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Committee on Government Operations. The report also suggested that DOD “pursue a more realistic security policy in its program,” and that “careful and intensive consideration be given to achieving future economies in space operations with greater standardization of systems and subsystems and through such techniques as recoverable and reusable boosters and spacecraft.” Moreover, “NASA and DOD [should] use each other’s facilities and resources to the greatest possible extent.” (Text)
The National Commission on Technology, Automation and Economic Progress, established by law in 1964 to find out what technological change was doing to the economic and social fabric of the country and how to obtain its maximum benefits with the least possible harm, met for the first time with Vice President Hubert Humphrey. The Commission would meet again Feb. 18-19 to determine the areas to be explored intensively and possibly to select outside personnel to help with basic research in these studies. (NYT, 1/30/65, 6)
Dr. Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, appeared before the House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations, in testimony supporting DOD’s request for $6,709 billion new obligational authority for FY 1966 research, development, testing, and evaluation. He discussed the Vela nuclear detection satellites, orbiting in nearly circular orbits. “All four satellites remain in operation, providing data on the radiation background and the operation of detectors in space.” He outlined the aacb’s 1964 launch vehicle study, which “was intended to identify overall effects and provide a data base for, rather than to resolve, individual user program booster selections or nearterm booster improvement questions.” The study “confirmed earlier estimates” of launch vehicle needs for the near future. [See Jan. 26, Jan. 27] (DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 1—30)
Rep. Westen E. Vivian (D-Mich.) told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that he intended to request adoption of a policy to award one half of all NASA Phase 1A contracts to companies in areas presently receiving less than one half of NASA business. Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said that although fiscal expedience demanded that procurement contracts go to industralized areas, geographic distribution should be seriously considered in the allocation of research and development funds. He said the Subcommittee would consider Vivian’s proposal. (Transcript, 3/9/65)
Summary report of NASA’s Future Programs Task Group, directed by Francis B. Smith of LaRC, was sent by NASA Administrator James E. Webb to the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Report presented “the results of studies made during 1964 to answer inquiries made by President Johnson as to criteria and priorities for space missions to follow those now approved for the decade of the 1960’s. . . It examined (1) conditions and constraints for future planning, (2) major capabilities existing and under development, (3) intermediate missions, and (4) long-range aeronautical and space developments. Report concluded: “. . . The details of these new missions such as specific spacecraft designs and exact mission plans will, of course, be the subject of continued study. . . . Continued space exploration will be an evolutionary process in which the next step is based largely on what was learned from the experience of preceding research and flight missions. The pace at which these new programs will be carried out will necessarily depend upon many other factors, such as the allocation of budgetary and manpower resources and the changing National needs of the future. “This study has not revealed any single area of space development which appears to require an overriding emphasis or a crash effort. Rather, it appears that a continued balanced program, steadily pursuing continued advancement in aeronautics, space sciences, manned space flight, and lunar and planetary exploration, adequately supported by a broad basic research and technology development program, still represents the wisest course. Further, it is believed that such a balanced program will not impose unreasonably large demands upon the Nation’s resources and that such a program will lead to a preeminent role in aeronautics and space.” (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings [Part 3], Senate Comm, on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, 1015-1102)
Writing about the visit of President Johnson and Vice President Humphrey to NASA Hq. for a briefing on NASA programs on Feb. 25, Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in an article for the San Diego Union: “1 was particularly pleased at the deserved tribute the President paid Jim Webb and Hugh Dryden. I have known them both since 1937. They are extremely modest men. They avoid personal publicity. They are not jealous of subordinates, but prefer that the publicity and credit for NASA successes carry the pictures and headline the names of those members of the NASA team most directly responsible. For this reason they can attract and hold able people. . . . “While we are giving out the space medals, it is only fair to say that without the vision and tenacity of Lyndon Johnson, the first man on the moon could not be an American. “To have man’s most dramatic and significant adventure become the achievement of a slave state instead of a free society would be intolerable.” (Eaker, cns, San Diego Union, 3/14/65)
ComSatCorp’s early bird i communications satellite successfully received, amplified, and returned a television signal to Andover, Me., ground station in an unscheduled communications test. ComSatCorp Vice President Siegfried H. Reiger said that “the picture quality of the test pattern was excellent.” (Clark, NYT, 4/8/65; ap, Balt. Sun. 4/8/65)	'
The Soviet Union was considering sending weather observers into outer space in manned meteorological satellites, Prof. K. I. Kondratief, Univ. of Leningrad, said at a meeting in Geneva of the World Meteorological Organization’s Scientific Advisory Committee. (NYT, 2/21/65, 24) February 21: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks taped for the nbc-tv program, “The Sunday Show,” that the U.S. would extend its national strength into the space dimension. “We expect to explore the moon, not just to photograph it or visit it,” he said. “We plan to explore and chart the planets as well. We shall expand our earth laboratories into space laboratories.” Mr. Humphrey praised the Nation’s space effort, saying that such activities had encouraged economic development, stimulated new products and processes, and furthered the cause of peace. This was Mr. Humphrey’s first public statement on the space program as Vice President, (nbc-tv)
Panel on Science and Technology of the House Committee on Science and Technology reported on its sixth meeting (aeronautics), Jan. 26-27. Report was a comprehensive summary of views by the Committee and Panel members and the more than 150 scientists and engineers attending as representatives of Government, industry, and the scientific and academic communities. In its general conclusion, report stated three objectives for future improvement of U.S. civil aeronautics: “Insure that our economy continued to have the best air transportation system to give it a continuing advantage in world competition”; “Insure that U.S. aeronautical development is immediately responsive to the demand, and sufficiently great to continue leadership in the domestic and world markets”; and “Maintain recognized world leadership in technical matters to insure a favorable image and stature of the U.S. technological competence in aeronautical development.” Some of its general observations on the future of aeronautics: “There is a need for more centralized direction, control, and procedure . . . [of the] widely dispersed . . . technical competence and expertise behind aeronautical development in the United States. . . . “The aircraft industry in general is willing to contribute to any program designed to further aviation advancement, but the degree of their contribution will depend upon the extent of Government support, and the availability of a market. The extent is also dictated by the extent of their earnings on marketable products for which the Government is usually the principal customer. “There are indications that an insufficient amount of research effort is being put forth in the hypersonic regime of the flight spectrum, particularly in the field of propulsion. “The aeronautical research and development capability of NASA is not being used to its maximum capacity.” (House Rpt. 227, 32-34)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries of America, Inc., addressed the Economic Club of Detroit: “. . . the aerospace industry of today does indeed represent a truly unique phenomenon in industrial history in almost all of its aspects. ... it is that industry which places at the disposal of the nation—both its public and its private sectors—the capacity to manage the research, development and production of the most technologically advanced product that is possible—for whatever purpose desired. . . it is essential that we all understand the principal factors—■ historical, present and future—that have produced and will continue to produce this uniqueness. “First, the genesis and evolution of what is today’s aerospace industry is a direct product of the nation’s post-World War II history and is inextricably linked thereto. . . . World War II unleashed for the world, but particularly for the United States, two revolutions which have been gaining momentum ever since. The first of these was a form of economic revolution which saw the economy of the United States surge into new dimensions. The second was a scientific/ technological revolution which saw all that had gone before in man’s scientific history fade into a pale background. . . . “World War II itself provided an extreme example of the explosive expansibility of the industrial base of the United States. This expanded industrial base remained after the war to serve as a foundation for a general economic upsurge. “. . . the aerospace industry has become and remains, in a very real sense, an instrument of national policy, not only in terms of the hardware directly provided the government, but also as it underpins the economic/technological advances in the private sector of our economy. ...” Discussing the future of the industry, Harr noted that “the size and viability of this industry is not tied to defense and space programs, important as these have been and will continue to be in shaping its destiny. It is tied, rather, to the total technological progress of the nation, meaning the application of advanced technology to whatever purposes may be desired. Programs now well underway in such diverse fields as air freight, urban transportation, desalination, oceanography, 2000-mph aircraft and hundreds of others serve to illustrate this fact. . . .” (Text)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
President Lyndon B. Johnson is briefed on the Mariner mission at nasa Headquarters. Left to right, James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, President Johnson, Vice President Hubert 1L Humphrey, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. world were “deep in your debt.'’ (NASA Announcement 65-43; Simons, Wash, Post, 2'26 65; Seldstedt. Balt. Sun. 2* 26 65: Young. Chic. Trib., 2/26/65: Mohr, NYT, 2/26/65, 10) February 25; usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite pavload. I U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 190S, 135)	'	_	_
On the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, commented on the successful ranger VIII spacecraft as “yet another major American space achievement. For the second time in less than a year a Ranger spacecraft has successfully taken closeup pictures of the lunar surface and returned them to earth from a distance of a quarter of a million miles. . . .” (nasa lar iv/33-35)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of nasa Space Vehicle Research and Technical Div., told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that lightweight, flexible plastic baffles had proved more efficient for controlling fuel “sloshing” in launch vehicle’s propellant tanks than heavy metal baffles. He said plastic baffles could also serve to prevent leakage of propellant gas used in fuel-pumping during weightlessness. (Text; NASA Auth. Hearings, 133-50)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara told the House Appropriations Committee that about $1.2 billion—80 per cent of the allocated money—had been wasted on the abortive b-70 bomber project, Howard Margolis reported in the Washington Post. The question of how much of the money spent was wasted arose when McNamara was asked whether knowledge from the b-70 work would be valuable to other military and civilian projects. McNamara suggested that at least 80 per cent of the money had been wasted, Margolis said. McNamara’s general view had been that substantial “waste” of this sort was unavoidable in the defense program since it was rarely possible to know how valuable a development project would be before large sums had been spent. Margolis added that McNamara suggested minimizing such waste by insisting on good evidence of probable value before allocating large expenditures and, even then, by limiting spending as much as possible until the value of a project was proven. (Margolis, Wash. Post, 5/15/65)
In a Christian Science Monitor editorial, Leonard Schwartz posed the problem of “how the capability represented by manned orbiting space stations can be used to enhance national security and promote peaceful-scientific uses of outer space.” Schwartz suggested formation of an inspection agency—International Space Patrol—to neutralize military potential represented by manned space stations and to ensure usage of outer space for peaceful purposes only. He pointed out that Vice President Humphrey, one of the first proponents of an arms control agency and an international space agency, was now Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, on which sat the Secretaries of Defense and State and administrators of AEC and NASA. This position provided him with “an appropriate vantage to supervise their arms control capabilities in order to reach a national decision which would reconcile control with security and scientific use of outer space.” (CSM, 3/2/65, 4)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey wrote to Cape Kennedy technician Richard Tennis: “I understand that you are the gentleman who corrected the problem of the oxidizer leak on the Gemini-Titan [GT-3]. “I simply wanted to express to you the thanks of all of us here in Washington who have watched so carefully the success of this program. It is the excellent and quick efforts of people like yourself that have made this program so successful.” ( ksc Spaceport News, 4/15/65, 2)
NASA’s actions in releasing foreign satellite information were criticized in a report by the House Committee on Government Operations, based on study by its Foreign Operations and Government Information Subcommittee. Committee stated NASA had deleted from its biweekly Satellite Situation Report certain Soviet launches because they were designated as secret information by Norad. “nasa has not once challenged these security classifications, blindly accepting the military decision. . . .” Compounding the problem, NASA had “publicized the facts about Soviet failures [Sept. 15, 1962, letter from Administrator Webb to Senate and House space committees] after those facts had been carefully deleted from its routine report of satellite information. “. . . NASA has ignored two clear requirements of law—the requirement for civilian control over nonmilitary space activities and the requirement for the fullest possible flow of public information. By yielding, automatically, to the military judgment on what the American people shall know about Soviet space activities, NASA fails to implement its legal mandate. By playing an on-again, off-again secrecy game, NASA tends to confuse the American public. . . . “Therefore, the committee recommends that, in every possible instance consistent with the dictates of national security, NASA exercise its right to challenge military-imposed restrictions by requiring justification and, thus, carry out the mandate to keep the American people informed. . . .” (House Rpt. 197)
President Johnson visited nasa Headquarters, accompanied by Vice President Humphrey, for a briefing on the mariner iv project and to congratulate and express appreciation to NASA officials and members of the Mariner and Ranger project team. The President recalled that he had sponsored legislation in 1958 that had created NASA: “I think it is really incredible that we have come so far. It was only seven years ago this month that we were deliberating and debating and still seeking to come to grips with the realities of the space age.” Mr. Johnson told NASA officials that the people of America and the whole
Strongly urging greater emphasis on U.S. aeronautics and aviation than now exists. Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D—Okla.), Chairman of Senate Aviation Sub-committee, addressed Air Force Association in Dallas, Tex. “I am afraid some people, and I mean people of high stature and great influence, seem bent on relegating aeronautics to a secondary position. This I think is a crucial mistake. In aeronautics we stand on the threshold of a boundless upsurge which may well dwarf what has been achieved by aviation over the past 61 years. “Also, the economic productivity of aeronautics makes dollars . . . and sense. It means money in the bank, or rather gold in Fort Knox. On the other hand, I don’t know of any scheme . . . and I doubt that one will emerge within this century . . . for fighting the balance of payments deficit in outer space. “There simply are no dollars floating around between here and the moon. For the time being, outer space commerce just doesn’t seem to be in the cards. And as long as this is the situation, I don’t think we should banish aeronautics to the back seat ... or have a NASA budget which is better than 08 percent spacecraft and less than 2 percent aircraft. And this in spite of the fact that NASA and its forerunner, naca, were ostensibly founded to serve aeronautics! “I am not saying this to downgrade space, but to suggest that we strike a balance based on how the national interest and economy are served best. . . . This widening disparity between NASA’s space and aeronautical efforts . . . this wall flower treatment of the airplane ... is a reckless gamble, economically, politically and militarily, that will come back to haunt us in the future. My criticism, by the way, is not directed at the level of competence in that agency but at the lack of programming of aeronautical goals and the failure to mobilize this nation’s brain power on behalf of aviation. It seems to me the real deficiency is that the well qualified aeronautical talent in NASA js so far down in the hierarchy that these men rarely ever get involved in the decision making. It’s crystal clear that other nations, the Russians included, have cut this Gordian knot and are rapidly filling the vacuum which we so invitingly created for them. . . .” (Text; ap, NYT, 7/2/65)
Sen. Russell B. Long (D-La.) introduced a bill (S. 1899) in the Senate “to prescribe a national policy with respect to the acquisition, disposition, and use of proprietary rights in inventions made, and in scientific and technical information obtained, through the expenditure of public funds.” Senator Long said in introducing the bill: “New discoveries derived from research supported by public funds belong to the people and constitute a part of the public domain to which all citizens should have access on terms of equality.” (CR, 5/4/65, 9023-9027)
In a White House ceremony, President Johnson conferred Exceptional Service Medals on GEMINI V Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Charles Berry, chief surgeon for the astronauts. The President announced that military promotions for the astronauts would be submitted to the Senate immediately. (Richard, Wash. Post, 9/15/65, A3) Following the ceremony, Vice President Hubert Humphrey accompanied the astronauts, their families, and Dr. Berry to the National Academy of Sciences. Humphrey told the Academy: “The achievements of our astronauts are not just the achievements of two men. They are the achievements of family, country and of a society. . . . “This is the best example of cooperation between Government and industry, between public and private, that I know in this nation, and might I add, that it is an example that should be emulated by many others in many other endeavors in this country. “But our space program ... is more than national. It would be well enough if it were only national, but it is more than that. It is truly international. And I want ... to stress our space program’s potential as an arm of our foreign policy, of our international relations, and particularly of our peace policy, because this Government has but one objective in the world: a just, honorable and enduring peace. . . .” Astronaut Cooper summarized some of the things that man could do in space: “. . . we again showed that man can do a great deal of geological observations while in space. ... I think it is very significant that although you pass across some [geological formations] rather rapidly you still are able to . . . observe them and you are very capable of photographing them in great detail. “. . . man is very capable of doing oceanographic observations. We have noted that you can detect a great deal of detail as to the depths of water, as to the currents of running water, and even to wind patterns that run on the waters, the wave patterns caused by the wind. “. . . man could do a great deal of weather observations, both in real time and photographically. And we . . . were able to pinpoint one tropical storm in between some of the planned observations, and apparently that was very accurate pinpointing of its position. “We determined in our discussions later with the Weather Bureau people, that for future use ... we could get much greater accuracy even on pinpointing these by the use of our platform combination and taking angles to a great deal more accuracy, rather than just estimations of the angular distance and locations. “We found that you could do a great deal of visual observations of the phenomena around the earth ... we picked up ship wakes, several hundred miles away of . . . the contrast of the white wake against the blue background in very clear weather areas. . . .” Conrad revealed that photographs taken during the Gemini v mission at the request of the Mexican government, had located volcanoes in Mexico that “the Mexicans didn’t know they had. . . .” He also said: “I think a system that has been left out and nobody has talked about is our environmental control system, which performed in a most outstanding manner for eight days. We had probably the nicest, freshest air that anybody could want to breathe, and we had an unusual first in the space business: most environmental control systems had been loaded down and pilot after pilot came back and said they were too warm, and we fought and fought it, and at McDonnell, to have a little change made because of some of the problems of heat exchange between the inlet and outlet pipes. It turned out that we were too cold. “With two tubes running, we were probably the first ones to shut the cabin heat exchanger down and run everything as hot as we could get it in there. We were just right. And the thing that most surprised us on opening the hatch on landing, we couldn’t tell the difference between inside and out, and that is a monumental job for that small system.” Dr. Berry concluded the program by presenting a review of the medical data received from the gemini v mission. The astronauts’ party then proceeded to the Capitol where Vice President Humphrey presented them to the Senate and then to the House. Cooper told the House: “We set out with our prime objective on Gemini 5 to fly 8 days. We were to fly this 8 days primarily to show that man, with all the various equipment on board, and the machines, could safely and very functionally do this 8-day mission with no adverse effects. We were entirely successful in this. . . .” Conrad explained: “Gemini 5 was a significant advance in the whole program in that we flew the first all-out spacecraft. We would not have been able to go without the fuel cells for 8 days. This was the first time they were flown. We had the first radars from which we got some very excellent data to enable the GT-6 to continue with their present rendezvous plans. It was the first time that the cryogenic storage of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been run that long in space. . . .” Dr. Berry told the Senate: “We are conducting a program such as this [Gemini program] ... to make man a vital part of such a research effort and to show the facility that man has to gain scientific information using vehicles such as we are able to build in this country. . . . “I think I can report, so far as information has been obtained in this country to date and at the moment, that we are the only ones who have that sort of information for the duration of which we are speaking. We can confidently say that man has been able to perform very well up to 4 days in a weightless state earlier, and on this mission 8 days in a weightless state. He has then been able to re-adapt back to a 1-G environment. We have living proof of that.” (Texts; CR, 9/14/65, 22924-22927; nas-nrc News Report, 9/65, 1-2)
Commenting on Dr. Warren Weaver’s Nov. 29 statement to U.S. News and World Report questioning the wisdom of spending $30 billion to get an American to the moon by 1970, the Wall Street Journal said: “Now Dr. Weaver is not against going to the moon . . . what he is against is the hell-for-leather way the moon program is being whipped along . . . where the emphasis rightly should fall is on Dr. Weaver’s assertion that ‘the great ideas that develop within the body of science —strange and improbable as this sounds—arise from curiosity and not from urgency,’ and that the moon program has caused a massive diversion of scientists and engineers from possibly more productive fields. . . .” (WSJ, 12/8/65, 16) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Conference, warned of the possible consequences of reduction in the NASA budget request for FY 1967:	. . history should have taught us that new space capabilities, in which we have made a considerable investment, must be used or their benefits will be lost.” Webb said history should have taught us also “that plans for the future should not be drawn by a timid hand.” He quoted the late Dr. Hugh Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, as saying “the present gap in manned flight activity [between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.] is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960 until May 1961.” (Text; LRC Release 65-88)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
In an address at Duke University, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said: “How fortunate we are to live in this dramatic and creative period of change, of challenge, of opportunity. How great is our responsibility to achieve excellence of mind and spirit to do the tasks that must be done. “I appeal, therefore, to you the generation of 1965. “Make no little plans. “Have not little dreams. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of your mother and father. “Do not set your standards and goals by those of this time. “Challenge the impossible. Do what cannot be done. “Thirty years ago it was ‘Brother, can you spare a dime.’ “Today we reach the stars.” (Text, CR, 4/26/65, 8179-80)
House Rules Committee deferred bill to study conversion to the metric system, proposed by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, (ap, NYT, 9/10/65, 41)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey urged establishment of research and experimental institutions in underdeveloped nations that would enable young scientists and technologists there to develop their own countries. “To train people without giving them the opportunity to put their training to full use can only result in frustration at home or migration abroad,” he said. The Vice President, speaking at a dinner given in New York by the American Committee for the Weizman Institute of Science, emphasized that measures must be taken “to make these talented people actually want to work in their own countries, by opening up to them careers which are genuinely and deeply rewarding in professional advancement and service to their people.” (ATT, 12/7/65, 10)
The Soviet Union’s apparent effort to penetrate the world commercial aircraft market was reported by Evert Clark in the New York Times. He said the U.S.S.R. had formed a new organization called Aviaexport to direct commercial sales. It was expected to pick satellite countries as its first target, then so-called “dependent” nations, and eventually the Western countries. Showing of the Antonov 22 700-passenger aircraft and a model of a supersonic airliner scheduled to begin test flights in 1968 had enabled the Soviet Union to dominate the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) until the arrival of Vice President Humphrey and Astronauts White and McDivitt. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/65, 30)' During week of July 4: Ambassador Tran Thien Khiem, South Viet Nam, visited NASA Langley Research Center. (Langley Researcher, 7/16/65, 8)
Eighty per cent of the $4 million needed to construct new bridges, modernizing the access road complex to Cape Kennedy, would be contributed by the Federal Government. The announcement was made jointly by Vice President Hubert Humphrey, Florida Governor Haydon Burns, and Florida Senators George Smathers and Spessard Holland. NASA and USAF would divide the $3.2 million Federal share and the state of Florida would provide $.8 million. (Cocoa Tribune, 8/24/65; KSC Spaceport News, 8/26/65, 1)
The suggestion that the Gemini vu/vi endurance-rendezvous mission scheduled by NASA for Dec. 4-13 might be a “space spectacular for spectators sake,” was firmly rejected by Rep. George P. Miller (D— Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at an MSC press conference. Miller said he believed the U.S. would land a man on the moon by 1970 and emphasized that information from the Gemini vu/vi mission would further the orderly exploration of outer space “for this country and the world.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/65)
In commemoration of Goddard Day, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator and other Washington officials telephoned greetings via relay II to Dr. Goddard’s widow in Worcester, Mass. The call had been arranged by Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Other events commemorating Goddard Day: At NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, a film on Dr. Goddard’s life and work was premiered; at NASA Manned Space Flight Center, Astronaut Scott Carpenter spoke to several hundred science students about Dr. Goddard and rocketry; at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, special recognition was shown, and at Smithsonian Air and Space Museum an original Goddard rocket was displayed. (NASA Release 65-87)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight issued a report on investigation of Project Surveyor
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, George Friedl, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, said: “NASA spends about 93 percent of its dollars on contracts with industry, universities and private research organizations. These procurements during fiscal year 1964 amounted to $4.6 billion. Approximately 96 percent of this amount or $4.4 billion was awarded by our field installations in accordance with program and project research and development requirements. NASA contracts support our in-house research and development activities and establish our coupling with industry and the private scientific community. . . Reporting on contract administration, Mr. Friedl testified:	“The cost reimbursement contract has been the basic instrument for procuring research and development because the Government has had to risk the uncertainties and assume the high cost involved. No other type of contract provides the Government and the contractor the latitude and flexibility needed to relate scientific and technical requirements, schedules and use of resources to mission objectives. By adding incentive provisions pertaining to time, quality and cost to this type of contract, it is our intention to offset some of its deficiencies and strengthen the purpose of the Government-contractor relationship. “nasa has made a concerted effort to introduce suitable incentive arrangements in our cost reimbursement type contracts whenever practicable. In each case, the objective is to encourage the contractor to manage better and improve his performance; adhere to schedules; and hold down costs. “As a consequence of our incentive contracting drive, there has been a marked increase in this activity in the past 4 Vi years. In fiscal year 1961 we had one contract worth about $100,000. By December 31, 1964, we had awarded 75 contracts with a target value of over $751 million, 7 of these have been completed leaving 68 contracts totalling over $724 million currently being administered. . . . “In view of the undesirable features of letter contracts, NASA Headquarters began a concerted effort, early in 1963, to curtail the issuance of new letter contracts and to assure the timely definitization of all outstanding letter contracts. Headquarters issued instructions to all centers directing program and project managers to plan ahead and allow adequate lead time for the initial negotiation of definitive contracts. ... At the end of January only 3 letter contracts having a total value of $4 million were outstanding. We expect that these contracts will be definitized in March 1965.” Mr. Friedl said that NASA had “structured a sound practicable managerial technique to direct the planning, approval and execution of . . . future programs. We believe that adoption of what we have termed ‘phased project planning’ will materially assist us in achieving this goal. “Phased project planning represents an orderly sequential progression in the execution of NASA major projects. It provides for formulating proposed work goals and missions, and allows for decisions, reappraisal points for management consideration to advance or replan such proposals, as well as the resources to implement them. “Specifically, phased project planning provides for four distinct phases as follows: “Phase A Conceptual/Feasibility Phase . . . “Phase B Preliminary Definition Phase . . . “Phase C Final Definition . . . and Phase ^ Development/Operation. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 269-88)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, Edmond C. Buckley, Director of nasa’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, said that during 1965, data processing facilities would handle 70,000,000 data points per day and that there would be an increase to 200,000,000 data points per day in 1966. He continued: “In fiscal year 1966, effort under this category will be directed toward developing and evaluating techniques for building up the existing telemetry data reduction capability to match the increasing requirements. In order to reduce this tremendous amount of data in an efficient and reliable manner, new techniques must be evaluated for obtaining this additional capability. “The heart of this prototype system is the Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction System (Stars). The development program for this system was initiated in prior years and is planned to continue through fiscal year 1968. The Stars equipment presently includes automatic editing, decommutation, and calibration of the telemetry data. Functions in addition to these will be included in the prototype equipment as the developmental subsystems become available. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 1-87)
Civil Aeronautics Board request for $2.1 million in subsidies for commercial helicopter lines in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles, to be paid during July-December period, was denied by House Appropriations Committee. {WSJ, 5/7/65, 2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb appeared before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices, in support of the $5.26 billion NASA appropriation requested by President Johnson for fy 1966. He said:	“The budget submitted to the Congress by the President provides for activities that are essential to continuing the progress that we have made towards our goal of preeminence in space sciences, application satellites, manned space flight, and advanced research and technological development necessary for aircraft improvements and for future space activities. It does not provide for everything that we could do or would like to do. In fact, it has been necessary within the strict budget requirements imposed by the President that certain desirable project activities started in previous years be omitted from the 1966 budget. . . . “Within the confines of this limited budget, the President has provided the funds necessary to preserve the opportunity that we still believe we have to accomplish a manned lunar landing and exploration within this decade. The margin for insurance that had been built into our original program plan has largely disappeared. However, we now estimate this may be possible if we can maintain our current successful development efforts and make the all-up systems testing procedure work on the very large Saturn V-Apollo combination to launch men toward the Moon on earlier flights than we had originally planned. There is, therefore, still an opportunity to accomplish this national space objective within the time specified. Our work to date gives us somewhat more confidence than we had a year ago that we can still achieve the objectives that were planned in 1961 in spite of a limit on resources that will not fund all the flights planned at that time. It is important, however, to keep in mind that in Gemini we are just now in a position to find out by flight experiments how men can live, work, remain efficient, and make important contributions in space for extended periods. . . .” (Testimony; Incl. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 846-96)
U.S. should build a supersonic transport regardless of the fate of the Concorde or any other country’s effort because “this is the next technological step in air transportation,” faa Administrator William F. McKee told the House Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices requesting $140 million for the project for FY 1966, according to Aviation Week and Space Technology. The House subcommittee responded by approving the money request. Acting Chairman Joe L. Evins (D-Tenn.) said: “Once we have made a basic decision to go forward with this program, I think we ought to go forward with it. This continual question of reservations as to whether we are going to build a supersonic transport is disruptive to continued progress.” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 28)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc Ret.), speaking at a National Space Club luncheon, said: “Looking back over the 3 years since the flight of Friendship 7, I am impressed most of all by the tremendous progress the United States has made in space science and technology. “I am proud of the determination the American people have shown to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. . . . “Three years ago, Mercury spacecraft were limited in weight to about 3,000 pounds. Today, the Saturn I booster is operational and can put 22,500 pounds into Earth orbit, or seven times the weight of Mercury. Saturn i-b, which will begin flying next year, will be able to orbit a payload equal to 11 Mercury spacecraft. Saturn V, which will fly in 1967, will be able to orbit a payload equal to more than 80 Mercuries. That’s some jump—but it is no more than typical of the great gains we are making in national space capabilities. “The accuracy requirements for all these missions are almost incomprehensible and are one of the least understood parts of the space program. A good case in point was the launch of Friendship 7 3 years ago. The speed at insertion into orbit was over 25,000 feet per second or 5 miles per second, and the booster and spacecraft were accelerating at approximately 240 feet per second at a steadily increasing rate. At booster cutoff, each error of 1.4 feet per second resulted in a difference of approximately 1 mile in apogee on the far side of the Earth. When you consider that before the onboard signal for cutoff was received, information had to be obtained by radar at the Cape, transmitted by landline to Goddard, run through the computers, returned by landline to the Cape, checked against Cape data and then transmitted 350 miles down range to the spacecraft, still allowing time for onboard delays in operation of relays, valves, and thrust termination, it looks like an almost impossibly accurate requirement. “Those accuracies, however, are rather crude compared with some now being obtained on the deep space probes. “Now we have Mariner IV which at 6 o’clock tonight will be 20,194,023 miles out from Earth on an extremely difficult and significant mission. As you know, there was a checkout of equipment aboard the spacecraft last week that indicates the chances are still good that we will get revealing pictures of Mars next July, when Mariner IV will be 134 million miles from Earth, so far it will take 12)/> seconds to get a radio signal back. “To wax philosophical for a moment, we might liken our space program to one of Plttto?s ollsgories. fie told of prisoners ciisined in s cave for so long they had lost touch with reality and felt that their whole existence was wrapped up in the shadows they could see on the wall ahead of them. He goes on to say that if one escaped to the outside world and returned to tell the others of what really lay outside the dark cave, they would probably think him completely crazy. “Even though we have seen such tremendous break-throughs in scientific knowledge in recent years, our knowledge has necessarily been limited to such a cave, for practically all we know has been limited to this one tiny speck of earth in a much larger environment. But that is in the process of becoming changed and with a rapidity no one can forecast.” (Text, CR, 2/22/65, A751-531 February 19: Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.) said in an interview that if commercial airlines would voluntarily join the Federal Government in subsidizing helicopter lines, these services might be saved. Commercial helicopter lines operating in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco had received Federal subsidies since 1947, but President Johnson proposed in his budget message that they be cut off after Dec. 31. Sen. Monroney said: “Congress isn’t going to appropriate any more money. We haven’t a chance of selling them or continuing the subsidy without added help from the airlines.” His plan involved artificially lowering helicopter fares so that a greater portion of the flying public would use them. This higher load factor, combined with the use of larger, more economical aircraft and hoped-for improvements in helicopter technology might lead to self-sustaining helicopter service in a few years, the Senator said.	(NYT, 2/19/65, 69)
Prospects for U.S.-European industrial cooperation in space were discussed in Air Force and Space Digest by Elmer P. Wheaton, Vice President of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Wheaton offered four “guiding principles” for any program of U.S.-European industrial effort: “The program to be jointly undertaken should avoid unnecessary duplication of an existing program. . . . “The project or program should contribute to a better understanding of the space environment. . . . “The program must provide a logical extension of our current space technology. . . . “The program must not require such a substantial increase of knowledge in either the space environment or the space technology that it involves a high risk of failure. . . .” Wheaton suggested: scientific areas that could be usefully investigated by Europe; advanced programs for “more distant European ex,-ploration”; and satellites that could be profitably developed by Europe —notably, applications satellites. In such company-to-company cooperation, contribution of the U.S. companies should be chiefly in space systems management. (AF Mag., 7/65, 53-57)
ComSatCorp, in a letter to the FCC, outlined its position regarding ITT World Communications, Inc.’s request to use EARLY BIRD I satellite for live television coverage of the recovery of the Gemini 5 astronauts. George P. Sampson, ComSatCorp’s Vice President of Operations, said that although itt and ComSatCorp had agreed that technical and operational aspects of the shipboard station would be subject to ComSatCorp’s control, ComSatCorp took “firm exception” to itt’s insistence that the fcc designate ITT as the responsible operating entity. Sampson noted the Fee’s May 12 decision giving ComSatCorp sole responsibility for operation of the initial terminal stations for the proposed global satellite system and said: “Despite our fundamental concern with the proposal, ComSat Corp is willing to give consideration to a joint application for the operation of the station.” (ap, Wash. Post, 7/23/65)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	“I feel that our record over the past calendar year is evidence of the success we have had in building a team that is dedicated to effective management. The space flight record for 1964 is impressive by several standards:	number of flights, percent of success, and variety of missions. The graph (spaceflight mission record) shows that, in terms of percentage, our 1964 success record is nearly the same as the high achieved in 1963; 83 percent compared with 85 percent in 1963. However, we more than doubled the number of successful missions from 1963 to 1964, from 11 to 25. . . . “Other significant measures of the pace and rate of change in our space program have been our performance in terms of spacecraft operations and data return. These performance indicators are at the heart of a successful space program. “For example, in 1964 an average of 54 experiments were functioning in space throughout the year; this is an improvement of over 35 percent from 1963, when we averaged 40 working experiments. “The volume of information brought back from space, measured in millions of data points per day, shows a tenfold increase over previous years:	in 1964 we were collecting about 57 million bits of information each day from our flight missions. . . .” Dr. Seamans listed NASA management accomplishments during the past year “to find new techniques and new methods to carry out our jobs.” Among them:	establishment of Mission Analysis Div. from the Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology at Ames Research Center; conducting the joint dod-nasa Launch Vehicle Cost Study; growth of incentive contract program (“over $1 billion are under active incentive contracts”) ; and application of phased project planning. “The budget presented here has already undergone critical review by NASA’s management, the Bureau of the Budget, and the President. It does not provide any contingency funds for the approved missions; it is predicated on a cost reduction program that will require us to operate more efficiently; it represents a carefully pared program priority list. In summary: “First, NASA is dedicated to the accomplishment of the present approved missions and projects in terms of cost, schedule, and technical performance. “Second, new effort is needed to maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics and space. This includes the definition of a new program for exploration of the planets commencing with Mars in 1971; the research and design necessary for effective extension of present Apollo and Saturn capabilities for manned flight; integration of the Centaur stage with the Saturn launch vehicle for planetary and other unmanned payloads; initiation of an advanced solar observatory satellite; and utilization of a prototype xb-70 aircraft for aeronautical research. “Third, an aggressive research and advanced development effort must be maintained in many fields, including chemical and nuclear propulsion, to assure the nation meaningful options and alternatives in the selection of future aeronautical and space goals and the ability to react decisively to external pressures and opportunities. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 37-51)
DMS, Inc., aerospace market intelligence operation that published annual analysis of DOD and NASA budget requests submitted to Congress, forecast a $106.57 billion market for the aerospace industry from 1966-1970, an increase of 13% for the five-year period, dms preferred this “generally favorable market climate,” to the “glorified major growth period of fiscal 1962-1964, when Government spending skyrocketed, inevitably producing an influx of hopeful though unusually ill-equipped competitors, followed by over-capacity as the market tapered off, and finally a retrenchment still under way.”	(NYT,
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, described to members of the Charlotte, N.C., Chamber of Commerce the development of the U.S. ballistic missile program: “In the ballistic missile program, of course, we were not concerned with the missile alone—complicatd as it was—but also had the problem of constructing the facilities to test the missiles; building the ground support equipment; and training crews to install, service, and launch the missiles. This was a $17 billion program, and was larger in scope than the Manhattan Project which produced the atomic bomb during World War ii. “To give you some idea of the size of the task, imagine that Henry Ford in the early days had not only had the problem of designing and building his automobiles, but at the same time had to construct all the highways and bridges, build all the service stations and garages, and plan and conduct driver training programs. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Mac C. Adams was sworn in at NASA Hq. as Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator. Dr. Adams came to NASA from Avco Corp., Wilmington, Mass., where he was vice president and assistant general manager for space systems. In 1949-51 he was an aeronautical research engineer with NASA Langley Research Center (then naca Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory). (NASA Release 65-317; nasa Ann.)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent six hours visiting Cape Kennedy launching pads, talking to space experts, and looking over NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). “I’m sure the American people can feel this program is in good hands,” he said before returning to Washington. At one point, Humphrey rode to the top of the 100-ft. launching vehicle to be used in next month’s manned orbital flight and exclaimed: “Man, oh man, what a fantastic job!” (NASA Release 65-57; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/65)
In summary of activities of the NASA Office of Lunar and Planetary Programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “The Ranger pictures represent our major scientific achievement in 1964. In addition to their direct value as new information, the subtle significance of these pictures toward increasing the value of other astronomical data is perhaps worthy of mention, as it may not be recognized generally. It is interesting to note how the information presented in the high resolution Ranger pictures has sent scientists scurrying back to the files of photographic plates taken years before to discover features which have remained unnoticed throughout the years. Some new interpretations of long recognized features have also been made possible by the close-up look obtained by Ranger.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 56-111)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
President Johnson named Dr. Finn J. Larsen, Honeywell vice president, as Principal Director of Defense Research and Engineering for DOD, succeeding Dr. E. G. Fubini, who left the job July 15. (ap, NYT, 12/3/65, 22; Pres. Doc., 12/6/65, 546)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, vice president and assistant general manager for space systems at Avco Corp., would succeed Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff as NASA’s Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. Dr. Adams, a consultant to NASA and NACA, was expected to assume his new duties in October. Dr. Bisplinghoff would become Special Assistant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 65-276)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on H.R. 2626, a bill to provide that the National Bureau of Standards conduct investigations to determine the practicability of U.S. adoption of the metric system of weights and measures. J. Herbert Hollomon, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Science and Technology, told the Committee that if the U.S. did not adopt the metric system it would stand alone in this regard in 10 to 15 yrs. (CR, 8/3/65, D740; Transcript)
U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing appropriations to NASA for FY 1966 totaling $5,183,844,850, as follows: $4,537,121,000 for research and development; $60,675,000 for construction of facilities; and $586,048,850 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.26 billion. During the debate preceding passage of the bill, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) said: “We have moved quickly. But we are not in a crash program. We are now conducting a reasonable program . . . it is a well-planned program. “It is impossible to believe that in the fiscal year 1959 only $48,354,000 was authorized for space [nasa]. In fiscal year 1960 it went up ten times to $485,550,000. It doubled again in fiscal year 1961 to $915 million. “In fiscal year 1962 it went to $1,361,900,000. “In fiscal year 1963, it went to $3,742,162,000 and in fiscal year 1964 to $5,238,119,400. “In fiscal year 1965 it went to $5,193,810,500. “For this fiscal year, the committee has recommended $5,183,844,850, which is down from last year’s level. “I want the House to know we have gone over these programs thoroughly. We have made cuts in the committee, and the cuts were worthwhile. They are responsible, and they are substantial. They are not small.” Regarding funds restored to the NASA budget, Rep. Fulton said: “The M—1 engine development, the 260-inch engine development, and the snap-8 development, were ongoing programs of research that were approved by the committee and authorized by the House over the past several years. However, for reasons of economy, the Administrator cut these three programs entirely from the NASA budget. The committee on the other hand, believed that such actions in the long run would be extremely wasteful and later result in very high costs when it would become necessary to reactivate these programs. “Consequently, the committee restored $15 million to the M-l program to continue it on a technological development level, $6.2 million to the 260-inch solid rocket program to carry it through the test firing of two full length rockets, and $6 million to the SNAP-8 to continue it at the scheduled level of effort.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) discussed changes made by the Manned Space Flight Subcommittee: “The total request by NASA for manned space flight for fiscal year 1966 is $3,567,052,000. . . . The subcommittee is recommending a total reduction of $42,825,000. “NASA requested $3,249,485,000 for research and development in manned space flights. Total reduction in research and development amounts to $30 million. All of this reduction comes from the Apollo program. It is the view of the subcommittee that in the areas of Apollo mission support and engine development that program improvements could be made. However, the reduction was made in the total request to allow NASA to make program alterations with a broad management latitude of choice without adversely affecting the total program. It was recognized by the subcommittee that NASA, prior to coming before the committee, had made substantial reductions in their total research and development program. A further reduction was also made by the Bureau of the Budget. Based on this, the $30 million reduction is considered a maximum amount that could be taken without jeopardizing the pace and progress of the Apollo program.” (CR, 5/6/65, 9291, 9296, 9301)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said at msc that nasa’s fy 1967 budget would be limited to about the same level as the fy 1966 budget ($5.3 billion) because of military expenses in Viet Nam. He said nasa would like “$200 million or $300 million more” for fy 1967. “With the war in Viet Nam, I doubt there’ll be more money for NASA. And NASA needs more money than it is getting now to use its team with top efficiency.” (Houston Post, 8/30/65)
Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini program, and Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward White II (Maj., usaf) received NASA’s Exceptional Service Award from President Johnson in a special White House ceremony. Introducing the President, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . we . . . should never forget that at the beginning of the space age, in 1957, the challenge of this new frontier which was laid down to us was first met by the man who is now the President of the United States and who has so graciously invited us here today to indicate again his interest in, and the importance he attaches to, the new systems we have developed for building our national competence in space and using the science and technologies acquired to work toward a peaceful world and a better world. “This great leader of our nation, and of the Free World, is still pioneering, this time on an even more difficult frontier where we must learn to master the restrained but decisive use of the powers which technology gives our nation. Those of us who are responsible for the build-up of our new base of technology believe that power, based on advanced technology, can provide new means to hold back those ruthless forces which answer not to the need of all men for security, freedom, dignity, and opportunity. The pioneering which President Johnson is engaged in today on this new frontier is, if anything, more important than his pioneering actions in 1958 to create our national program in aeronautics and space. “Seldom in the history of the world has one man had to play so vital a role in developing the tools of modern science and technology and then in the development of a national capability to use them to achieve cooperation toward a world consistent with our own ideals and those we have sought for others as well as ourselves.” Accompanying citations noted “outstanding contributions” and singled out Major White as “the first man to engage in self-propelled extra-vehicular activity.” Terming the three “the Christopher Columbuses of the 20th century,” Mr. Johnson said their work had nudged the world toward greater international cooperation. “Men who have worked together to reach the stars are not likely to descend together into the depths of war and desolation,” he said. Later, the recipients were guests at a luncheon held by Vice President Humphrey and received accolades in both the House and Senate. A crowd estimated at 50,000	applauded the motorcade as Mathews and the astronauts rode to the Capitol. In the evening, Majors White (usaf) and McDivitt (usaf) narrated a 20-min. film of the GEMINI IV flight for the chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. President Johnson, in a surprise appearance, told the astronauts to “take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.” He said: “Many people in many lands were thrilled by what you have done. I want you to join our delegation in Paris and go out among the friendly peoples of the earth to share with them the excitement and thrills of your experience.” Astronauts White and McDivitt then returned to the White House where provisions had been made for them and their families to remain overnight. (Text; Clopton, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al, A3; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/18/65; Semple, NYT, 6/18/65, 1, 13; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/18/65)
Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Director of Advanced Studies of General Dynamics Corp., in a series of talks at Evanston College, predicted several “realistic possibilities” for the 1980’s and 1990’s: (1) a manned space station to handle the world’s communications needs, including global telephone calls complete with televised views of the speakers; (2) space vehicles to keep man informed of all weather developments, detect forest fires, and inform firefighters; (3) orbiting manned information centers to supply doctors and other scientists with data an any subject regardless of how distant they were from the source of material on earth; (4) orbiting hospitals or lunar hospitals to relieve persons suffering from certain ailments by providing gravityless or very low gravity conditions. (Chic. Trib., 10/10/65) During October: Dr. Walter Dornberger, Vice President for Research of Bell Aerosystems Co., former chief of German v—2 missile program, and father of the Dyna-Soar concept, was interviewed on the eve of his retirement from Bell by Claude Witze in Air Force and Space Digest. Witze said:“. . . [Although Dornberger is] the outstanding pioneer in the development of ballistic rockets, he feels strongly that we have erred in relying on this single vehicle, with its inherent limitations.” He quoted Dr. Dornberger:
Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, professor of chemistry at Harvard Univ. and former special assistant to President Eisenhower for science and technology, was selected Vice President of the National Academy of Sciences for four-year term beginning July 1, 1965. nas also elected 35 new members in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research. National Academy of Engineering, holding its first annual meeting in coordination with NAS, elected 19 new members including Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nas Releases; nas-nrc News Report, 4/65)
Vice President Humphrey announced that the National Aeronautics and Space Council, of which he is chairman, would meet July 1 to consider a proposed USAF manned orbiting laboratory. Meeting was later postponed to July 9. (NYT, 6/26/65, 5; eph)
Participants in the World Peace through Law Conference in Washington, D.C., agreed that advances in international communications, including early bird i communications satellite, were important milestones on the road to world peace. John A. Johnson, vice president of ComSatCorp, told the international communications panel that early bird I had provided a case study of progress in “the development of legal principles and institutions which further international cooperation.” He said global coverage in the satellite communications system was planned for 1967. Prof. Ivan A. Vlasic, McGill Univ., warned we may be facing “a proliferation of competing, possibly even antagonistic communications systems. Given the present state of international relations the chances of conflict are considerable.” Jean Evensen, Norway’s government broadcasting system adviser, felt “a pressing need for ways of enforcing international communications rules. One rebel, one nonconformist . . . can create havoc ... to the damage of the rest of the world,” he said. (Bullen, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/65)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Solid Rocket Operations, Aerojet-General Corp., received aiaa’s James H. Wyld Propulsion Award during the Institute’s Propulsion Joint Specialists’ Conference in Colorado Springs. He was cited for “outstanding contributions to the field of solid rocketry for over 15 years, including the development of thrust-vector control and thrust-reverser systems that made possible the use of solid rocket motors in ballistic missiles.” (NYT, 6/17/65, 54M)
Machinist union members at Boeing Co. installations throughout the country voted to accept a new contract and end their 19-day-old strike against Boeing Co., announced Charles F. West, the union’s general vice president. Under the contract, IAM would be free to strike again after six months if agreement were not reached on performance analysis—system by which the company graded employees for promotion, demotion, or discharge, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 10/5/65; Wash. Post, 10/5/65)
Expansion of the role of the National Science Foundation and expenditure by Federal mission-oriented research agencies of more money on basic research were two major recommendations of a special panel of the National Academy of Sciences to Congress. Recommendations were in a report, Basic Research and National Goals, submitted to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The panel, headed by Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky of Harvard Univ., former science adviser to the President, was comprised of 15 scientists, engineers, and economists. The panel held that the National Science Foundation, as the sole agency of Government whose purpose was support of science across the board without regard for immediate practical gains, should be expanded to serve as a “balance wheel” to soften the impact of variable research policies of mission-oriented agencies on “little science.” The recommendation that agencies should devote greater portions of their budgets to basic research was based on the view that in many cases these budgets were becoming stationary while the capacity for scientific growth was expanding. The panel also recommended that in some cases the Congress should extend the mission of the agency to include the pursuit of certain branches of basic research. Three general opinions were widely held by the panel regarding the balance of science support today: first, Federal funds should be allocated with some consideration to the geographical-social effects of their expenditure; second, biological sciences had been under-supported and should receive support to expand them faster than the physical sciences; third, there was an impending crisis in the physical sciences because mission-oriented agencies, faced with stationary budgets, would probably not expand their support of basic physical research as fast as capacity to do basic research expanded. (Clark, NYT, 4/26/65, 55; SBD, 4/30/65, 330)
Speaking before the Senate Commerce Committee in support of his bill calling for a three-year feasibility study of this country’s adopting the metric system, Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) said: “Should Canada follow Great Britain’s example and convert, the United States would be virtually the only remaining country that uses a system of weights and measures based on other than the metric system. Actually, 90 percent of the people in the world use metric measures right now.” The proposed three-year Dept, of Commerce study, Senator Pell said, would include not only a detailed estimate of the cost of conversion, but also a statement of the possible side benefits in foreign trade, (ap, NYT, 7/15/65, 35)
Rep. Adam Clayton Powell (D-N.Y.), Chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor, personally wrote the presidents of the Nation’s 116 predominantly Negro colleges and universities urging them to apply for NASA grants and research contracts. In his letter he noted that of 187 colleges and universities receiving NASA grants, only one—Howard Univ.—was predominantly Negro and that 20 universities (10%) received $61,451,000 (50%) of the $121,115,000 total expenditure. (House Comm, on Education and Labor Release)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved a $5.2 billion nasa authorization for fy 1966, cutting only $75 million from the President’s request. An unrequested $27.2 million was included for the 260-in. solid propellant program, the M-l liquid hydrogen engine, and the Snap 8. Biggest single reduction was $42 million cut in $3.6 billion request for Apollo. Other programs affected by the cut included Oao, Ogo, Surveyor, Rover, Lunar Orbiter, and Centaur. (WSJ, 4/28/65)
Aerospace and defense planning concepts could be applied to many of the Nation’s major social problems, Dr. Ruben F. Mettler, executive vice president of TRW, Inc., told a luncheon meeting of aiaa in New York. Dr. Mettler listed transportation, medical services, and housing as areas where the systems approach to problems would prove beneficial. He said that he thought the application of aerospace systems concepts had a bright and profitable future in civilian endeavors. (NYT, 10/27/65, 74M)
In answer to the query “Is a permanent role waiting in space for military astronauts,” Robert Brunn in the Christian Science Monitor quoted an Air Force official as saying: “No strategy is known for space as yet. We can’t use space the way the cowboys and Indians used high ground for advantage, nor the way the Air Force in World War II climbed to altitude and dove out of the sun. “Something with military importance may turn up in the next five years. The Air Force doesn’t know what the usefulness of space will be. . . .” (Brunn, CSM, 10/13/65, 14)
Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said at the 16th annual luncheon for Albert Lasker Medical Journalism Awards in Washington, D.C.: “The most important race is not the space race or the arms race. It is the human race. If America can get excited about putting a man on the moon in 1970, why can’t we get excited about putting a lot of people on their feet by the same date? . . . some day we will be able to tell the world that science has discovered the secrets of aging or of cancer or of muscular dystrophy or multiple sclerosis or mental retardation. That news will outrank in importance even the wonderful tidings that man has landed on the moon.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb was asked by Rep. Charles R. Jonas (R-N.C.) in NASA appropriations hearing of the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, House Committee on Appropriations, to “set to rest” the rumor that NASA was planning to phase out msfc in Huntsville, Ala. Mr. Webb explained that during his recent visit to Alabama leading Alabama businessmen had asked “questions about the future and whether the budget was going to be larger, and whether more would come to Alabama. Perhaps injudiciously, I said, ‘Unless we can recruit better and more able people for the new phase of our program, you are not going to keep what you have.’ . . . “We have a real problem in recruiting the kind of people needed to manage these contracts with American industry to go and live in Alabama, and the image of the State has been one of the problems that we have had. I pointed this out to the businessmen, and pointed out to them also that not only the problem of our recruitment was involved, that the State itself, in my opinion, was missing a valuable opportunity to use these kinds of people to build up its own economy, because the very existence of them there in the various areas could be of great benefit to the State. . . .” I Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 1264-65)
A nasa report on its Aircraft Noise Research Program to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences said: “. . . there is a growing understanding that efforts at a practicable and mutually effective solution will need to be evolutionary in nature, and involve a dedicated attack on all major aspects of the problem. These include the acquisition of definitive information on the manner in which aircraft noises are generated and propagated, and the associated development of efficient methods for the reduction of adverse aircraft noise at its source; the establishment of safe and efficient aircraft operating procedures that minimize and control the exposure of airport community property to undesirable aircraft noise; and the provision of a rational understanding of the specific aircraft noise factors which produce subjective annoyance for various activities and environments of a community population, and of optimum methods for the control and adjustment of community property usage in critical noise areas in the vicinity of the airport.” {CR, 5/27/65)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, said in an article in Boston Sunday Globe: “The need for increased electronics research to develop devices which will meet the demands and rigors of long space flights will affect our industrial outlook and economy in many ways. By requiring a ‘new look’ at electronics, NASA, led by ERC, will provide a research emphasis such as we have not had since World War II when the golden age of electronics started. “We have been in the ‘rocket phase’ and are now entering the ‘electronic phase’ of space flight development, a phase which will affect us dramatically over many years.” (Boston Sun. Globe, 1/3/65)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Aerojet-General Corp.’s solid rocket operations, announced that a new solid fuel multipulse rocket engine containing several charges of propellant that could be separately fired by electrical signal had successfully completed its first series of test firings. The rocket could zip, glide, and dart about much like a bird, he said, or could lie dormant in space a year and then be restarted on command. Key to multipulse firings was described as a lightweight thermal barrier separating each charge. Aerojet had conducted demonstration firings of six flight-weight configurations in the company-funded program, (ap, Denver Post, 4/21/ 65; Av. Wk„ 4/19/65, 30)
James C. Elms and L/Gen. Frank A. Bogart (USAF-Ret.) had been appointed NASA Deputy Associate Administrators for Manned Space Flight effective Sept. 1, Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced. Elms had served as Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center before assuming his present position as vice president of Raytheon Co. General Bogart, former usaf comptroller, had served as Director for Management Operations, omsf, since February. Paul E. Cotton, who had been assistant to Dr. Mueller since November 1963, would become Director of Manned Space Flight Management Operations, succeeding General Bogart. B/Gen. Julian H. Bowman (USAF, Ret.) would succeed Cotton. General Bowman had been a special assistant to Dr. Mueller, (nasa Release 65-264)
Discussing the missions and plans of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Dr. Winston E. Kock, erc Director, told the Harvard Engineers Club in Cambridge: “I believe that the recent strengthening of research in NASA can act to overcome any such braking of scientific enthusiasm which the recent changes in our defense program . . . may have instigated. I have seen at first hand true research enthusiasm at two NASA Research Centers, Lewis in Cleveland, and Ames in California, and, at Cambridge’s new NASA Research Center, the response we have had from inventive, research-minded individuals, expressing an interest in association with the Center has been phenomenal. I have always believed in the saying ‘necessity is the mother of invention,’ and I feel certain that it was the necessities of World War II that brought into bloom radar, the jet aircraft, nuclear power, the v-2 rocket (which led to our present missile and space rockets), and many other developments which have proved to be of vital importance to our way of life. So, I feel that a counterbalance to today’s reduced necessities of the broad, new opening field of space research . . . will help to keep our nation’s research talent active and enthusiastic, and maintain it in the strong virility it has exhibited since the start of World War n.” (Text)	_	_
Hearings on NASA budget authorization for fy 1966 began before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Of the $5,260 billion requested for fy 1966, $4,576 billion was for research and development; $74.7 million was for construction of facilities; and $609.4 million was for administrative operations. Administrator James E. Webb testified:	“This budget . . . supports an on-going successful research and development effort and the use of this knowledge to develop and test operating systems designed to give us what we need to know for national security, for applications in meteorology, communications, and other working satellite systems, and from which to make any decisions which may be called for in the future. “An important fact that underlies the President’s 1966 budget decisions is that the program is now operating at a level of 5/4 billion dollars instead of at the optimum level of 5% billion originally recommended by President Kennedy or the ‘fighting chance’ level recommended last year by President Johnson. This means that we cannot accomplish the 15 Saturn V-Apollo flights now included in the program within the period of this decade. If all 15 flights are required to succeed in the lunar landing, then this will not be done before 1970. However, our overall major milestones are being met and we still have a reasonable opportunity for success on a flight earlier than the 15th and thus within this decade. In effect we will be launching toward the moon on earlier flights than we thought a year ago would be possible, but we simply cannot predict which flight will be the first either to orbit the moon or to land there. “What we can say is this:	the systems of equipment for the utilization of men for flights of all kinds out as far as the moon are now rapidly proceeding toward tests that will work out any imperfections; and our fast-developing knowledge of both the space environment and the capabilities of this equipment gives us more confidence than we had a year ago that we are on the right track and proceeding on a reasonable basis for the development of machines of this size and power. . . . “In preparation of this budget, the President has faced two important facts. The first of these is that the central core of NASA activities as planned in 1961 is proceeding with excellent results. . . . “The second major fact faced by the President was the necessity for a continued emphasis on supporting research and development. . . . “Bearing these two facts in mind, this budget and this request for authorization call for an operating level which is approximately the same as that approved by Congress for fiscal years 1964 and 1965. This means that the work planned in 1961 for accomplishment in this decade must be spread out over a longer period, and the cost for the total will be increased. . . . “The essential funds to give us some opportunity to make the lunar landing within this decade are included, as are funds for studies toward further use of the Saturn launch vehicles and the Appollo-LEM manned space flight systems in the period following the lunar landing. By 1969, we will have the capability to launch 6 Saturn-iB’s and 6 Saturn V’s per year. In the unmanned area, we have begun planning for a Voyager-Mars mission in 1971 with the possibility of a test flight in 1969; funds are included in the budget for expansion of this design effort during fiscal year 1966. Development and hardware procurement could then be initiated in fiscal year 1967 if appropriate. . . .” (Testimony; 1966 NASA Auth. Hearings, 5-14)
Former faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby was appointed senior vice president of Pan American World Airways and elected to its board of directors. Halaby’s initial responsibilities would embrace the airline’s defense activities, its services for USAF at the Eastern Test Range, and its business-jets division. (NYT, 9/15/65, 77M; Wash. Post, 9/15/65, B9)
Vice President Humphrey, in France for the International Air Show at Le Bourget with Astronauts White and McDivitt, met for 80 min. with President de Gaulle. (Tanner, NYT, 6/21/65; Newport News Daily Press, 6/22/65)
The National Science Foundation’s past activities were reviewed in a report by the Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. No judgments were made, but the 286-page report called attention to broad areas of concern: (1) Could the Foundation meaningfully promote the progress of American science on a very limited budget? (2) What was its relationship to the Office of Science and Technology which was developing national science policy? (3) What was its relationship to American universities conducting research? (4) Had it effectively gathered data and made statistical analyses essential to research planning and administration? (5) Should the Foundation continue to manage large-scale research projects? (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 10329, which would authorize the Secretary of Commerce to conduct a feasibility study on adoption of the metric system. {CR, 8/24/ 65, 19007)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, reviewing overall manned space flight objectives and reporting on the Gemini and Apollo programs in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “Chronologically, the first objective of manned space flight is to establish man’s capabilities in space. Next is the establishment of a national competence for manned space flight, including the industrial base, trained personnel, ground facilities, flight hardware, and operational experience. Next, we use this capability for further space explorations and for other purposes. Finally, accomplishment of all these objectives brings about United States leadership in space. “. . . In 1964, we concentrated our efforts on Gemini ground tests and accomplished the first flight test. Filling the pipeline with hardware and carrying out development testing of subsystems were the major Apollo activities. Now in 1965, we have entered a year that will be devoted to Gemini flight test operations and the conduct of Apollo system development tests. “Looking at the remainder of the decade, 1966 will be the year when we learn new' space flight techniques in the Gemini Program, and conduct unmanned earth-orbital flight tests of the Apollo/Saturn IB space vehicle. In 1967, Gemini will be available as an operational system and we will carry out manned earth-orbital flights of the Apollo/ Saturn V space vehicle. Manned flights of the Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle are scheduled for 1968, leading to the beginning of manned lunar missions before the end of the decade. “. . . I want to emphasize again that Apollo is an orderly program. The buildup of the Apollo effort has proceeded over more than three and a half years to its full strength. It is not a crash program. “The duration of Apollo, as we reported to the Congress last year, is one of the longer United States research and development programs, resulting in a schedule that permits rapid, orderly progress. The Apollo priority is high but not overriding. Parallel and backup development efforts are limited. Flight testing is being carried out on a logical basis, and only after all possible tests are conducted on the ground. “Efficient use of available resources is a major consideration in the conduct of the Apollo program, whereas a crash program follows the most expeditious course regardless of cost. “Finally, crash programs typically have goals beyond the existing state of technology and pursue these goals under the pressure of having to achieve a technological breakthrough. Apollo, on the other hand, harnesses current technology in the development of launch vehicles, spacecraft and facilities to permit effective space exploration. The greatest challenges in Apollo, in fact, are in the integration of those systems and the men who must fly them as well as the provision of ground operational support, and the overall management of this enterprise.” Dr. Mueller said that data received and analysis continued in 1964 regarding radiation and the lunar surface indicated that these matters were of less importance than had been previously deduced:	“. . . First, the chance of a significant solar event occurring during a mission is very low. Second, if the worst solar flare previously observed had occurred during an Apollo mission, the maximum dose that could have been received at the bloodforming organs by astronauts in the command module would have been about 10 per cent of the allowable safe dose, rather than 15 per cent as estimated last year. “Regarding the lunar surface, the data from ranger vii have been very helpful. The large area photography has indicated the probability that there are many areas of the moon’s surface where the design of the lunar excursion module is adequate with respect to surface slope and roughness. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 53-134)
“If Major Edward H. White leaves his space capsule during next Thursday’s Gemini 4 flight, it will only be a ‘space spectacular’ stunt,” said Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) during a news conference in San Francisco. Rep. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had made the same comment at the time of a similar feat by the Soviet Union. (NYT, 5/28/65)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began a two-day seminar with a panel discussion on science and technology, with specific reference to aeronautics. Speaker of the House John W. McCormack opened the seminar. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began executive hearings on the subject of launch vehicles. (NASA LAR iv/17)
Members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, meeting to consider H.J. Res. 597 providing for a monument to Dr. Robert H. Goddard at Clark Univ., agreed to limit cost of the memorial to $150,000.	(CR, 9/7/65, 23315)
A crowd of two million gathered in Chicago during the parade and motorcade honoring Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf), accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Honorary citizens medals were presented the astronauts at a special City Council meeting. Civil rights leaders postponed a demonstration protesting de facto school segregation in deference to the celebration, (ap, Wash. Post. 6/16/65; Wehrwein, NYT, 6/15/65)
Paul Haney, Chief of Public Affairs for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, addressed Oklahoma members of the American Legion to open their state convention: “Although we are not pursuing any military objectives as such, every once in a while somebody turns over a rock and finds something which could be of immense military value. “As Detroit learned to produce millions of cars in a hurry by production line development and thus was able to convert without a bobble to tank production in World War II, so could our entire manned space flight program be converted.” (ap, Houston Post, 8/8/65)
Discussions at last week’s Eurospace meeting in Philadelphia indicated that “Europeans are eagerly seeking means to acquire U.S. technical know-how and systems management capability without buying hardware,” wrote William J. Coughlin in a Missiles and Rockets editorial. He continued: “This was recognized in a blunt statement by Lockheed vice president Elmer P. Wheaton:
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey visited nasa Flight Research Center. (frc X-Press, 4/9/65, 1, 2)
Fuel cells used in the Gemini v mission August 21-29 were being developed by General Electric Co. for commercial use, Dr. Arthur M. Bueche, ge vice president for research and development, told a news conference in New York City. The first models, expected to be ready next year, would provide only 12 watts [gemini v cells provided 2,000 watts] but could power remote television cameras and other communications equipment. Larger units might soon provide emergency power to homes, Dr. Bueche said. (NYT, 9/2/65, 38C)
Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, usaf Deputy Chief of Staff (r&d), stated in fy 1966 appropriations hearings of House Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on dod Appropriations: “I cannot help but believe, if we take a look at the last 40 years of Russian national development, that they are watching for an opportunity to gain a major military advantage over us. I cannot help but feel that they are examining opportunities in space very thoroughly for this particular purpose. “In order to be able to offset any advantage which they may discover, I feel we must move as rapidly as we can in this area, and take full advantage of any other national space programs such as the NASA activity. “The big program that we hope to get a go-ahead on here shortly is the Manned Orbital Laboratory. Here we think we will achieve a number of answers in the next 2 or three years. . . .”	(DOD Appropriations Hearings [Part 5], 148)
Sen. A. S. Monroney (D-Okla.) told a meeting of the American Helicopter Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA was spending too small a share of its budget on aviation research. Senator Monroney, the chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, said he became angry when he compared the $43 million earmarked for aeronautics next year with the space agency’s total budget of $5.2 billion. He said that although the agency allocated less than 2 percent of its budget to solving the many flight mysteries it acknowledges still exist, the agency’s working-level scientists wanted to do more in this area. Monroney also said he disagreed with those who contended that subsidy for the helicopter airlines was wasteful and unwarranted. He said that while helicopters might not have made the progress many wished for and some had promised, commercial revenues had increased, costs had declined, equipment had improved, and capability to operate on instruments had been developed, (ap, NYT, 5/15/65)
The British Defense Ministry announced that its fleet of Valiant bombers would be scrapped because of weakened structure caused by metal fatigue. Valiant was the first of the three “V” types of jet bombers built by U.K. following World War II. They had been in service nine years and only about half the original force remained in service as reconnaissance or tankers. This would not affect Britain’s contribution to nato or its proposal for an Atlantic nuclear force. {NYT, 1/27/65)
Former German missile experts who helped foster American rocketry after World War II met at NASA msfc to celebrate their 20th year in the U.S. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, attended, (upi, Cocoa Trib., 11/4/65; Marshall Star, 11/10/65)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA had an obligation to make information gained from space exploration available to the public. He continued: “To help achieve this, a National Space Science Data Center was established at GSFC in April 1964. . . . “The Data Center is responsible for the collection, organization, indexing, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of all scientific data resulting from experiments in space and the upper atmosphere. Since its establishment the Data Center has begun: (1) to maintain a continuing inventory of data from sounding rockets and spacecraft; (2) to acquire data generated by spacecraft previously launched; (3) to collect selected ground correlative data; and (4) to produce the announcement publications which support its functions. “In anticipation of the need for this facility, NASA has established a line item in the Physics and Astronomy budget, Data Analysis, of three million dollars in FY 1966. Of this, 600 thousand dollars is for the operation of the Data Center and 2.4 million dollars is for analysis of data from a flight experiment under the flight project. After the initial results have been published by the Principal Investigator and the data are placed in the data center, the additional analyses of these data will be funded from Data Analysis funds on the basis of proposals from competent scientists throughout the Nation . . . This approach is expected to . . . encourage them to use all of the available information in their theoretical research.” Dr. Newell discussed NASA’s orbiting observatory program: “The primary reason for . . . solar studies is to meet the overall NASA objective to expand human knowledge of space phenomena. . . . “oso-c [Orbiting Solar Observatory-C] is the next spacecraft to be launched and it is undergoing final testing at this time. On 30 May a solar eclipse of unusually long duration will occur. Every effort is being made to launch oso-c prior to this event so that two oso’s, with complementary payloads, can be operating and transmitting unique data on the solar radiation at the time of the eclipse.” He said that the Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo) program would make a major contribution to our understanding of earth-sun-environment relationships and that although OGO I had not functioned as planned “it has proven that the basic spacecraft design is adequate and that large numbers of experiments can be integrated and operated from a single satellite. Furthermore, should OGO I continue to transmit data for a reasonable period, it is expected that the results will contribute substantially to studies of the Earth-Sun relationships. “Investigation of the OGO i failure indicated there was no common cause for failure, but as a result of the investigation, design modifications and additional tests are planned for future OGO spacecraft. The modifications include: (1) relocation of the horizon scanner and certain boom appendages to assure a clear field of view for the horizon scanners; (2) the use of a new type development spring and the addition of separate appendage ‘kick-off’ springs; and (3) the relocation of the omnidirectional antenna.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 461-580)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, addressing 4,000 employees and officials of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., warned Grumman to reduce contract proposals sharply if it expected to gain a share of future defense contracts. McNamara said Grumman’s proposals for construction of a portion of the f-111 fighter’s tail assembly were “higher than other competitive sources. “There is no question in my mind that you can reduce costs on this $1 billion contract. They’ve got to come down,” he said. The contract he was referring to had not yet been awarded. McNamara, accompanied by Senator Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) and Asst. Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester, was making a brief tour of defense plants on Long Island. (Maiorana, NYT, 10/14/65, 41)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Charles R. Able, group vice president, Missile and Space Systems, Douglas Aircraft Co., defined for the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., the reasons the U.S. must have an on-going space program. He concluded: “The most important single factor in deciding what space programs we will implement in the future ... is going to be, simply, how well we perform in the programs now going and those just getting started. “The extent to which this Nation will be willing to commit itself to new ventures in space in the years ahead depends entirely on how well we stay on schedule and within the budget set for us. “The most important task we have in preparing for the future is to do a good job now.” (Text, CR, 9/22/65, A5370-71)
In NASA fy 1966 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb testified: “Among the hard decisions and difficult choices which had to be made in the preparation of this budget was the decision to terminate the programs to develop the m—1 large liquid hydrogen fueled engine, the large 260-inch solid propellant motor, and the snap-8 nuclear electric power supply. The reduction in the requests for space technology activities amounting to about $18 million when compared with fiscal year 1965, results mostly from these terminations. However, as this Committee knows, there is pending before it notification of a plan to reprogram $16,950,000 of 1965 funds so that these projects can be carried forward into 1966 to appropriate developmental points at which important segments of the engineering data for which the projects were originally planned can be obtained for incorporation in our total bank of technological and engineering knowledge.” Mr. Webb was questioned by Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D—Minn.) on when the first U.S. extravehicular activity was planned, and he replied: “Within the next year. We are not sure on which Gemini flight we will do it as yet.” Senator Mondale asked: “When do we plan our first rendezvous maneuver?” and Mr. Webb replied: “Within the next year, maybe the latter part of this year.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 623, 663)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and DOD Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced NASA—dod agreement on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), released in conjunction with fy 1966 budget: . . Planning for the Defense manned orbiting laboratory program will also consider, in cooperation with NASA, broader objectives of scientific and general technological significance. “To determine the essential characteristics of the vehicle that will be required, the DOD will continue intensive studies and design of experiments and systems aimed at the primary military objectives. “Cooperative studies, by NASA and Defense, will identify and define scientific and general technological experiments which might be carried out, with NASA participation, in conjunction with the military program. “dod, with assistance from NASA, will compare configurations of Apollo which may be suitable for military experiments with the Gemini b-mol configuration to determine the complete system that can meet the primary military objectives in a more efficient, less costly, or more timely fashion. “On the basis of these studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with full-scale development by Defense of a manned orbiting laboratory system and what the specific developments and vehicle configurations are to be. The Defense budget includes $150 million in fy 1966 for the program. . . . “Depending upon the manned orbiting laboratory decision, upon the progress in the Gemini and Apollo programs, and upon the results of NASA studies, a decision will be made whether to proceed with modifications to the Apollo system and the nature and timing of necessary specific developments. The NASA 1966 budget includes about $50 million for proceeding with design and pacing developments. . . (nasa Budget Briefing fy 1966)
Curtiss-Wright Corp. could participate in future naval weapons procurement, including the procurement of weapon system trainers, DOD announced. Last March when R/Adm. Allan M. Shinn, Chief of the Bureau of Weapons, testified before a closed session of the House Appropriations Committee he disclosed “inadequate performance” on the part of Curtiss-Wright in connection with the p3-a trainer program. (Text; NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed its report on H.R. 1441, the $4.986-billion nasa budget authorization, (nasa lar V/65-66)
U.S. Army claimed 21 world records for its new light observation helicopter, OH-6A. NAA-supervised flights at Edwards afb resulted in 12 speed records, and three each for distance, climbing, and sustained altitude. Records had been submitted to Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Paris for official approval. (Chic. Trib., 5/23/66, 16) May 23: Debate began in Senate on authorization of NASA budget for FY 1967. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said: "It is important to note that the pressures creating the great surges in progress-—whether it be in science, technology, exploration, or economic and social development—come from outside forces and considerations. . . . "It is these forcing functions which mainly set the pace of progress and development. Space is no exception. Indeed, the great surge in space research and exploration is a classic example of this historical pattern. It was these forcing functions which set in motion the revolution in science and technology which has brought us to the era we know as the Space Age. And it is these forcing functions which today and tomorrow will determine our future course and our future policies in space. .. . "The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether the history of the last half century will repeat itself a few years hence, and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. Indeed, in today’s cold war arena, the question boils down to whether this Nation can afford such a luxury, in terms of our very survival. For it is clear that future leadership in this scientific and technological competition—which has such great economic, military, and political significance—will not be easily held, nor would it be easily regained once lost.” (CR, 5/23/66, 10681-2)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at NASA FY 1967 budget briefing that the "extremely stringent budget” ($5,012 billion) approved by President Johnson and the bob was the result of pressing needs of the Vietnam war and the Great Society. Major loser in the nasa budget reduction was the Apollo Applications (Aa) program: "The option to go ahead or not [on the Aa program] will be made in 1968 [budget],” he said. Although nasa had wanted $5.58 billion to carry out its FY 1967 program, Seamans said, the $5,012 billion would make it possible to continue "a good space program” with most of the projects intact. Yet, nasa did "not have the funds we would like to see” for Apollo. He said the approved FY 1967 Apollo budget of $2,974 billion (compared to $2,967 billion in FY 1966) would give the U.S. "a chance of lunar landing in this decade,” but there were no funds "for major difficulties that might occur.” (Transcript)
In letter to Congress transmitting report on the Nation’s oceanographic work, President Johnson urged that funds be voted to continue work on Project Mohole. House Appropriations Committee had denied (May 5) $19.7-million Presidential request for nsf work on Mohole in FY 1967. Total cost was estimated as $110 million; about $25 million had already been spent. President Johnson wrote: "The Mohole Project will provide the answer to many basic questions about the earth’s crust and the origin of ocean basins. It will teach us how to drill in the ocean depths— the prelude to the future exploitation of resources at the bottom of the sea.” (Pres. Doc., 5/23/66, 661; AP, NYT, 5/19/66, 23; Wash. Post, 5/19/66, A6)
More than 70 tethered balloon ascensions to 1,500-ft. altitude for vehicle drop tests had been conducted by afcrl at Holloman afb over past three years to test Surveyor spacecraft’s retrofire descent and impact capabilities, oar Research Review reported, (oar Res. Rev., 6/66, 17) During June: Dr. Dorothy Martin Simon, Avco Corp. vice president and director of Corporate Research, received 1966 Achievement Award of Society of Women Engineers. She was cited for "significant contributions to engineering administration and space engineering, especially in the fields of combustion and ablative coatings.” (Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 46)
Rebutting Aug. 14 Washington Sunday Star editorial which called the U.S. Sst program "a dubious venture moved by extraordinary pressures,” Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) told Senate that program was "moving forward on a logical basis” to make Sst available for commercial use in 1974 at total cost of about $4.5 billion-—25% of which would be paid by manufacturers. Senator Magnuson said that planners were "well aware” of potential hazards of excess radiation, internal heat, lack of maneuverability, and structural stress suggested by Star and assured the Senate that aircraft had been designed "to preclude catastrophic conditions. . .	(CR, 9/6/66, 20909-10; Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 17)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey designated Col. Donald W. Paffell (usaf) his Assistant for Aeronautics and Space Matters, (usaf Hq. Bull., 2/14/66,2)	_
NASA’s lunar and planetary programs were discussed by NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: "It is important to note that the Mariner IV photographs do not determine whether life exists on Mars. Even before the flight of Mariner IV, it was known that pictures taken at this resolution could not give any direct evidence of life forms. . . . "We propose to continue the exploration of Venus and Mars begun so well with Mariners II and IV, respectively, by utilizing for the 1967 Venus opportunity an appropriate modification of the spare spacecraft from the Mariner IV program. This will be launched on an Atlas-Agena vehicle.” Cortright presented prepared statement by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell summarizing comsat and sounding rocket launches: "The first launching by NASA of a satellite for the Corporation [ComSatCorp] took place on April 6, 1965, when the Early Bird satellite was placed in orbit using a thrust-augmented Delta launch vehicle. The launching was carried out under an agreement between Comsat and NASA, signed in December 1964, which detailed the services to be performed by NASA, financial arrangements, etc. . . . "Although the original agreement gave Comsat options for as many as seven additional launchings through March 1967, none of these options has been exercised. In the meantime, Comsat has inaugurated tbe HS-303A program, and has advised NASA that it will require two or three HS-303A launchings in 1966, beginning in August. The HS-303A is larger and heavier than Early Bird, and will need the capabilities of the thrust-augmented improved Delta launch vehicle. Otherwise, launch services are expected to be similar to those provided in support of the Early Bird. "The Corporation is now negotiating for development and procurement of spacecraft for the eventual global system. These spacecraft are expected to be deployed beginning in 1968.” Referring to the NASA sounding rocket program, Dr. Newell said: "Since 1959 to the present NASA has launched 668 sounding rockets for scientific investigations in space and 516 of these were for investigations in the areas of physics and astronomy.” He mentioned as significant the International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) Mobile Launch Expedition carried out in spring 1965 using an aircraft carrier as a launching platform: rockets carrying instrumented payloads were launched off west coast of South America from 5° north latitude to 60° south latitude with the greatest concentration of flights at the geomagnetic equator near Lima, Peru. 45 Nike-Cajun/Nike-Apache rockets and 32 single-stage Areas rockets were flown carrying experiments furnished by NASA, usn, usaf, universities, and industry. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 233-4, 359, 375-6)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably H.R. 14832 incorporating changes and improvements in organization and operation of nsf recommended in Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development report, "The National Science Foundation—Its Present and Future.” (House Rpt. 1650)
Westinghouse Electric Corp.’s Defense and Space Center had developed a 7M-lb. TV camera that could be carried inside Apollo spacecraft and by astronauts as they explored the lurain. Prototype had been delivered to NASA and a commitment obtained for live TV coverage. (Gibbons, WSJ, 1/21/66, 1)
NASA’s second space-tracking station near Canberra, Australia, was officially opened by Minister of Supply Denham Henty. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, attended ceremony and praised Australia’s contribution to U.S. space program saying: "We will explore space together for the benefit of mankind.” (NYT, 2/25/66, 3)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams said: "During 1965 we flew the three X-15 airplanes 32 times, setting a new activity record. These aircraft comprise a unique research facility capable of providing data during actual hypersonic flight. . . . "At the end of 1965, the three X-15 airplanes had been flown 156 times. . . .” Referring to rocket reactor tests, Adams said: "The kiwi-nerva-Phoebus operations during 1965 demonstrated an altitude equivalent specific impulse of over 750 lb-sec./lb., equivalent thrust of over 50,000 lbs., and total duration of 4200 seconds, or over an hour. The experiments have shown that rapid starts and restarts can be made and that operation is stable over a wide range of conditions. "On February 3, 1966, we made the first power run with a complete nuclear rocket engine system. Although the major components were spread out and connected in a 'breadboard’ fashion, the system started and operated as a unit with no external power. On February 11, the system was operated again. We feel that these runs are very significant milestones in the nuclear rocket programs.” (NASA Autk. Hearings, 50, 57)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
Martin Co. had been awarded a three-month, $75,000 contract to design and develop a flight-qualified, lightweight, hand-held lunar core driller for use on Apollo missions, msc announced. Similar contract, also for $75,000, had been awarded Northrop Space Laboratories. {Chic. Trib., 8/18/66) Ford Foundation president McGeorge Bundy said that although the use of profits from a commercial business to finance a noncommercial undertaking might be novel to television, creation of a special carrier service in the public interest was not without precedent. He cited the Government’s granting of special mailing privileges to newspapers and magazines. Bundy disclosed the Ford Foundation was planning to arrange "a series of meetings in various parts of the country with potential users of a noncommercial satellite system.” Fred W. Friendly, TV consultant to Bundy, described what he said was the underlying irony of modem TV: commercial networks had the money to do qualitative public service but lacked sufficient time on the air, while educational TV had the time but lacked the money. ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack said the heart of the Ford proposal called for the 'Tunneling of savings” that might be enjoyed by commercial communications carriers into support of a cultural undertaking. While acknowledging the value of educational TV, McCormack said he felt only Congress could rule whether one segment of a diversified society could be compelled to support another segment without benefit of specific legislation to that end. AT&T vice president Richard Hough, itt executive Bertram B. Tower, and Western Union Telegraph Co. vice president Earl D. Hilburn challenged the proposal saying that any such communications system should adhere to the common carrier principle of serving all users rather than any particular group such as broadcasters. While these witnesses supported the objective, they questioned the feasibility of the plan on economic and technical grounds. Tower suggested that consideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services through existing common carriers. Hilburn said that rate adjustments in favor of educational broadcasters might be authorized if some form of subsidy were determined to be in the national interest. Sen. John O. Pastore (D-R.I.), who had called the hearings, said they were a "prelude” to action by fcc and noted that Congress almost certainly would want to explore the implications of the Ford proposal as it related to a private corporation. Hearings were completed Aug. 23. (ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8/18/66, 59; Wash. Post, 8/18/66, A12; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/66, A2)
President Johnson established White House committee headed by Dr. Donald F. Hornig to study ways to help West European nations improve their technology. Serving with Dr. Hornig would be representatives of Depts. of State, Defense, and Commerce; NASA; aec; and Council of Economic Advisers. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 41; Wash. Post, 11/27/66, A6)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investigators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II died Feb. 28. msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told upi that full report would not be completed for "at least six weeks.” The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time required and the justification for such requirements, (upi, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; nasa lar V/36)
Aerospace rather than shipbuilding companies were competing for $l-billion Fast Deployment Logistic Fleet (Fdl) program because of USn’s new contract policy, Robert Wright reported in the New York Times. Under new policy, firms were required to bid for total package— concept, design, and construction—instead of construction only. Vernon A. Johnson, a Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president, believed Lockheed, General Dynamics Corp., and Litton Industries, Inc., were competing exclusively for contract because shipbuilding industry lacked resources and experience for total-package systems design. Goal of Fdl program was fleet of 30-40 ships capable of remaining at sea for indefinite periods and making fast delivery of heavy supplies to fight small wars. (Wright, ATT, 12/11/66, 12)
Najeeb E. Halaby, vice president of Pan American World Airways and former faa Administrator, suggested that Government build two Sst prototypes—one Boeing and one Lockheed—using same prototype power plant for both before selecting the final design. "There is no substitute for flight testing,” he said. "The whole world would benefit in the economics and safety of a flight-tested plane.” Airframe designs by Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and engine designs by General Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div. had been submitted to faa Sept. 6 for evaluation. President Johnson would announce final selection in late 1966. (NYT, 11/11/66, 73)
Dr. James A. Hootman, executive secretary of nasa’s Inventions and Contributions Board, retired after 30 years Government service to become a professor of physics at Pensacola (Fla.) Junior College, (nasa Ann.) Dr. Hilliard W. Paige, vice president of General Electric Co., reported first known satellite collision: in April 1965 two experimental gravity-gradient-stabilized satellites launched pickaback by Naval Research Lab. March 9, 1965, locked booms in their 1,756th revolution. After collision, satellites separated and quickly were stabilized by gravity-gradient systems. They were still in orbit. Paige said NASA was currently reviewing GE study to equip a Saturn V 3rd stage with three-axis gravity-gradient system to orient vehicle as manned space laboratory. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 1, 2) Jack L. Bromberg and T. J. Gordon, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., said the asteroids between Mars and Jupiter could be investigated by utilizing basic Apollo/Saturn launch vehicles, launch facilities, tracking system, and manufacturing and engineering expertise. Bromberg said a three-stage Saturn V could propel a 7,000-lb. unmanned research payload into the asteroid belt and a four-stage Saturn V could propel a 22,000-lb. payload to same target. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/11/66, 3) Dr. Luis Tapis Salinas, president of IX Colloquium on Law of Outer Space, urged changing present laws to cover situations that could arise in outer space. (GE Congress Reporter, 10/13/66, 1) Richard Johnston, Chief of msc Crew Systems Div., said that to work effectively in space, a future astronaut would require a more streamlined spacesuit, a better self-propulsion system, and an anchoring device such as "stable work platform which will permit his energies to be used in accomplishing the task and not in overcoming body instability.” He said that during extravehicular activity on NASA’s Gemini missions nearly 80 per cent of the astronauts’ energy had been expended to keep still and avoid tumbling. Johnston also recommended further investigation of metabolic expenditures required to perform work in space: twice Gemini astronauts had been forced to return to their spacecraft, overheated and exhausted, after struggling with relatively simple tasks. (Wilford, NYT, 10/12/66, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, presented a comprehensive review of NASA’s Gemini program and Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, gave a detailed biomedical report on the Gemini missions. Observations on the effects of spaceflight on man’s system had revealed significant changes involving only cardiovascular, hematopoietic, and musculoskeletal systems, but even these changes appeared to be adaptive in nature and were no cause for concern, Dr. Berry said. Results of a study on red blood cell loss during spaceflight were inconclusive, Dr. Berry reported; hyperoxia, lack of inert diluent gas, relative immobility of crew, dietary factors, and weightlessness were being examined as possible causes. (Tech. Wk, 10/17/66, 16) Soviet scientists V. E. Belai, P. V. Vassilyev, and G. D. Glod reported "significant changes in the effect of various pharmaceutical preparations” under spaceflight conditions and emphasized that new medicines adapted and tested for space were necessary. Report indicated U.S.S.R. used drugs in manned spaceflight both for "therapeutic purposes or to increase the resistance of the human organism to unfavorable effects.” Drugs mentioned included narcotics, to relax cosmonauts; stimulants; cardiovascular preparations; and antiradiation medications. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13) Soviet scientists A. A. Gurjian, A. V. Yeremin, and V. I. Stepanzov said the dynamics of men working in free space was one of the most important problems connected with manned spaceflight. They had developed a series of arm and leg movements for cosmonauts to maneuver into working position, which included raising one hand over the head and rotating arm in cone-like fashion to cause an opposite body reaction and enable cosmonaut to face about. (Av. Wk., 10/17/66, 30-31) Phil Bono, Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems Div., encouraged by recovery, virtually undamaged, of forward section of gemini v-Titan II booster from the Atlantic in September 1965 and of an intact Atlas-Centaur insulation panel in November 1565, proposed a "near-term technique for the land recovery of an earth-orbital stage” to be applied specifically to the Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IVB). (Av. Wk, 10/24/66, 32) H. B. Bjurstedt, Karolinska Institute of Sweden, suggested that moon’s low gravity field might lead to an accompanying loss of normal g-tolerance. He acknowledged that this was an uncertain extrapolation and that physiological effects of such exposure were as yet unknown. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13-14) Soviet delegate Vassily V. Parin narrated new film showing postflight activities of space dogs Veterok and Ugolyek, launched Feb. 22, 1966, in cosmos cx. Dogs, who lost up to one third of their preflight body weight during 22-day mission, appeared very weak and dazed when they emerged from capsule, but fihn sequence taken four months later showed them completely recovered. Parin said flight had studied neurological regulators of cardiovascular system. (Tech. Wk, 10/24/66, 13) Dr. Luigi Napolitano, Univ. of Naples, was elected new president of iaf. (Tech. Wk., 10/24/66, 13)
Vice president of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Boris Konstantinov discussed mission of Proton spacecraft series in Tass interview: "Research already carried out with the help of the Proton stations gives reason to expect that the growing weight of such laboratories will allow scientists to delve deeper into the processes occurring within the universe.” He revealed that proton in, launched July 6, would attempt to experimentally detect "quarks,” fundamental particles believed to appear during collision of cosmic ray particles with atoms of interstellar environment. Spacecraft carried "new, complicated instrumentation which is more sensitive than the old equipment.” (Tass, 6/8/66)
Lowell T. Wingert, at&t vice president, wrote a letter to ComSatCorp urging discussions on development of a large-capacity communications satellite for "long haul domestic communications of all types,” to be owned and operated by ComSatCorp with "equitable access to domestic common carriers” in return for "bearing their share of ComSatCorp’s charges.” He called for ComSatCorp and other interested communications users "to undertake a joint study promptly with the hope of placing this newest type of communications facility into early domestic use.” (NYT3/25/66, 48; at&t Release)
Report of the White House Committee on Meteorology concluded that global weather experiment using meteorological satellite and network of sensors on constant-altitude balloons, remote land stations, and ocean buoys could be deployed in four years for $50 million. Assignment of overall management responsibility given to single agency to begin design study was discussed in Aviation Week. Designated Ghost (global horizontal sounding technique), project would attempt to extend atmospheric measurements to that 90% of the earth’s surface not yet adequately covered, using meteorological satellite in 600-mi.-altitude polar orbit to obtain pair of readings from all global points every 12 hrs. In addition, 1,000 to 3,000 super-pressure balloons would be floated at six different atmospheric levels to measure wind, pressure, temperature, humidity, and overpressure. NASA Nimbus B meteorological satellite, scheduled for launch in 1967, would carry interrogation, recording, and locating system experiment (Iris) designed to perform ranging and data collection function on which Ghost was based. However, NASA would attempt only limited experiments with Iris involving a check of the system’s ability to locate fixed sensor packages, and track them on slow-moving and fast-moving platforms, Dr. Morris Tepper, Director, Meteorological Programs Div., NASA Office of Space Science and Applications, told Aviation Week. Tepper said any agency providing its own transponders and funding its own equipment could participate in the Iris tests. (Av. Wk., 1/3/66,55)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
Sir Sydney Camm, British aircraft designer who designed the RAF Hurricane fighter used in World War II, the Hunter fighter, the P-1127 Vtol aircraft, and other combat aircraft, died in London. Sir Sydney, honorary fellow and member of council of Royal Aeronautical Society, had received the Society’s Gold Medal in 1958 and had been selected to receive the Guggenheim Medal, highest U.S. aeronautical award, in the spring. (NYT, 3/14/66, 31)
President Johnson signed into law Marine Resources and Engineering Development Act of 1966, establishing national goals for an expanding national oceanographic effort. Legislation, sponsored by Sen. Warren G.	Magnuson (D-Wash.), provided for Cabinet-level National Council of Marine Resources and Engineering Development—and administrative and coordinating organization similar to nasc. Chairman would be Vice President. Bill also provided for 15-member Marine Science, Engineering and Resources Commission to conduct 18-mo. study of U.S. oceanographic capabilities and recommend Government organizational plan for oceanography. (CR, 6/2/66, 11490-92; Wash. Post, 6/19/66, A17)
U.S. Sst program had been assigned "Dx” priority—highest manufacturing priority usually reserved for key defense and space programs—by President Johnson in April without public announcement, the press reported. The New York Times questioned secrecy and priority implied by President’s decision: "It was an error to keep the decision secret.” (Clark, NYT, 8/7/66, 1; WSJ, 8/9/66, 1; NYT, 8/8/66, C26)
Tonnage of U.S. bombs dropped on Vietnam in 1966 would surpass that dropped by U.S. in the entire Pacific during World War II or during three years of the Korean War, Ted Sell reported in the World Journal Tribune. U.S. planned to drop 638,000 tons of bombs in 1966 compared to 502,781 tons dropped by usaf in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945. (Sell, WJT, 10/3/66, 4)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, testifying on the nasa FY 1967 budget request before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that the gap between the U.S. and Soviet space programs still remained and "this budget will not close it. We are as much as 2 years behind the Soviet Union in certain important aspects of space power. In . . . 1965, they launched 52 Cosmos satellites; successfully orbited a 3-man spacecraft; demonstrated a communications satellite capability with 2 Molniya spacecraft; and orbited the heaviest payload by anyone in the world to date, indicating they have developed a new launch vehicle with some WA to 3 million pounds of thrust. Since the beginning of 1966 they have achieved a successful soft landing on the moon and they have reached Venus with two probes. "The Soviet program shows every evidence of a continuing major commitment to long-term, large-scale operations in space. . . . The massive Soviet commitment to a rapid buildup and a long-term program underlines the importance they attached to advancing their space capabilities. It will require a strong and increasing effort initiated no later than fiscal year 1968 and vigorously pushed in the years after the United States has achieved a manned lunar landing to prevent them from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 5)
White Paper released by U.K. Defence Minister Denis Healey said RAF would buy 50 F-lll variable wing bombers from U.S. for 2.1 million pounds ($5,880,000) each and that plans for new British aircraft carrier had been dropped. F-lll aircraft operating from land bases would take over the strike-reconnaissance and air-defense functions of carriers. First Sea Lord, Adm. Sir David Luce, resigned in protest; Navy Minister Christopher Mayhew had resigned Feb. 19. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/66, Al; Lewis, NYT, 2/23/66, 1, 5; Meyer, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, All	_	_ Reconnaissance satellites, adapted for peaceful observations of earth’s surface, would bring revolutionary scientific and economic advances, Willis B. Foster, Director of Manned Space Science in NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications, predicted: "Remote sensing from space has unique capabilities, particularly in the opportunity it provides for repetitive synoptic coverage of the earth’s surface. . . . Spaceborne sensors will add to the knowledge of the figure of the earth, its mass distribution, and its magnetic and gravity fields. Movement of glaciers, growth of deltas, growth of crops, and even growth of populations can all be followed with this type of survey.” (Text) Austin M. Stanton, president and board chairman of Varo, Inc., said features of space such as airlessness, weightlessness, extreme temperature, and radiation could be "exploited as a completely new realm” for manufacturing. He said the earth might ultimately be encircled by a "vast doughnut-like ring 150,000 miles in circumference,” of articulated orbiting manufacturing facilities: "As a businessman, I propose that the time is ripe for a profitable industrial venture in space. ... It will not be difficult to persuade investors to venture into buying stock in the new companies for three reasons: the predictions of the early advocates of astronautics have been fulfilled; the efforts of space agencies have been spectacularly successful; and . . . the communications satellite venture seems sound.” (Hill, NYT, 2/27/66, 60) The massive investment in technology and manpower created by space programs could be used to handle pressing problems associated with anticipated population growth on earth, suggested Dr. Peter A. Castruccio, director of IBM’s advanced space programs. Satellites could survey earth from space, pinpoint tillable land and examine staple crops using infrared techniques to detect diseases invisible to the naked eye. Seas could be mapped, isolating concentrations of fish and edible seaweed, and growing consumption of water offset by using satellites to map snow fields and glaciers. Underground rivers could be detected from space by measuring the tiny difference in soil temperatures above them; such streams were estimated to have 3,000 times the water present in all known rivers. Other fields, such as weather control and geological survey searches for fuel and minerals, could also be handled from space. (M&R, 2/28/66, 9, 12) "The ultimate goal of weather modification and control may be realized only if man himself is placed in a Space Meteorological Lab,” suggested Sidney Sternberg, vice president and general manager of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. He said the "ability and bandwidth of transfer of information between experiments and experimenter could not be duplicated by unmanned observations.” (M&R, 2/28/66, 12)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey attended ceremony at nasa Hq. celebrating successful launch of essa i, essa’s first operational meteorological satellite. During ceremony, first pictures taken by essa i, launched by nasa from etr Feb. 3, were released; nasa Administrator James E. Webb administered the oath of office to nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and the Vice President presented nasa Exceptional Service medals to Dr. Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Programs; Herbert I. Butler, nasa Chief of Operational Satellites, gsfc; and David S. Johnson, essa Environmental Satellite Center Director. Vice President Humphrey praised the spirit of cooperation between nasa and Dept, of Commerce, noting that "science leaves no room for jurisdictional disputes.” He said of NASA’s Administrator and Deputy Administrator: "I know of no two men who are more dedicated to our space program than Jim Webb and Bob Seamans. Their devotion is almost sacrificial.” (nasa Release 66-29)
The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-fueled rocket from Auburn, Mass., 40 yrs. ago. Annually on the anniversary of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address, emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: "I feel the necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he could foresee "dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration, notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of "a whole family of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3) development of "recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneuverable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5) improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be made in a week or less; (6) "launching of unmanned probes to every part of the solar system—and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as well.” (Text; CR, 5/4/66) National Space Club Press Award "in recognition of his exceptional photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went to nasa photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews "for his contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as a key engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space flight, culminating in Project Mercury... and in the successful Gemini program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for "making a major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented jointly to msc, usaf Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for "Danish Rocketry in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to university of recipient’s choice) "in recognition of the need for higher scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C. (Text; Program)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president and designer of numerous aircraft, was named recipient of the Air Force Academy’s 1966 Thomas D. White National Defense Award for "outstanding contribution to the national defense and security of the United States.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/66, A18)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
Dr. Clark Blanchard Millikan, director of Cal Tech Graduate Aeronautical Laboratories and pioneer in the development of multiengine, high-altitude airplanes, jet propulsion, and guided missiles, died of a heart ailment. Millikan, chairman of the board of jpl in its early days, had been awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work in wind tunnel research during World War II and had been given the British King’s Medal. (NYT, 1/3/66, 27; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/3/66; M&R, 1/10/66, 13)
President Johnson said at news conference at Texas White House that there would be $60-million program reduction in NASA FY 1967 budget requiring some contract cancellations. About $30 million in expenditures was involved. Asked if changes in the NASA budget would cause postponement of target dates for any of the space programs, Johnson said: ". . . $30-million out of some several billion dollars wouldn’t cause a change in the target date of the moon schedule, if you are talking about that.” (Pres. Doc., 12/S/66, 1741; Transcript, NYT, 11/30/66, 18)
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey told group of young scientists visiting Washington, D.C., under National Youth Science Camp program to devote some of their talents to solving problems on earth as well as in space. "If we can put a Surveyor on the moon to take pictures, why can’t we get some one in from La Guardia Airport to downtown New York City before he collects his old age pension ... we must try to harness our divergent and separated resources and our energies to solve the problems of our earthly environment.” The Vice President forecast scientific break-throughs for the year 2000, including the elimination of bacterial and viral diseases, the correction of hereditary defects, landing of men on Mars, farming of the ocean, manufacture of synthetic proteins, control of weather on regional basis, and creation of life in the laboratory. (Text)
Three earth-orbiting objects not identified "with any launching or country of origin” were reported by gsfc Satellite Situation Report. Two had inclination of 85° and the third, 35°. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66,19) September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding rocket were launched from nasa Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in 1969—probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration had definite plans for "very active post-Apollo schedule,” but refused to "put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unmanned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice President foresaw no possibility of merging usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 12, 13) During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal began Sept. 6 with pictures from essa i meteorological satellite, launched Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Regions photographed—primarily Atlantic Ocean and Western Europe-—had been matched so operations of satellite systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs: U.S. scientists found Soviet photos "poor” in quality; Soviet scientists described U.S. photos as "usable.” Receipt of photos from cosmos cxxii had enabled U.S. to analyze satellite’s instrumentation: cosmos cxxii carried pair of 48° TV cameras canted 16.5° to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about 690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1°; frames transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 26-7; Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
Reps. William Green (D-Pa.) and Earle Cabeil (D-Tex.) were appointed to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replacing Reps. Bob Casey (D-Tex.) and Brock Adams (D-Wash.), who resigned, (nasa lar V/41)
Dr. Eric A. Walker, president of Pennsylvania State Univ. and chairman of the National Science Board, was elected president of the National Academy of Engineering, (nae News) Dr. Vannevar Bush, Honorary Chairman of the Corporation, MIT, received the National Academy of Engineering’s first Founders’ Medal at 2nd annual nae meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Bush, former president of Carnegie Institution of Washington, director of Office of Scientific Research and Development during World War II, and naca Chairman 1939-41, was cited as "the engineer who mobilized this country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the blueprint for the post-war cooperation of science and government.” (nae Release, 4/19/66)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x unmanned spacecraft had achieved lunar orbit (1,000-km. [621-mi.] apolune, 350-km. [217-mi.] perilune, 3-hr. period) at 1:44 p.m. est April 3 to become world’s first artificial moon satellite, U.S.S.R. announced at 23rd Communist Party Congress meeting in the Kremlin. Accomplishment was dramatized by direct broadcast from luna x of the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” Tass released details of luna x’s structure and flight. 3,530-lb. spacecraft consisted of two main parts: moon satellite section and engine facilities section. 540-lb. satellite was an airtight package containing radio equipment, telemetry system, equipment for studying the moon and near-lunar space, heat-regulation and power supply systems, and small jet engines to stabilize the flight. Approximately 8,000 km. (4,969 mi.) from the lunar surface, spacecraft was oriented so that jet of the engine was directed against direction of its movement. At approximately 1:44 p.m. est retrorockets fired automatically, slowing spacecraft to 1.3 km. (.8 mi.) per second and putting it in lunar orbit. Twenty minutes after switching off retrorockets, earth command was sent to separate instrumented lunar satellite from engine facilities section, and first radio communications session was held. Equipment was functioning normally and radio communications were stable. There was no suggestion that photos of the lunar surface were being transmitted to earth, or that LUNA x was "tumbling” [see April 3]. (Tass, 4/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/4/66, A6; AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/66, A12) Aoril 4: House Committee on Science and Astronautics voted to report $4,986,864,150 NASA authorization bill—$25,135,580 less than $5,012, 000,000 nasa had requested for FY 1967. (nasa lar V/57-58)
Soviet rocket pioneer Vladimir Vasilyevich Razumov, presumed to have died in Stalinist purges of Leningrad during World War II, had been located and interviewed by Leningradskaya Pravda reporters. Razumov had headed the Leningrad Jet Study Group of space enthusiasts until Stalin abolished it in 1935. His residence was not disclosed, possibly because of his continued association with missile manufacture. (NYT, 1/10/66, 46C)
nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Breene M. Kerr, reviewing nasa technology utilization program for 1965 in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, stated that the total number of NASA Tech Briefs now published was more than 600. He continued: "We anticipate publication of approximately 700 Tech Briefs during calendar year 1966. ... we estimate the average Tech Brief is seen by more than 10,000 persons. . . . Industry interest in our program is . . . indicated by the fact that approximately 1,500 persons visited our Field Center Technology Utilization Offices during calendar 1965. . . . Two additional Regional Dissemination Programs have been started in the last year, one at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque and the other at Southeastern State College in Durant, Okla. One hundred and thirty-one companies are now paying annual membership fees at our established computer-based centers. ... Of real significance ... is the fact that approximately 3,000 companies have received some degree of service from these centers. . . . We have also recently concluded an interagency agreement with the Small Business Administration whereby several of that organization’s field offices, under an experimental program, will be providing NASA technology to selected small business concerns.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 634-9)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew by helicopter to gsfc for three-hour tour, during which they watched GSFC technicians receive first photos from essa ii meteorological satellite. Successful operation of essa ii officially created world’s first fully operational weather-forecasting satellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey proclaimed Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill "Multiple Sclerosis Woman of the Year” in ceremony at his Washington, D.C., office and presented her with engraved bronze hope chest— symbol of Multiple Sclerosis Society. Dr. Gill, an MS patient for over 20 yrs., was with NASA Manned Flights Experiments Office, ossa. She formerly had been Chief of In-Flight Sciences, ossa, and on March 1 had received one of six Federal Women’s Awards of 1966. (Wash. Post, 6/16/66, Dl)
T. R. May, vice president of Lockheed-Georgia Co., disclosed plans to build commercial version of the C-5A military fan jet which could carry up to 900 passengers and thus reduce fares drastically. May, speaking at an Air Force Assn, seminar in Salt Lake City, said Lockheed "fully expects” to have the aircraft, designated the L-500, "flying commercial routes” in the early 1970’s. Lockheed-Georgia Co. had received a $1.4-billion dod contract Sept. 30,1965, to develop and build the C-5A—a military carrier that would be world’s largest aircraft. Delivery was scheduled for mid-1968. (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66, Dl; NYT, 2/18/66, 53M)
Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, "chief constructor of space systems for the Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after World War II. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union, Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from sputnik i in 1957 to voskhod ii manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; upi, Wash. Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66, 82)
The study of future national space objectives by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight was termed a "timely and thoughtful” document in Technology Week editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting that its major contribution "is to focus attention on the urgent need for a major decision concerning the nation’s space program,” Coughlin added: "Not only does Congress have a role to play in such decisions, but the Teague subcommittee is moving to fill a vacuum in the decision-making process. The Administration has shown itself reluctant to bring forth decisions in this area. NASA itself has backed away from defining the next space objective. The subcommittee is performing a valuable national service in attempting to bring the matter to a head.” (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 50)
Rep. Albert Thomas (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Appropriations’ Independent Offices Subcommittee, died of cancer. A member of the House for almost 30 yrs., Thomas had heen deeply interested in Congressional funding for naca, nsf, and NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/66, B8)
Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor (usaf), special consultant to President Johnson, was appointed president of Institute for Defense Analysis replacing Dr. J. P. Ruina, who would return to mit. ida also named Dr. Gordon J. F.	MacDonald, of ucla’s Dept, of Planetary and Space Sciences, vice president for research. Both appointments would take effect in September. (ida Release)
General Dynamics Corp. announced that U.S.S. Redstone, one of three World War II T-2 type tankers being converted by corporation into Project Apollo tracking-communications vessel, had undergone initial sea trials out of Quincy, Mass. (NYT, 6/12/66)
Question of "garbage problem” in space was raised during recent House Appropriations Committee hearings on Spacetrack, which maintained surveillance on over 1,800 orbiting objects, Drew Pearson reported in Washington Post. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Alexander H. Flax replied there was no danger of collision "because of the tremendous amount of volume that these 1,800 objects are disposed in. It is like the problem of stepping on a flea in Grand Central Station. It could happen, but it is highly unlikely.” (Pearson, Wash. Post, 6/27/66)
ucla dedicated new center for space sciences, Schlichter Hall, made possible by $2-million NASA grant. Six-story building, named for Dr. Louis Byrne Schlichter, Prof. Emeritus of Geophysics and Director of ucla Institute of Geophysics from 1947 to 1962, would contain 30 large laboratories and 50 research and administrative offices. Dr. T. L. K. Smull, Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator, said in a dedication speech: "nasa thinks that this is a singularly important type of activity as many of the problems confronting NASA in the space program reach across disciplinary lines and require the combined efforts of chemists, physicists, mathematicians, engineers, biologists, psychologists and even, on occasion, political scientists, social scientists and economists.” Other speakers were Dr. Thomas Gold, director of Cornell Univ. Center for Radiophysics and Space Research; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics; ucla Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Schlichter; Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald; and Nobel Laureate Willard F. Libby, director of ucla Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, (ucla Release, 4/3/66; Text)
President Johnson announced his intention to nominate Dr. Werner A. Baum, Vice President for Scientific Affairs of New York Univ., as Deputy Administrator of essa to succeed V/Adm. H. Arnold Karo who would retire Jan. 1, 1967. (Pres. Doc., 9/19/66, 1305)
Charles W. Harper, Director, Aeronautics Div., nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart), testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on the nasa aeronautics program. Citing the need for close coordination between scientific groups within Government, he said: "Recognizing the Air Force interest in hypersonic flight, a proposal was made to the Air Force Systems Command Headquarters that the two agencies prepare a single coordinate program representing a national effort in hypersonic technology with each agency supporting that portion most appropriate to its capabilities. The proposal was accepted. . . . Technical approval of general plans is through the nasa oart Office and the AFSC RTD Office and generation and coordination of program details are developed through appointed technical groups from the NASA and Air Force research centers. To date this coordination activity has been very effective. ...” As major elements of NASA’s 1967 aeronautics program, Harper listed: (1) a continuing effort in advanced research; (2) major effort in support of Sst with emphasis on flight operations and advanced propulsion; (3) a substantial increase in research in propulsion systems appropriate to the whole speed range, from V/Stol to hypersonic speeds with special attention directed to the noise problem and supported by two new facilities; (4) a substantially increased effort in V/Stol research supported by construction of the first research facility to be built expressly for conducting research on problems unique to V/Stol aircraft. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 170-1, 179)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed B. L. Dorman, vice president of Aerojet-General Corp., Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Jan. 16, 1967, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) Acting Administrator for Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1967. Both positions were formerly held by William B. Rieke, who resigned to return to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. (nasa Release 66-327)
$500-million XB-70 No. 2 experimental bomber and its F-104 chase plane collided and burned near Barstow, Calif., destroying both aircraft and killing F-104 pilot Joseph A. Walker and XB-70 co-pilot Maj. Carl S. Cross (usaf). Walker, NASA test pilot, held world’s records for his 4,104-mph and 354,200-ft.-altitude flights in X-15 rocket research aircraft. XB-70 pilot A1 White ejected in seat capsule and parachuted to ground, suffering arm.and back injuries. On basis of preliminary usaf reports that F-104 apparently hit two vertical stabilizers on XB-70 at 25,000-ft. altitude during "routine” flight, President Johnson praised pilots who gave "their lives to advancing science and technology” and added "immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in the effort” to advance supersonic flight, usaf later revealed that aircraft were flying in formation as close as 10 ft. with T-38, F-4B, and F-5 aircraft "to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Disclosure prompted AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard Schriever to establish two usaf accident boards and Congress to designate House Appropriations Committee to investigate the disaster. (Edwards afb Release; Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748; Wash. Post, 6/14/66, A3)
National Science Foundation must abandon its passive role and be more dynamic if scientific progress is to keep pace with society’s growing technological needs, concluded a report released by the Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee viewed the revitalization of nsf as "an area of the government-science relationship in which Congress should provide a large share of the leadership essential to significant improvement in the Nation’s resources and development.” Some recommendations of the report: (1) NSF supplement its traditional philosophy with positive plans and programs; (2) character and functions of the National Science Board be strengthened; (3) authority of nsf’s director be widened; and (4) important executive and policy problems of NSF be acted upon administratively or legislatively in the near future. (Text, Committee Print)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told AP he saw "no urgency” in landing on the moon first. Discounting the theory that a manned lunar landing would have military significance, Senator Anderson said "had the United States and the Soviet Union cooperated from the start in space exploration, more knowledge at less expense might have resulted.” (AP, NYT, 12/15/66, 34)
Former Vice President Richard Nixon told a Republican fund-raising dinner in Houston that U.S. should divert some of its space exploration funds to the Vietnam war effort. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A36)
Report on national document-handling systems in science and technology prepared by Federal Council for Science and Technology’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information (cosati) was summarized in Science by Launor F. Carter, vice president of System Development Corp.-—a participant in the study. Report had recommended that Office of Science and Technology: (1) accelerate its efforts to organize an integrated national network of information and document-handling systems in science and technology; (2) collaborate with other Federal agencies and private organizations to develop comprehensive, coordinated program and sponsor effective legislation; (3) encourage private sector to formulate plans for its consideration; and (4) encourage Federal support of experiments in information technology, including prototype information systems. (Carter, Science, 12/9/66, 1299-1304)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told Clear Lake (Tex.) Chamber of Commerce that he foresaw no curtailment of space program because of Vietnam war. If there were curtailment, "it will be aimed at all Government programs.” (Amerine, Houston Chron., 10/21/66)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, speaking to a group of Life magazine executives visiting ksc, remarked:	. . the space program has added greater meaning to our lives. I have talked to a great many Americans recently about the benefits of the space program, and I have found that my fellow Americans get a thrill and a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction out of this great undertaking of our nation. "Our young people have a new frontier to explore. And this comes at a time when we thought all the frontiers were gone. They have new and exciting places to go out in the universe, new ideas to bring home and enrich their lives, new challenges to hone their character. "Yesterday our horizon was limited by the globe of earth, and today, as a result of this new frontier, our horizons are as limitless as the universe itself.” (Text)
A "commercial missile” that could transport 170 passengers from Bombay to New York in 39 min. was described at the Pacific Area Travel Association Conference in New Delhi by B. F. Coggan, corporate vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co. He said the rocket—which would reach a speed of 17,000 mph—would be a bell-shaped vehicle 114 ft. high with a diameter of from 33 to 49 ft. It would weigh more than three million pounds at liftoff. Passenger compartment would have 45 individual passenger couches arranged on each of four decks; during the period of weightless flight, passengers would be held to the couches by belts. On a typical flight plan, Coggan said, the rocket would reach 125-mi. peak altitude. Then, it could hover and maneuver horizontally before landing on four extendable legs. (NYT, 1/29/66, 54)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey said in address at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colo.: "It was seventy years ago this May that Samuel Pierpont Langley, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, launched his sixteen-foot, steam-powered model airplane off the Potomac River and flew a half a mile in the incredible time of 90 seconds. . . . "Seventy years—in the larger scheme of history—is not a very long time. "But though those seventy years are but the average length of a full American life, they reach back into an incredibly distant world—a world that has receded from us by a quantum of change that no other period in the vast sweep of human history can surpass. "One measure of that change is flight itself. "I flew here this morning from Washington—nonstop—in 3 hours and 20 minutes. "Had I made the flight from Washington to Colorado Springs in Langley’s plane, it would have required 127 days—and we would have had to make 2,987 fuel stops along the way. . . (Text)
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
Role of NASA in aeronautical research and development was examined in Policy Planning for Aeronautical Research and Development, 279-page report released by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Document noted "space budget demands have probably hampered what might have been expected to be a normal growth of the level of effort in aeronautics within the agency” and questioned adequacy of $124 million (about 2%) earmarked for aeronautical r&d out of nasa FY 1967 appropriation of $5,012 billion. Separate budget for aeronautics was suggested as possible solution. (Senate Doc. No. 90, 5/19/66)
Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee would conduct a “full review” of the Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed three Apollo astronauts, Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex) announced. {NYT, 1/29/67,47; WPost, 1/29/67, A18)
House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations released testimony on U.S. missile strategy by dod officials at closed hearing March 20. Dr. Charles M. Herzfeld, who resigned as Director of Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) May 26, testified that advanced missile systems based in space rather than on land were being studied. He recalled that dod had studied, until 1964, the “Bambi” system designed to use satellites to locate and destroy enemy missiles shortly after they had been launched. Work had been stopped because it was “much too costly,” but “we think the time is getting ripe again to look at the whole question because the costs of putting things in orbit have gone down dramatically, the reliability of space engineering has gone up dramatically so that the overall cost of the system ought to come down significantly.” Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, revealed that repairs had had to be made on all Minuteman icbms because of missile’s failure to fire in three tests during October 1966. He emphasized, however, that all missiles were operational at the time of his testimony and said overall readiness of the Minuteman and Polaris missile forces was “excellent.” (Beecher, NYT, 5/31/67, 1, 28; W Star, 5/31/67, A6)
Although junior colleges constitute a major segment of higher education in terms of number of institutions (about one-third), their resources . for science, in terms of expenditures and manpower, are meager,” nsf reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee, nsf report, The Junior College and Education in the Sciences, stated that junior college “share of expenditures for separately budgeted research and development, in 196364, was one-tenth of 1 percent of the total for all colleges and universities; for science ‘plant,’ 3.7 percent; and for instruction and departmental research, 4.8 percent.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying before the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries’ Subcommittee on Oceanography, summarized nasa’s activities in national marine science program. NASA’s activities, primarily exploratory, were aimed at ascertaining what potential benefits could be gained in oceanography through the application of space techniques and equipment, he said. Major areas included: (1) investigation of the applicability of existing space technology to problems of oceanography; (2) studies of remote sensing of oceanographic phenomena, including analysis of data obtainable from space missions not originally conceived for oceanographic purposes such as Gemini, Tiros, and Nimbus photos; and (3) development and test of remote sensors for viewing and discrimination of oceanographic phenomena. Spacecraft, Dr. Seamans said, “will not supplant surface, subsurface, and airborne research and monitoring systems; rather they will supplement them. The absolute accuracy, three-dimensional capability, and selective resolution of these conventional systems will continue to be necessary and must be utilized as a part of the overall system to their best advantage. However, Earth-orbiting spacecraft have unique advantages for obtaining certain types of marine data as follows: repetitive worldwide coverage, greater frequency of observation (once or twice daily for polar orbiting satellites and continuous lor geostationary satellites), ability to observe remote areas at will, and an ‘all-weather’ capability for certain parameters.” (Testimony; SBD, 12/20/67,257)
U.S.S.R. and North Vietnam signed agreement to establish a satellite tracking station in North Vietnam and cooperate in synchronic photography of earth satellites. (Reuters, NYT, 10/19/67,9) Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on role of Congress in r&d in 1970s. Citing increasing “Government concern for the involvement of science and technology in the welfare and security of the American people,” he said it was increasingly obvious that science and technology, a prime source of many environmental problems, must be means by which they are solved. He also called for realism in minimizing influence of competition between political philosophies on implementation of scientific knowledge for human problems. “We must direct more and more attention ... to the effects of urbanization, such as the pollution of air, water and the land, the practical control of population, to offsetting the constantly decreasing supply of natural resources such as fresh water, arable land, and fuels.” (Text) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), speaking on techniques for forecasting technological advances, emphasized need for enlightened and comprehensive planning and bold, imaginative management. He described technological forecasting as one of most valuable new tools for planners and managers. Indicating that forecasting must go beyond advanced planning, he called for its use in determining long-range implications of technological progress. If a manager, keeping a program open to possible advances in technology, chose improved performance, then he could be assured that when his truly advanced item entered the market or the military inventory, it would be effective for the maximum number of years. (Av Wk, 12/4/67,21) All scientific instruments and spacecraft subsystems performed properly during encounter sequence, as they had throughout flight. Sequence of 15 significant events during encounter, occultation, closest approach, exit occultation, and return to cruise mode, had begun at 10:49 pm edt Oct. 18 and had ended at 3:55 am edt Oct. 23. Full recorded account of experiments performed by Mariner V—first and second playbacks— exhibited clear and steady signals, jpl scientists obtained meaningful scientific data from all of spacecraft’s experiments. Results of experiments included: solar plasma probe and magnetometer showed existence of solar wind/Venus interaction; trapped radiation found no energetic particles or radiation belts, and found magnetic moment less than 1% of earth’s; S-band occultation estimated carbon dioxide and found ionospheric observations on daytime side indicated electron density; dual-frequency radio propagation provided data on Venus mass as 81.50% of earth’s mass, and astronomical unit determination agreed with radar computations; and ultraviolet photometer found hydrogen corona comparable with that of earth, detected no oxygen, and found night airglow to be very faint ultraviolet emission detected at dark limb of planet—probably result of chemical reactions, particle bombardment of electrical discharge. Spacecraft’s mission also was to accumulate data on interplanetary environment during period of increased solar activity. After return to cruise mode, Mariner V would resume report on interplanetary space weather. By end of November 1967, when earth was no longer in direction of high-gain antenna pattern, communications would be terminated; however, three-month-duration communications would be possible during next five years. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 10/20/67, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 10/22/67, 12)
North American Aviation, Inc. (naa) , NASA’s prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, announced major management changes: (1) William B. Bergen, former President of Martin Marietta Co., who joined naa April 7, replaced Harrison A. Storms, Jr., as President of Space Div.—formerly Space and Information Systems Div.; (2) Ralph H. Ruud, corporate vice president in charge of manufacturing, replaced William Snelling as executive vice president of Space Div. Snelling assumed new post of assistant vice president; (3) Bastian Hello, former Martin Marietta Co. executive, assumed new post of vice president in charge of Space Div.’s launch operations at ksc; and (4) Paul R. Vogt, former vice president of engineering at naa’s Rocketdyne Div., assumed new post of assistant to President of Space Div. in charge of quality control. (Clark, NYT, 5/2/67,1,53; upi, W Star, 5/2/67, A13; O’Toole, W Post, 5/2/67, A4; Wilford, NYT, 5/4/67, 9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that NASA would present, within two weeks, detailed estimates of how much the Jan. 27 Apollo accident had cost; what changes in spacecraft would be made to reduce fire hazards; and the earliest date for the first manned Apollo mission. He declined to disclose his thoughts concerning canceling nasa’s contract with North American Aviation, Inc., because of failures to meet development schedules and stay within cost estimates: “They did not do all die things they should have done, but I can say the same thing about us at NASA.” He stated his conviction that he was obligated to “act responsibly in respecting confidences between himself and contractors.” Denying that undue risks were taken in order to speed the program, Webb emphasized that NASA had “never put schedule above safety.” Apollo 204 Review Board’s study was “a good report,” he said, but it should not be construed to be an evaluation of the entire space program: “The board has done an outstanding investigation of one accident but it is not a full and fair appraisal of the space program... [and] cannot be taken as a guide to the realities of this program. . . .” In response to questioning Webb stated that, in his judgment, the pacing item in the manned lunar landing program remained the Saturn V booster, and when it was ready for manned flight there would be a spacecraft ready. Committee Chairman Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) requested that nasa witnesses appear again not later than May 9 to detail changes the program, as suggested by Webb. (Wilford, NYT, 4/18/67, C26; O’Toole, W Post, 4/18/67, Al; SBD, 4/18/67, 275)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described correction of “serious procedural deficiencies in the flow of timely information” from NASA to the Committee, J. V. Reistrup reported. A letter from Rep. Miller to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) had explained the corrective measures, worked out with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. NASA would notify the Committee staff immediately of any accident involving death or serious property damage; NASA Oversight Committee would be briefed every three months on Committee-defined “critical problem areas”; NASA would report significant program changes and problems as soon as they occurred; and nasa would furnish budget data in October, updating the data monthly. (Reistrup,. W Post, 9/23/67)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, said the scientific community saw a need to develop a spacecraft to make measurements at low altitudes—about 80 mi—to investigate transition between the meteorology of the lower atmosphere and the aeronomy of the upper. In the lower atmosphere the constituents are thoroughly mixed; in the upper, they tend to separate by gravity with the heaviest below and the lightest above. “The importance of this transition region has been revealed by the [sounding] rocket program, but only satellites can provide the global measurements needed to establish the lower boundary conditions for the upper atmosphere as a whole,” Newell said. “Such a mission would require the development of a spacecraft with a restartable engine in order to achieve an adequate lifetime.” (Testimony)
Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, and his Deputy Dr. Alfred J. Eggers testified on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. U.S. space program was entering a period when NASA would . utilize existing capabilities, Dr. Adams said, and it was therefore particularly important for oart to “emphasize new technology so that new systems will be available for the next major thrust in aeronautics and space.” He mentioned highlights of the program to develop new technology: (1) Nerva nuclear rocket engine; (2) experimental research related to hypersonic propulsion; (3) advanced cryogenic engine; (4) improved life-support systems; and (5) increased effort in electronics problems because “electronics systems may well be the limiting factor in our future exploration.” Dr. Eggers noted that r&d budget request in aeronautics for FY 1968 nearly doubled that for 1967 and said the expansion reflected “recognition of the rapidly growing importance of air transportation and the need for increased r&d to provide required advances in the associated technology. Aeronautics is already the order of a $24 billion a year industry and it is netting the nation better than $1 billion per annum in favorable balance of payments. Accordingly, our proposed major strengthening of aeronautics r&d will be to the great commercial as well as military benefit of the nation in the future.” (Transcript, 8, 13; Testimony)
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
TV coverage of space launches and press coverage of rising costs of space program had been almost the only source of public exposure of U.S. space effort, said Aerospace Systems Group Vice President J. Lynn Helms at Rotary International meeting during Michigan Univ.’s Ses-quicentennial Celebration. Speaking on “A Citizen’s Return on Investment,” he outlined many accomplishments of U.S. space program that affect daily life, stating that “money spent in the quest for new information keeps coming back to us again and again ... a society that continually invests part of its annual profits into the future is a progressive society. Progressive societies serve their people better, in living standards, medicine, and health, and consideration for and by other nations of the world.” (Text)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), introduced to Senate new $5.1-billion FT 1968 NASA authorization bill (S. 1296) to reflect President Johnson’s Feb. 28 request for funds to develop nuclear rocket technology. Original NASA authorization bill for $5.05 billion (S. 781) had been introduced Jan. 31. (CR, 3/15/67, S3781)
Technology Week marked beginning of its second decade of publishing by asking some of the Nation’s leading educators, scientists, and engineers to project their goals for technology, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Sea-borg emphasized the need for man to first choose goals for technology: . . we must give more thought to guiding the direction of our technological future. “. . . if there are any ultimate goals for technology we will know what they are only when we all agree on the goals of man.” MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun proposed an earth resources management system employing space technology—principally, resourcesensing satellites—to meet the needs of the world’s rapidly growing population. Said Dr. von Braunam firmly convinced that one of the great future contributions of our space program will be in helping to manage more effectively the utilization of our world resources.” In discussing long-delayed peaceful application of nuclear explosions—Project Plowshare—Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Lab., suggested that questions of safety, fear of the unknown, limited nuclear test ban, and international politics were chief obstacles to program. Until these obstacles were removed, Plowshare would continue to lie dormant. Prof. Isaac Asimov, Boston Univ. School of Medicine, foresaw that mankind, now faced with the practical need for working under low-gravity conditions, would have to develop “low-gravity engineering.” Low-gravity engineering might also prove useful in future exploration beneath the sea. Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Professor of Genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine, proposed that man’s central technological goal was the harmonization of his technical goals, a process Dr. Lederberg called “eutechnics.” He went on to declare: “In the eutechnical society, the penultimate crime may become to introduce any technological innovation as a subsystem benefit without analyzing its impact on the whole future of man. The ultimate one would be to deny man his humanity by denying him the chance to think, to know himself.” Dr. Charles S. Draper, head of mit’s Aeronautics and Astronautics Dept., emphasized the need to establish an adequate balance between “directly beneficial” and “remedial” technologies. As air and water pollution, land damage from mining, soil erosion, and other problems become acute, man must give more thought to remedial actions for disturbances inflicted on the environment. Dr. Draper suggested space vehicle technology as “. . . an excellent model for the technology of overall environmental control for the earth.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, believed that the big challenge of the next 25 yrs would be the effective management of technology for the public good. Schriever suggested that: “the systems management concept [developed in Nation’s military and space programs] will be required to bring these technologies to bear on these problems. ; . .” Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President, listed 10 aerospace projects which, he felt, should receive major attention during next 20 yrs. Among these projects were use of nuclear power plants in aerial transports to reduce fuel-to-cargo ratios, solution of sonic boom problems, and development of high-density fuels. Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, explored the objectives and benefits of geotechnology— use of geophysical and geochemical knowledge “to intervene in the natural processes of our environment on a massive—and even global— scale.” Dr. Spilhaus said he believed the public would “. . . welcome ... an imaginative experiment in city living designed to remove the chores, dirt, delays, and human wastage, and emphasize the opportunities for social, cultural, economic and recreational advantages that high-density living provides.” In final article, TRW Vice Chairman Simon Ramo wrote: “We are in the science era of mankind; we are not yet in the social era of mankind. ... A quick look at our society shows that science’s greatest challenge now and for the next few decades is for the application of science to human needs.” (Tech Wk, 1/23/67, 32-79)
Report on spaceflight emergencies and spaceflight safety, released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, made several specific recommendations: (1) NASA and USAF continue to devote intensive study effort to spaceflight safety and report periodically to the committee; (2) NASA and usaf establish joint working-level committee to eliminate duplication of effort, assure compatibility in equipment features, conduct joint accident reviews, and achieve a coordinated effort; (3) each agency establish a separate flight safety group to monitor system designs for specific missions to ensure close attention to the problem of flight safety; (4) development of possible space rescue or escape capabilities be considered in the design and development of all future manned spacecraft; and (5) NASA prepare a long-range “plan for meeting future spaceflight emergencies”—including program identification and long-range funding requirements—by the end of 1967. (Text)
Vice President and Mrs. Humphrey, accompanied by nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, would visit msfc and U.S. Army Missile Command (amc) at Redstone Arsenal March 22-23, msfc and AMC announced. Trip was later postponed because Mr. Humphrey felt he should remain in Washington, D.C., to greet President Johnson on his return from a Pacific trip, (mfsc Release; Marshall Star, 3/22/67,1)
Dept, of Agriculture scientists, in April testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Agriculture, predicted that the application of remote sensing techniques developed in conjunction with U.S. space program, could revolutionize agriculture. They requested $340,000 for FY 1968 to adapt equipment to agricultural requirements. Equipment, currently flown in aircraft, was used to identify accurately and within minutes the soil conditions and moisture, crop yield, and incidence and severity of diseases. Dr. G. W. Irving, Jr., Agriculture Administrator of Agricultural Research Service, predicted: “Once we are in operation from satellite-type spacecraft, the possibilities for securing vast amounts of useful information within extremely short time periods are almost limitless.” (AP, B Sun, 5/29/67)
President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget recommendations marked “a turning point in the Nation’s space program,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said President Johnson had “placed before the Congress a program which says that this Nation must go forward in space and not call it quits at the end of this decade.” He summarized recommendations for (1) completion of Apollo program; (2) development of capabilities for long-duration manned space flight in Apollo Applications (aa) program; (3) development of “practical applications of our space know-how” using capabilities of AA program and “advanced unmanned systems like the ats-4”; (4) planetary exploration through Voyager program; (5) development of Nerva II nuclear rocket engine; and (6)	increase in aeronautical research efforts to deal with “emerging problems of civil as well as military aviation” [see Jan. 25]. Webb announced that NASA had established Voyager program management responsibilities “designed to make the best possible utilization of the proved capabilities” of JPL “and of our field centers and laboratories.” Voyager program, since 1964 under NASA Hq. Division of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become a separate division in OSSA with Oran W. Nicks as Director and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director. JPL would be responsible for surface laboratory, tracking, and mission operations systems; msfc, for orbiting spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle systems; and LaRC, for landing capsule bus system. Discussing the NASA program, Webb said: “I should be very clear on the subject of risks. In moving ahead to utilize the resources made available to us, we have had to take technical risks in the development of our equipment and in establishing our schedules. These have included risks that a particular design or line of development would not succeed in meeting the specifications; risks that schedules might not be met; and that we could not recover from a serious setback because we did not have parallel or back-up developments. But we have not knowingly accepted a higher level of risks in order to meet our manned flight schedules. In our specifications, trade-off studies, test criteria, or mission plans, we have taken no risks to the lives or safety of the astronauts that we could find a way to avoid.” Webb urged that decisions on Voyager and aa programs and on Nerva II be made this year to avoid acceleration of the “dispersal of the know-how that we have built up in government, industry, and universities that has already begun___” Questioned by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space technology, Webb replied that U.S.S.R. would be ahead in large spacecraft until “we get the nerva as a third stage for the Saturn V which will roughly double the capability of the Saturn V for Earth-escape missions.” While U.S.S.R. may lead in planetary exploration, he said, U.S. was superior in “the very sophisticated use of microminiaturization and many new techniques of handling data.” (Testimony; Transcript, 14-15, 28-9, 34; NASA Release 67-40; NYT, 3/1/67, 29)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics filed $>4.9-billion nasa authorization bill (H.R. 10340) with the House and recommended that it he passed without amendment [see May 16]. (NASA lar VI/64)
As of .Nov. 15, U.S. had dropped 1,630,500 bombs on North and South Vietnam since July 1965—twice the tonnage dropped during the Korean War, and three times that dropped in the Pacific Theater during World War II. (Wilson, W Post, 1/5/68, 4)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, told AP he did not think “we will ever know what caused that fire” in which three Apollo astronauts died. Thousands of NASA and industry technicians responsible for Apollo I spacecraft would always wonder whether they contributed to the accident, Teague suggested. Asked if he believed NASA officials had taken unnecessary risks to land a man on the moon by 1970, Teague said: “Maybe we were a little bit careless.” He said some of the safety checks probably should have been more thorough, but did not elaborate. (AP, W Star, 3/30/67)
The U.S. should expect “an early Soviet attempt to send a large payload around the moon and recover it on earth,” Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said in releasing committee report: “Review of Soviet Space Program,” prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Library of Congress’ Science Policy Research Div. This 1957-67 review drew comparisons with the corresponding program in U.S. Rep. Miller commented: “At the same time that space efforts in the United States appear to be slackening, the pace of Soviet space flight has picked up by about 60 percent this year over the corresponding ten months total of last year. The strong technological base the Russians are building through a sustained, longterm commitment to space [assures them] sophisticated and intricate planetary probes . . . unmanned or manned space platforms . . . [application of] aerospace technology systems management to a great variety of industrial and social purposes here on earth.” Committee report gave “no simple, direct answer” on “whether there is a space race” but suggested “at the present time both the Soviet Union and the United States have put large resources of somewhat similar size into very broadly based programs of great strength.” Competition in overall space capability, especially on weight lifting and thrust of launch vehicles used by U.S. and U.S.S.R., was illustrated: “In connection with the nasa Administrator’s August 1967 pronouncement on the expected large Soviet vehicle [Saturn V class], he made a plea for support of an American nuclear stage to mount on Saturn V in order to leapfrog the Russians. A month later, Leonid Sedov in Moscow stated his belief in the importance of nuclear propulsion for the very large rockets which will soon be needed.” (Text; nasa SP-4007, 212; Committee Release, 11/20/67)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued statement on Jan. 27 Apollo accident, commending “the diligence, integrity, and patent independence” of the Apollo 204 Review Board which would serve as a model for future inquiries. Noting the “admitted mood of overconfidence” exhibited by NASA and North American Aviation, he urged that a “renewal of chain successes . . . never again be permitted to encourage indulgence in such a potentially dangerous attitude. “. . . the Apollo accident may well move the date for an American landing on the moon beyond the reach of this decade. That would be regrettable. But there is nothing sacred about the goal. When set in 1961 it was a goal which was technically achievable. A target date was, and still is, essential to efficient planning and to maintaining a vigorous and competent organization. . . . The accident has taken a toll in morale and in momentum within the program . . . [but] that momentum will be regained and NASA will emerge stronger. I intend to support NASA in its requests for manpower and funds to get on with the important job.” (Text)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey told the National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Dinner that U.S. space program would continue to move forward despite the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. “On behalf of President Johnson, I assure you . . . that we have not lost heart—that we will not falter—that we shall move forward with renewed determination in our exploration of space.” The Vice President said the first obligation was to “come as close as humanly possible to determining the cause of the Apollo 204 accident, so that we can make sure it will never happen again.” He said he was impressed with the “tough-minded way the Review Board is going about its work.” (Text; AP, NYT, 3/3/67, 31)
Manned expeditions to every part of the solar system would be achieved by the end of the 20th century, Vice President Humphrey predicted in his opening statement to a student panel at North Dakota State Univ. in Fargo. He envisioned “the development of a whole family of earth orbiting stations, manned and supplied by regular ferry services; the launching of unmanned probes to every part of our solar system, and probably manned expeditions as well.” (upi, NYT, 5/14/67)
President of Aerospace Industries Assn. Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., testifying before Senate Special Subcommittee on Scientific Manpower Utilization, urged that the systems approach—“an extremely high degree of capability to evaluate, plan and do certain complex and difficult things”—be applied beyond the national defense and space effort to “problems connected with improving the quality of American life. . . . Many of these problems, such as air pollution and water pollution control, relief of traffic congestion, provision of adequate food supply, school systems, housing, and crime control are already fully identified and very much on the front burner of public concern.” Harr pointed out the need for experimentation in the application of the systems approach to gain breadth of experience and emphasized that efforts should be aimed at regional, state, and municipal levels. “It remains for us as a nation to find the various political formulae for its application wherever needed. Whatever the cost it will be far cheaper to solve these problems than not to. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicles, and Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., NASA Office of Advance Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Ames said land recovery of manned spacecraft was one of OART’s major objectives; NASA had enlarged research plans substantially to acquire “without delay” the detailed technology necessary to “permit the confident application of steerable flexible-winged parachutes to the recovery of manned spacecraft.” Earliest major potential application would probably be to Apollo, to provide for land recovery in post-lunar-landing period of the early 1970’s. “Such a capability would greatly extend the operational flexibility and utility of the Apollo system and . . . contribute to the feasibility of refurbishment and reuse.” Dr. Jones said increased possibility of aspiration of particulate matter had been identified by nrc Space Science Board as a potentially serious effect of prolonged weightlessness. “In zero gravity conditions, dust particles do not settle out. This could lead to deposits in the respiratory tract which could have important implications in the production of pulmonary disease.” Jones said a new instrument to measure and record the number and size of dust particles in a spacecraft was scheduled for an Apollo flight. (Testimony)
A completely fireproof version of the spacecraft fabric Velcro had been perfected and would be used on NASA’s first manned Apollo mission in 1968, William Hines reported in the Washington Evening Star. In tests conducted at msc early in August, the all-metallic fabric did not ignite, even in pure oxygen atmosphere at 16.5 psia. Velcro Corp. vice president Jack Mates told Hines in an interview that NASA had not yet placed an order for the improved Velcro, but that his company was beginning production of a substantial quantity. In the Jan. 27 Apollo fire, flames in the spacecraft had quickly spread along the surface of ordinary nylon Velcro adhesive pads which were used to hold frequently used equipment. (Hines, W Star, 8/18/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by Apollo 204 Review Board members, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testified on Jan. 27 flash fire before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Webb said the Board had found error, “but it has also found the capability within NASA and the Apollo team of contractors to overcome error.” NASA and industry would share their part of the blame “for what we have done or left undone,” Webb said, but the committee could have confidence that “nasa and its contractors have the capability to overcome every deficiency required to proceed to successfully fly the Apollo Saturn system and accomplish its objectives.” He said Board Chairman Dr. Floyd Thompson had reassured him that the “concepts and the basic design on which the Apollo system is based can be made to work in a reliable manner,” and Astronaut/Board member Frank Borman had reported he would be confident to fly the Apollo spacecraft if reported deficiencies were eliminated. Webb concluded: “If any man in this room asks for whom the Apollo bell tolls, it tolls for him and me, as well as for Grissom, White and Chaffee. “It tolls for every astronaut test pilot who will lose his life in the space simulated vacuum of a test chamber or the real vacuum of space . . . for every astronaut scientist who will lose his life on some lonely hill on the moon or Mars . . . for Government and industrial executives and legislators alike . . . for an open program continuously evaluated by the opinion makers with little time for second thought—operating in the brilliant color and brutal glare of real time, worldwide mass media with the speed of the television, from euphoria to exaggerated detail....” Asked why six of the eight Board members were NASA employees, Webb replied that they were the best qualified people for the investigation and noted that they were all familiar with the spacecraft or with similar types of investigations. He said that in his opinion the Board had “to a large degree . . . overstated the case.” Questioned about charges by the press that many qualified Project Apollo technicians were not called to testify before the Board, Webb responded: “It is easy to make allegations, hard to conduct an investigation, and even harder to make the Apollo Saturn fly at the earliest possible date. I do not believe these allegations are worth your consideration.” Dr. Thompson discussed methods and procedures followed by the Board, and key Board members traced the process of establishing the course of the fire, the “most probable” ignition source, and detailed findings and recommendations. (Testimony; Transcript 10, 15-8)
Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) expressed concern on Senate floor that the Nation’s space program suffered from a “serious lack of centralized leadership within the administration. Leadership is needed to weigh and decide on the merits of proposed space projects; to coordinate program requirements and development efforts of civil and defense agencies; and to establish long-range national space goals and to seek the resources necessary to achieve them. “I believe that this failure to assert administrative responsibility has resulted in the costly and needless development of two families of launch vehicles—one for NASA and one for the Department of Defense. Currently, NASA and the Department of Defense are each separately undertaking manned space programs having similar, if not identical, basic objectives—to determine whether man can effectively operate in space. . . .”	. Criticizing President Johnson’s support of NASA FY 1968 budget cuts recommended by House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 21], Sen. Smith said: “I am mindful that some significant budgetary decisions must be made because of our commitments in Vietnam and social strife at home. But is the Congress to supply the initial decisionmaking power for the executive branch? Is so little consideration and concern given to determining the required resource level for space technology programs that across-the-board reduction recommended by a legislative committee can be accepted so lightly ? “There are many of us who feel that science and technology may well be the key to our future existence—to the very survival of freedom in the world of tomorrow. In the past, I believe that the administration also held this to be true. However, the present lack of responsible action in regard to our space program leads me to wonder whether the administration plans and manages the future course for our country with any foresight or merely reacts to events with fear and trepidation.” (CR, 8/29/67, S12399)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
House Appropriations Committee reported $ 1.53-billion dot authorization bill (H.R. 11456) which included $142.3 million for development of two sst prototypes. Bill was approved by House July 18. (AP, NYT, 7/14/67,5)
NASA would delay scheduled 1967 launch of second Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (oao) until late 1968 to incorporate changes made necessary after failure of Oao I, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Third oao would be launched in 1969 and fourth in 1970 to continue studies in ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray spectral regions. Dr. Newell explained that “the intensive investigations by NASA of Oao—I program development, test, and operations history have resulted in design and program modifications directed toward increasing the reliability and the operating efficiency of the OAO system in order to insure the success of the second oao missions. . . . Although the remaining three approved missions have been delayed . . . the scientific goals of these missions will be accomplished . . . [and oao] will continue to be the backbone of the NASA space astronomy program. . . .” (Testimony)
Senate and House adopted conference report on amended NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) totaling $4.6 billion, and legislation was cleared for President’s signature. Report approved $3,925 billion for R&D, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization and decrease of $356.5 million from budget; report approved $35.9 million for Construction of Facilities, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget; report approved $628.0 million for Administrative Operations, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of House, said that “Voyager and nerva II programs should be funded this fiscal year. Voyager is the only major planetary exploration program this Nation will have in the 1970’s. If this program is abandoned, we will be abdicating our responsibilities. . . . This is particularly significant following the recent Russian Venus IV soft landing on the planet Venus.” Sen. Gordon L. Allott (R-Col.), ranking minority member of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Space Appropriations Subcommittee, was forced to accept no specific funding for Voyager and Nerva programs (in final version) but said in statement read by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) on floor of Senate that “agreement was reached to add $15.5 million to [r&d] over the House figure.” He added that the agreement would provide that NASA’s Administrator “may reprogram funds . . . with approval of the appropriate committees of the Congress.” He added: “. . . conferees share this belief, that this country must move ahead now in [r&d] leading to interplanetary exploration.” (CR, 10/26/67, H14036-8, S15405-8)
Najeeb Halaby, Pan American World Airways, Inc., Vice President and former faa Administrator, praised the Johnson Administration’s “carefully calculated risk” in the development of the SST, in a speech before the Wings Club in New/York. He suggested that as a result both the Government and industry involved in producing the aircraft “are in a position to make a better decision and a better plane than . . . France, Britain, and the Soviet Union.” Halaby said aviation industry had a duty “to help the President and the Congress make the most prudent and the most temporary investment of public funds in a national interest venture.” {NYT, 1/19/67, 57)
Congressional cuts in the nasa budget had forced an agency-wide hiring freeze, Aerospace Technology reported. No job vacancies might be filled or new positions created unless there were exceptionally mitigating circumstances, jpl expected to lose about 200 engineers during the freeze, but no estimates had been released by NASA field centers. There was no indication of how long the freeze would last. (Aero Tech, 9/25/67,3)
Congressional role in space program and possibilities for improved international cooperation in space was discussed in General Electric Forum interview by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Congress’ role, Rep. Teague said, was “to examine periodically how well the work is being done and what return we are gaining in new knowledge and practical utility from the space program. . . . Each decision . . . involves the setting of a relative order of priorities for the use of the Nation’s resources for science and technology.” Expressing conviction that international cooperation in space would increase, he noted that there was “great potential in the use of space for human betterment. . . . More than 60 per cent of the world’s people, for instance, are protein-deficient today. If, by earth orbital surveys, in cooperation with the less-developed countries, we can improve that situation, our entire space program will have paid for itself many times over.” (GE Forum, Autumn 1967, X/3, 11-12; CR, 10/19/67, H13719-20)
Current attacks on the SST project appeared to stem from ignorance of the plan and a failure to appreciate what it would contribute to the economy and security of this country, reported columnist l/g Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.). He had presented estimates of the sales volume and financial aspect of the SST programs which had been developed, checked, and rechecked by civil advisory groups, the airlines, and individual experts in transportation, industry, and finance. He said no Federal program since World War II had had the thorough analysis, careful examination, and close scrutiny accorded the present sst plan. He emphasized that the sst was not competitive in any way with social reform programs. On the other hand, it would stimulate continued growth of the economy, create employment, and provide a higher standard of living for thousands. (Eaker, Detroit News, 9/4/67)
Washington Evening Star suggested that House Committee on Science and Astronautics might have been “the victim of a high-level snow job last year when it did research for a 1,200-page report on Project Apollo” because report’s conclusions conflicted so greatly with findings of Apollo 204 Review Board. Committee report issued March 29 praised ability of NASA and industry “to identify and solve technical and administrative problems” and stated that the Apollo accident did not “alter the basic conclusions of the report.” Board report, by contrast, criticized NASA and naa for poor management and deficient quality control. (WStor, 4/10/67, A7)
House and Senate both passed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills which were less than the $5.1 billion originally requested by NASA. Senate bill (S. 1296) authorized $4,851 billion: $4,136 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. House bill (H.R. 10340) authorized $4,791 billion: $4,076 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. Senate defeated two amendments by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce nasa authorization—-one by $317 million; one by $98 million. An amendment by Sen. Charles Percy (R-Ill.) which would require NASA to keep Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences “fully and currently informed” was also defeated. Committee Chairinan Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) said the proposal had been considered by the Committee and rejected as unnecessary: “It’s not needed. What is needed is enforcement and compliance with existing legislation.” House bill authorized $200.7 million less than Committee on Science and Astronautics had recommended [see May 16]. An amendment by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R-Ind.) to an amendment by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) cut $65 million from $455 million proposed by Committee for aa program. Fulton’s original amendment had recommended cutting the program by $250 million. Remaining reductions, totaling $135.7 million, were contained in surprise recommittal motion offered by Representative Fulton at the end of the day. They included: (1) $6.2 million from advanced missions (funding eliminated); (2) $21.5 million from Voyager; (3) $20 million from nuclear rockets; (4) $78 million from launch vehicle procurement; and (5) $10 million from sustaining university program. Amendment also contained provision to establish an independent safety review board within NASA. Establishment of the board had been urged by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) as one means of avoiding another accident like the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Differences between Senate and House authorization bills would be resolved by joint House/Senate Conference Committee. (CR, 6/28/67, S9078-94, H8150-200; upi, NYT, 6/29/67, 11; Reistrup, W Post, 6/29/67, A6)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, praised NASA’s Lunar Orbiter program on the House floor: “In the short span of just under 1 year, all five Lunar Orbiters have been launched and have provided the world with more information about the moon than has been obtained in all previous history. Lunar Orbiter photography has certified four potential landing sites for our Apollo astronauts, and has provided detailed photographs for 99 percent of the front side of the moon and 60 percent of the back side. “Successful completion of the present mission (Lunar Orbiter V] will provide supplementary data for the certification of five more Apollo landing sites, detailed photography of virtually the entire moon’s surface, front and back, and very close view of 36 areas of great scientific interest on the front face of the moon. “I wish to compliment the NASA team that has made the Lunar Orbiter program one of the most successful in the 9-year history of that agency. . . .” (CR, 8/9/67, H10175)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research and Development Subcommittee, spoke on “A Challenge to the Scientific Community,” at autumn meeting of nas, at Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor. He urged scientists to become more actively involved in helping Government leaders find effective ways of dealing with national problems, and he believed that Congress should take an active interest in the “state of science” because scientific activity “is critical to the deliberations and the decisions of our political representatives.” In turn, he urged an understanding by scientists and engineers of “pressures and functioning of a government which must be responsive to every shade of thought which our nation harbors.” (Text)
U.S. leaders expressed sorrow at the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. President Johnson: “The death of Vladimir Komarov is a tragedy in which all nations share. Like three American astronauts who lost their lives recently, this distinguished space pioneer died in the cause of science and in the eternal spirit of human adventure.” ~ Vice President Humphrey: “It is with great sorrow that we learn of the tragedy involving Vladimir Komarov. The loss of a dedicated life is indeed a heavy price. Yet progress and space development is necessary.” NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “All of us who have faced the difficulties of understanding and putting to use the forces of nature at the outer edge of Man’s knowledge of what is possible in this decade deeply regret the loss of life represented by the death of Cosmonaut Komarov, and extend our sincere sympathy to his family and associates. We feel certain that man will achieve great things in space. Some of these will determine what the men will be able to do on earth. “We also feel that at this dawn of the space age, man has the duty to seek cooperation between nations, such as the USSR and the United States on a realistic basis. “We at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration want to make every realistic effort. Could the lives already lost have been saved if we had known each other’s hopes, aspirations and plans? Or could they have been saved if full cooperation had been the order of the day?” U.S. astronauts: “We are very saddened by the loss of Colonel Komarov. We feel comradeship for this test pilot because we have met several of his fellow cosmonauts and we are involved in a pioneering flight effort which is not without hazards.” (Text; PD, 5/1/67, 660; AP, NYT, 4/25/67, 21)
New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics were named: Reps. Jack Brinkley (D-Ga.); Bob Eckhardt (D-Tex.); Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Guy Vander Jagt (R—Mich.); Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.); Donald E. Lukens (R-Ohio); and John E. Hunt (R-N.J.). (nasa lar VI/8,11; Committee Ofc.)
Report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations said that DOD’s Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) had many inadequacies and urged that steps be taken “forthwith” to reinforce it by adding synchronous satellites. Report argued that undue reliance on present system would stretch it “skintight,” impairing its capabilities if unexpected failures developed. The subcommittee expressed concern over DOD’s apparent intent to use IDCSP “for a longer period than originally planned” and its tendency to lean “rather heavily on the future promise of technological breakthroughs and improvements in the state-of-the-art.” It conceded it would be wrong to settle for a limited system when new technological advances could be made, but also felt it would be an error to inflate the possibilities of present system as an excuse to defer needed improvements. (Jones, M/S Daily, 8/29/67)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that NASA did not know whether U.S.S.R. was adequately sterilizing its interplanetary spacecraft. “If we find . . . that . . . [Soviet] sterilization procedure is many orders of magnitude less good than ours, then we will be able to relax in our standards simply because there will be no value in our going through an expensive process only to find that they have already contaminated the planet. “However, we do not know at the present time, and there is reason to believe that their procedures may well turn out to be adequate.” (Transcript, 446)
Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, in its report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended that $46.8 million be cut from $3.4 billion requested by nasa for FY 1968 manned space flight program. Recommendation, which included $25-million reduction in Apollo program, was approved by full committee May 16. (W Post, 5/12/67, A13)
U.S. industry would spend $16.6 billion for r&d in 1967—double the amount spent in 1957, McGraw-Hill, Inc., reported in its annual economic survey. Federal Government had financed 54% or $8.4 billion of the $15.5 billion spent for research in 1966. Survey estimated that 1970 expenditures would reach $21 billion. It noted that more than half of the R&D was concentrated in two industries—aerospace, and electrical machinery and communications—both of which were heavily involved in defense and space exploration. (Koshetz, NYT, 5/12/67,67)
The number of scientists, engineers, and physicians immigrating to the U.S. had increased 77% between 1956 and 1966, according to report released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee. Report said this influx from poor nations was an “involuntary gift of valuable resources. “Such a loss by the developing countries is. of direct concern to the United States. To the extent that it undermines development, it also defeats a major United States foreign policy objective for the sake of which this country is currently spending about $3.7 billion per year. . . .” Reduction of this influx would probably have to be the joint responsibility of the U.S. and the nations that were losing their skilled professionals, report said. (Text; Science, 8/18/67, 783; NYT, 8/3/67, 13)
House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill—$516.6 million less than NASA had requested and $282 million less than NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). Committee said the bill was “less than would be recommended under less stringent fiscal circumstances,” but it would support “a viable space program, and one that is consistent with available resources. “The reductions . . . should in no respect be interpreted as an expression of a lack of confidence in our space endeavors. . . .” Cuts included: (1) $50.5 million from Apollo program; (2) $154.7 million from aa program; (3) $27.5 million from Nuclear Rocket Program; (4)	$37.7 million from Tracking and Data Acquisition; and (5) $71.5 million from Voyager (funding eliminated), (nasa lar VI/91; WSJ, 8/21/67,4; O’Toole, W Post, 8/19/67, A4)
National Academy of Sciences had concurred in House Committee on Government Operations recommendation that outside experts as well as those in Government be used to advise decisionmakers of R&D deficiencies and remedies. Committee released report of NAS and Bureau of the Budget comments on recommendations to improve Federal r&d decisionmaking process, which also showed nas had concurred that Executive Office should examine program-level recommendations but had warned of danger of attempting to determine gaps or establish levels of support on too centralized a basis. NAS also had voiced strong reservations on a cost-benefit approach to R&D evaluation. (Text)
U.S. must “answer the post-Apollo question . . . very soon,” Douglas Aircraft Co. Vice President and General Manager J. P. Rogan told aiaa/aas Space Forum in Washington, D.C. He suggested that U.S. develop five “building blocks” which would maintain options for any future course of action chosen: (1) long-duration orbital experience; (2) reusable spacecraft; (3) reusable launch vehicles; (4) nuclear-powered stages; and (5) improved secondary power systems. (Text)
House voted 312-92 in favor of $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474)—NASA’s lowest in five years. This was the sum recommended by the House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 18]. Two amendments by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.)-—one to reduce R&D funds by $100 million, one to reduce administrative operations’ funds by $37 million—were defeated by voice vote, (nasa LAR VI/93; CR, 8/22/67, H10909-30)
An advanced concept in solid rocketry was demonstrated when Lockheed Propulsion Co. static-fired large-scale motor with two interconnected combustion chambers for 7.5 min. Firing—longest ever achieved by high-performance solid-propellant gas generator—was 80% successful. Lockheed Vice President Kenneth H. Jacobs commented: “The firing demonstrates the feasibility of a large-scale, all-solid rocket propulsion system for spacecraft attitude control and trajectory adjustment.” (Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 5)
A report expressing confidence in NASA’s management of the Apollo program was released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Report was prepared before Jan. 27 Apollo fire, but Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said the findings of the study were “essentially unchanged. . . . The public may look with confidence to the management, engineers, scientists and technicians of NASA and industry as the Apollo program progresses.” Report praised the ability of the NASA-industry team to identify and solve the administrative, technical, and engineering problems “inherent in performing a program contributing major technological progress. . . .” It identified the major Apollo pacing items as the Saturn V 2nd stage, the Lunar Module (lm) for the Saturn I and V, and the Command and Service Module (csm) for the Saturn I and V. “Any significant delays in attainment of flight capability of these items could affect both program shcedule and cost adversely.” Report said that an additional $300 million in NASA’s FY 1967 budget would have provided: “(1) increased confidence in meeting unforeseen development problems when encountered; (2) broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and (3) an increased assurance of meeting the national goal of a lunar landing in this decade.” (Text; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/20/67)
Vice President Humphrey commissioned into service usn’s $130-million Atlantic undersea test center, which he predicted might become the Cape Kennedy of oceanography. Speaking at West Palm Beach, the Vice President said: “This center has been established primarily for purposes of national security. But the knowledge we gain here will help us in other ways.” It would contribute to man’s knowledge of tides and provide information on untapped mineral resources and unutilized food sources. “We may learn how to divert and even prevent hurricanes,” Mr. Humphrey said. “But perhaps the greatest promise of all lies in food from the sea.” (AP, NYT, 2/27/67, 46)
William Littlewood, a former vice president of American Airlines and developer of the DC-3 aircraft, died at age 69. Recipient of numerous awards—including Wright Brothers Medal, Flight Safety Foundation Medal, and Guggenheim Medal—Littlewood had been a member of naca, Flight Safety Foundation, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory board of directors, U.K. Royal Aeronautical Society, and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute. (NYT, 12/5/67, 45; W Star, 12/5/67, B4)
10th anniversary of the space age, inaugurated with the launching of first man-made satellite, U.S.S.R.’s 184-lb Sputnik I. During first decade of space age 803 spacecraft were successfuly orbited: U.S. orbited 529; U.S.S.R., 269; France, 4; and Italy, 1. U.S. total included 14 manned orbital space flights with 677 orbits and 1,993.4 man hours; U.S.S.R. had 9 flights with 310 orbits and 532.5 man hours. Of 45 worldwide flights related to the moon, 20 were successful— including 5 softlandings—providing high-quality photos and on-site analyses of lunar surface. Some 24 planetary flights provided close-up photos of Mars and atmospheric data on Mars and Venus. Some 17 bioscience payloads, including mice, dogs, mold spores, plants, insects, a chimpanzee, and an anthropomorphic dummy, were successfully launched and recovered, providing data on effects of space flight on living systems. Space applications satellites totaled 292; advanced technology satellites, 26; and military support and observation satellites, 158. (EH; Sheldon, “Review of the Soviet Space Program,” Report of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics)
Francis J. Sullivan and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Sullivan, Director of Electronics and Control Div., said that the development of technology for high-resolution, 60- to 120-in space telescopes for optical astronomy, communications, and other potential applications was a major OART effort. “Success in this research will provide the capability to study celestial objects which cannot be viewed from the ground because of atmospheric attenuation and will provide vastly improved resolution over that attainable through the earth’s atmosphere.” Sullivan said because environmental, structural, and control problems of large mirrors in space were almost insurmountable with conventional fabrication and alignment, unique approaches were being studied. One was 24-in-dia, three-segment mirror feasibility model in which distortion sensor, located in front of primary mirror, determined which segments were out of alignment and to what degree. Electronic circuitry then processed and used the alignment data to realign mirror surface segments with actuators located behind each segment. Dr. Kurzweg, Director of Research, said the jpl had developed a new mathematical approach for calculating energy requirements for Mars vehicles which provided, for the first time, a complete day-hy-day listing of the energies necessary for a round trip. Calculations had been completed for launching during the entire 1970-80 decade. “The calculated trajectories went from a circular parking orbit about the Earth to the vicinity of Mars, into a circular parking orbit about Mars for a stay time of 7 days, out of the circular parking orbit about Mars to the vicinity of the Earth, and into a circular parking orbit about the Earth. It was assumed that the one-way flight times for both the departure and return trajectories are the same.” Dr. Kurzweg said information was very important for “fast trade-off calculations for future advanced Mars missions. . . .” (Testimony)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
Noise problems arising from commercial jet aircraft operations, and the Government’s attack on these problems were described by ost Director Dr. Donald F. Hornig in appearance before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee [see Feb. 1]. He stated: “At the request of the Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport, Secretary McNamara, I assumed responsibility for defining and directing an interagency sonic boom program. Its goal is to determine the potential sources of difficulty or additional costs associated with commercial operation of supersonic transports.” ost, said Hornig, had framed “action program” with faa, NASA, and Depts. of Commerce and of Housing and Urban Development—responding to President Johnson’s Transportation Message of Mar. 2, 1966. He added: “. . . NASA’s aeronautics research program in the sonic boom problem areas is both broadly conceived and well defined to provide technical support to the FAA and to the aerospace industry in the national sst Development Program.” (Text)
In response to fcc inquiry on future communications in Atlantic area— currently served by two comsats and four cables—ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and at&t Vice President Richard R. Hough presented their proposals in separate letters to fcc Chairman Rosel H. Hyde. Hough, advocating a fifth underwater cable, said that although AT&T supported the idea of a global comsat system, all of the international carriers believed the cable project was “the right way to add to our capabilities at this time.” The best service, he said, could be provided by “a balanced, integrated network of both cables and satellites.” Charyk charged that the cable would not be economically feasible: “. . . when a new cable is laid to carry traffic that could otherwise be carried at no extra cost by satellite facilities which must be established in any case, the ultimate customer must bear the cable cost as an addition to the already committed costs of service.” As traffic was diverted from comsats to a cable, a greater share of satellite revenue requirement would have to be carried by routes not served by the cable, primarily less developed countries with smaller traffic streams. U.S., he said, was committed to develop the Intelsat system. To ensure that U.S. met this commitment, “the advanced [comsat] system must be in operation in the time frame we have proposed for INTELSAT iv. It is essential that a vigorous advanced satellite development progam be under way during 1968.” (Texts; Smith, NYT, 12/29/67, 43) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXCVIII into orbit with 281-km (175-mi) apogee, 265-km (165-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.1° inclination. Equipment and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc SSR, 12/30/67)
naa’s incentive fees for the Apollo Command Module (cm) destroyed in Jan. 27 fire would be reduced by NASA to $41 million, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, told the press. He said information provided him showed “that amount is $15 million less than what North American’s estimated potential incentive earnings would have been if the accident had not occurred.” Senator Anderson said he believed the settlement was realistic and fair: “A stricter penalty would have served no purpose and could have adverse effects on the relationship between [nasa and naa] (Text)
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
nasa personnel changes: m/g James W. Humphreys (usaf) , recently returned from a Vietnam assignment as Chief of the Public Health Service Div., Agency for International Development (aid) , became Director of Space Medicine, omsf, replacing b/g Jack Bollerud (usaf), who had been Acting Director since the December 1965 death of Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II. General Bollerud returned to duty with usaf. Jerome Lederer, vice president and technical director of Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., and director of Comell-Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center, was appointed Director of Safety, omsf. Lederer would develop policies and procedures related to manned spaceflight systems safety; act as focal point for consideration of and decisions on matters related to system and flight safety; and provide continuing review and evaluation of safety provisions. m/g Charles R. Roderick, who retired May 31 from usaf where he was serving as Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, was named Special Assistant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Harold Sims, retired career foreign service officer currently serving as mayor of Sparta, Tenn., and Gerald J. Lynch, president and chairman of the board of Menasco Manufacturing Co., were sworn in as consultants to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 67— 84, 67-138, 67-139, 67-140, 67-141)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller appeared before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight to submit Apollo project reprogramming plans presented to the Senate May 9. Dr. Seamans assured the Subcommittee that schedules could be met and urged that Congress continue to support NASA: “We have confidence in the ability of our technical and adrrdnistrative teams, both in government and industry, to meet the challenge before us. But that is not sufficient; the Congress, representing the people of the Nation, must
First live global telecast linking North America, Europe, Asia, Australia, and Africa would be carried on National Educational Television (net) June 25, net Vice President William Kobin announced. Designed as a live documentary to enable man to see earth as a single entity in space and time, two-hour telecast would examine such major problems as hunger and overpopulation. It would be transmitted to more than 30 nations via four comsats: ComSatCorp’s Early Bird, I and Intelsat II—B and two of U.S.S.R.’s Molniya I comsats. (Gent, NYT, 2/8/67, 63)
The time had come to “fix” the responsibility for the total results of U.S. technology, Michael Getler suggested in Aerospace Technology. There was no single group or agency to “link the broad spectrum of American technological development with social development. There is no single group with the expertise available to probe all forms of technology and its effects, to pump funds into a truly important new applied science not able to capture headlines, to speed the transfer of defense and space technology into other areas, and to put the special interest groups on the line for blockage of improvements within the state-of-the-art. There is no group directly responsible to the citizenry to develop and carry through legislation to try and save us from tomorrow’s smog and urban clutter; for we have not, by a long shot, run out of self-inflicted ills. . . .” Getler urged that the overall responsibility be given to Congress. “It is the Legislative branch of Government, properly augmented with a permanent staff of specialists, that is best equipped to serve as a responsive arbiter between the good life of our people, the promise of technology, and the pressure of die marketplace.” (Getler, Aero Tech, 8/14/67,62)
Ronnie J. Lagoe, 17-yr-old high school senior whose %-scale model , of NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft had made five successful soft-landings on earth from varying heights, was introduced at a New York news conference by Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President of Hughes Aircraft Co., manufacturer of Surveyor spacecraft. Lagoe built his 2-lb model—designated Surveyor-R (“for revised”)—with wood strips, foam rubber, bathtub calk, glue, ping-pong balls, cork fishing floats, a battery, and four tiny rockets. Total cost: $28.95. He described the 85-ft flight sequence following Surveyor-R’s launch from the top of a water tower: “After retro-fire, a marked decrease in spacecraft velocity was noted until retro-burnout occurred at 20 feet and the verniers burned alone. Complete counteraction of gravity was achieved at two feet, after which vernier shut-off occurred and the craft dropped to the surface.” Hughes presented Lagoe with a summer job at ksc, a free trip to its Culver City, Calif., plant, and a $5,000 college scholarship. (Wilford, NYT, 5/25/67, 43)
In testimony before House Committee on Interstate Commerce’s Transportation and Aeronautics Subcommittee, Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, urged passage of H.R. 3400 to allow Secretary of Transportation to prescribe aircraft noise abatement regulations. Rep. Wydler cited complaints from churches whose religious services had been interrupted; doctors whose patients’ mental and physical health had been impaired; schools whose classes had been disrupted; and individuals whose lives had been inhumanly intruded upon by jet aircraft noise. Passage of the bill was imperative, he said, because aircraft noise had become “something that dominates the lives of those who have to live with it to the point where it actually destroys the way in which they are living.” Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd told Subcommittee that dot was trying to find a solution to the problem, but he admitted his disbelief that “there will ever be such a thing as a quiet airplane. Despite our far longer experience with the problems of truck noise and railroad noise, we have not been able to produce quiet vehicles in those modes of transportation.” However, he believed that “we will be able, by technological and regulatory means, to reduce the impact of aircraft noise exposure for the majority of Americans who are . . . subject to excessive noise exposure.” He said bill was “the mechanism by which we can assure future aircraft are substantially quieter than our present generation [of aircraft].” (Transcript)
NASA FY 1968 operating plan was presented by Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reflecting accommodation of fund reductions by Congress during recent months— 20% for r&d programs other than Apollo, 50% for construction of facilities, and 7% for administrative operations. He reviewed decisions restructuring NASA effort at least through FY 1969. The first scheduled Apollo Applications flights of 1970—a “limited number with limited objectives”—would begin with a “precursor training mission for scientists-astronauts with certain orbital experiments, and then proceed with dual launch missions with the Orbited Workshop and the Apollo Telescope Mount.” Launch vehicle/spacecraft hardware for follow.-on Apollo Applications flights would depend on funding “some time after FY 1969,” because of stringent FY 1969 budgetary guidelines. Future planning for Uprated Saturn—acknowledging necessity for production termination after vehicle No; 216—included FY 1968-funded lead time items “to hold open the option of continued production ... at the rate of two per year.” Webb explained that he held open the option of definite termination of Uprated Saturn production, intending to “preserve competition among the companies involved and between solid, liquid, and, where applicable, nuclear propulsion systems.” To preserve competition would cost 83.5 million from FY 1968 funds. He announced NASA—dod discussions “to consider carefully future national requirements for large launch vehicles, including a possible new booster of the 100,000-pound in earth orbit class.” Webb stressed the need for planetary exploration utilizing both orbiters and landers in a long-term program: “We do not believe that it is the policy of the Nation or the intent of Congress that the United States abandon the field of planetary exploration.” Present program still had two Mars-Mariner 1969 flights; continuity depended on NASA’s current 8143.4-million allocation to lunar and planetary category which would serve as basis for reestablishing future programs in FY 1969 budget. Development of nerva I flight-qualified engine could proceed “with the amounts that we and the aec have available in FY 1968,” longer-range planning again dependent on “an affirmative decision” in the Administration’s FY 1969 budget for NASA. (Text)
nasa should prepare a list of priorities for its future programs to guide Congress in making any budget cuts required by the Vietnam war, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Clinton Anderson (D—N. Mex.) told Baltimore Sun reporter Albert Sehlstedt, Jr. Senator Anderson insisted he was not necessarily predicting cuts in the FY 1968 budget, but observed that “something might have to give a little” while so much was being spent on the war. (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 1/21/67)
President Johnson presented National Space Club’s 1967 Goddard Memorial Trophy to Rep. George P. Miller (EX—Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, in special White House ceremony. The Trophy, founded in 1958 to recognize outstanding national space leadership, was presented to President Johnson in 1966. (Off of Rep. Miller; CR, 3/9/67, H2408-9)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
Gerald J. Mossinghoff, Director of the Office of Legislative Planning at U.S. Patent Office, was named director of Congressional Liaison Div. in NASA’s Office of Legislative Affairs, (nasa Release 67—297) Dr. Hilliard V. Paige, General Electric Co. Vice President and general manager of Missile and Space Div., compared role of the space program in stimulating technological development to that of World Wars I and II. World War I, he said, marked real beginning of American'aviation activities. World War II led to current U.S. leadership in production of jet aircraft. Space program was current counterpart of this stimulus, he noted, but program was declining because of crippling budget and program cuts. Former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) described his experiences living in Sealab II [see Aug. 28, 1965] and plans for a larger Sealab III in 1968. In addition to Sealab experiment, series of special vehicles would be tested, he said: Deep Submergence Rescue Vehicle (DSRV—1) to rescue men from disabled submarines resting on ocean floor; Deep Submergence Search Vehicles (dssv) to conduct research on ocean floor, collecting and surfacing small objects; Nuclear Powered Deep Submergence Research and Ocean Engineering Vehicle (NR—1) which would run along ocean floor on wheels; and Large Object Salvage System (loss) to develop a variety of tools, from surface craft with strong lifting ability to equipment enabling swimmers to operate effectively in deep water. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/6/67, 35; 12/24/67, E3; NY Academy of Sciences pio)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
United Aircraft Corp. vice president and chief scientist Perry W. Pratt received the American Society of Mechanical ^Engineers’ Gas Turbine Award for “his distinguished leadership and technical contributions in the development of aircraft turbojet and turbofan engines used widely throughout the world.” (United Release)
1967 Robert J. Collier Trophy was presented to James S. McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., by Vice President Humphrey in ceremony at Smithsonian Institution. Making the award on behalf of President Johnson, Mr. Humphrey said McDonnell had been selected because of his leadership in aeronautics and astronautics as demonstrated by the performance of the McDonnell Gemini spacecraft and the F-4 Phantom II jet fighter. Trophy was presented annually by Look and National Aeronautic Assn, “for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, efficiency, or safety of air or space vehicles.” ( naa News; AP, NYT, 5/25/67,81)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, in interview with Aerospace Management, said: “The Space Program got off the ground ten years ago on a surge of apprehension and sensationalism. This year it became very clear that public acceptance or rejection will be a key factor in shaping the U.S. objectives in space for the years ahead. Having ushered in the second decade of space exploration, both NASA and the aerospace industry should now review their ‘ledgers’ to make the best use of their achievements to date, as well as learn from the mistakes and false-starts of the past.” He predicted: “I have no doubts that before this century is over, man will set foot on the near planets [although] it seems more reasonable to me to first find out more about the other planets by means of automated robots [and] I will be disappointed if ... we don’t couple the great capabilities of the Saturn V vehicle with those of a Voyager spacecraft.” He added: “However, be they the merits of the Voyager concept or the potential benefits of Earth Resources Satellites, the public and Congress must be honestly convinced of their values if space efforts are to be supported.” (Karth, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 5—9)
Letter to President Johnson from Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, assessed U.S. space program after Apollo/Saturn flight of Nov. 9: U.S. had captured lead in space race with the U.S.S.R. Rep. Ryan urged the President to renounce the space race, and “to make a serious request for the beginning of far-ranging international cooperation to reduce the costs and increase the benefits of space exploration—to remove the wasteful duplication of two great nations.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Science, Research, and Development Subcommittee released report, Science, Technology, and Public Policy during the Eighty-Ninth Congress, January 1965 through December 1966. Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), subcommittee chairman, emphasized: “Congress does indeed recognize the impact of science and technology on modem society and is moving expeditiously to meet its challenge and shape its potential on behalf of human welfare [and] ... is becoming aware of the difficulties and dangers which technologically applied science may carry in its genes—and is searching for effective means to counter them.” NSF Director Dr. Leland J. Haworth, in statement before Subcommittee, said: “In all honesty, it must be admitted that thus far there have been no broad, systematic, and intensive studies designed to develop an understanding of alternative policy structures and options open to the Nation as a whole and to assess the associated opportunities and risks, as well as the impact, which such policies and choices might have on the individual agencies, disciplines and the Nation’s goals.” Haworth referred to the major lack in the studies concerning long-range national needs. (Text)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
The House Committee on Government Operations in H.R. 613 urged dod to proceed with plans for an advanced communications satellite system that would eventually replace the present Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp). The Committee said it “would be a mistake” to lean too heavily on the idcsp because its limited channel capacity was already strained. Several possible system configurations were under study by dod. (Av Wk, 9/4/67, 18)
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, in keynote address to annual meeting of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Panel on Science and Technology, suggested that many of the potential perils of advancing technology might be avoided if a group of experts were impanelled every live years “to explore our technological future. . . . The values of this type of forecasting to policy judgments is obvious,” Rusk said. “In most cases a true technological innovation does not reach full bloom for some years—the first basic patent on the transistor was, after all, issued in 1930. . . .” He recommended that panel members be selected from the natural sciences, the social sciences, and industry. (Text)
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, defended the Mariner/Mars 1971 mission in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Responding to criticism by Committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) that information from the mission would arrive too late to contribute to the design of the 1973 Voyager spacecraft, Dr. Newell said: “. . . it is very important to recognize . . . that there are three areas of design involved. One is the hardware design. Two is software design, and three is design of the scientific mission. . . . The Mars 71 probe will be fully in time for us to use in the software design, in other words, setting the profile of the mission to get the spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto the surface, and will be fully involved in continuing design of the scientific experiments and observations. . . .” (Transcript, 433-5)
Effect of sonic boom on sst flight routes and sales prospects was discussed by Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd, FAA Administrator William F.	McKee, and Director of sst Development b/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf, Ret.) in May and June testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Transportation. Conditions under which supersonic flight would be permitted over populated land areas had still not been determined, Gen. Maxwell explained. “The available sonic boom data indicate that the present sst design may possibly be restricted from supersonic operations over populated land areas . . . [and we] have based our sst program decisions on the conservative assumption that this design will be operated primarily on water.” dot did not have to force the American public to tolerate sonic booms to make sst program an economic success, Secretary Boyd assured the Committee. “We are satisfied that we can have a . . . highly successful program, assuming the sonic boom is intolerable over populated areas. ... The only thing that is involved here is whether we sell more aircraft, not whether the program is a success. . . .” Even if sst were limited to subsonic flight over inhabited areas at least 300 aircraft could be sold initially, he said, and market studies indicated “that there is a possibility of going up to 1,200 aircraft by 1990.” (Transcript, 41, 294, 942)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
sst design refinements reflecting 1966 recommendations made by 240-man Government and airline evaluation team were announced by Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington. Prototype refinements were still to be reviewed by FAA and described in detail to the 26 airlines which had reserved sst deliveries. Changes included addition of canard surfaces, incorporation of direct-lift control, -lengthening fuselage by 12 ft, and provision of more convenience in passenger boarding and deplaning. Withington cited progress in component and subsystem testing and in wind-tunnel investigations. The first metal (titanium alloy billets) for airliner prototypes was under production. Major contractors were preparing for work on assemblies and Boeing was making ready facilities for construction of the two prototypes. A titanium fabrication facility would be completed as part of the Boeing Development Center and would include a furnace large enough for heat-treating sheets of titanium 70 ft long and 10 ft wide. The full-scale demonstration mockup, constructed in 1966, had recently been dismantled to make room for a dimensionally accurate engineering mockup to be constructed at Boeing Co. (Boeing Release)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testified in support of nasa’s FY 1968 budget authorization before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He reviewed 1966 accomplishments and discussed future space-flight activities: “We completed 22 missions during 1966 successfully out of 29 attempts, or a 76% success. This record is somewhat lower than the previous year, but it is marked by qualitative advances greater than any before. “The FY 1968 request represents the first true post-Apollo decisions. ... The combination of the 1971 Mariner flights and the initiation of a continuing, major Voyager program” represented effective translations into action of President’s Science Advisory Committee’s recommendation that planetary exploration be given a high priority in the post-Apollo period. “During FY 1968 we will be decreasing somewhat our application of manpower effort on the manned space flight programs with a considerable shift in effort from the Apollo to the Apollo Applications part of that activity. We will be increasing our total effort in space science and applications programs, particularly in the build-up of the Voyager program activity . . . [and devoting] more effort to our advanced research and technology activities. . . .” Emphasizing that he was “not prepared nor willing to state that a manned lunar landing cannot be achieved before 1970,” Dr. Seamans admitted there was a high probability that Apollo program would have to operate on a delayed schedule. “An important contributor to . . . success will be adequate resources and the flexibility to apply them when needed. . . . We cannot say today that the $2.6 billion requested for Apollo is not enough [but] we can say it is not too much. ... It cannot be reduced and still accomplish the objectives we have defined.” (Testimony; Transcript, 118)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
F-111B was “a very easy plane to fly” with outstanding low-speed qualities, V/Adm. T. F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations (Air), said in April 18 testimony released by the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Defense. Admiral Connolly’s description of the F—111 (formerly tfx), subject of increasing criticism since April 21 crash of usn test model, was described by Rep. George Andrews (D-Ala.) as “the most complimentary statement [about the F-lll] . . . which has been made before this committee.” Basing his views on his personal inflight observations, Admiral Connolly conceded that there was “a lot of work to do on the airplane,” including making configuration changes to improve pilot visibility. He asserted that when difficulties involving engine stall were overcome there should be no major problems and said that aircraft’s anticipated weight satisfied usn requirements. (Transcript; AP, NYT, 6/2/67, 23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences staff report released by Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) disputed theory that any nation would have a military advantage with orbiting nuclear weapons. Report, prepared “to provide information for . . . legislative evaluation” on the space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] submitted for Senate approval Feb. 7, noted: “Majority military opinion holds that orbital bombardment is not an effective strategic weapon as compared to land-based ballistic missiles. An effort to use space-based nuclear weapons would have the effect of a strategic warning, thus placing an aggressor in the position of being open to retaliation by strategic weapons.” (Text)
President Johnson signed $4.86-billion NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296) into law. Noting that on Aug. 18 House Committee on Appropriations reported $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill, $516.6 million less than NASA had requested, the President said: “Under other circumstances I would have opposed such a cut. However, conditions have greatly changed since I submitted my January budget request. . . . “I recognize—as also must the Congress—that the reduction in funds recommended by the House Appropriations Committee will require the deferral and reduction of some desirable space projects. Yet, in the face of present circumstances, I join with the Congress and accept this reduction.” (PD, 8/28/67, 1192-3)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, an ibm vice president, told ieee meeting in New York that too many scientists and engineers—as prime movers of change—were not sufficiently attentive to the results of their discoveries and inventions. “Historically, scientists and engineers have underestimated or ignored the social and moral consequences of their work. Don’t continue to make that mistake,” he warned. Dr. Charles H. Townes, mit provost, received ieee’s 1967 Medal of Honor for his “significant contributions in the fields of quantum electronics which have led to the maser and the laser.” (Lieberman, NYT, 3/26/67, FI; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 97)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams outlined nasa’s supporting role in sst development at hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1965 NASA provided the faa with the services of 50 technical people for six weeks for the evaluation of industry-proposed airframe and engine designs. During final evaluations last fall, 75 professionals were provided for two months and two major facilities at Langley and Ames were operated 10 hours a day and 6 days a week during September. We are assisting FAA contractors by making available to them facilities such as wind tunnels and simulators and have helped solve specific problems growing out of detail design. The contractors used about 4100 hours of NASA wind tunnel time for each of the past two years.” NASA was carrying a major research responsibility as a member of a Federal team on the SST sonic boom program—including definition of sonic boom signatures and effects of sonic boom on structures, Dr. Adams said, and was also continuing its own study of materials suitable for sst structures. “In addition to supporting the faa on the present SST, we are continuing our general research program aimed at an improved second-generation supersonic transport.” (Testimony)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. presented to Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum historic liquid-propellant rocket engines made during World War II. Gifts included primitive rocket test stand known as ars Test Stand No. 2, used by members of original American Rocket Society (now aiaa) , on Dec. 10, 1938, to test first U.S. successful, fully regeneratively cooled rocket engine. Other Thiokol gifts included World War II liquid-propellant jet assist takeoff (jato) units for aircraft, and engines for Lark surface-to-air missile, usaf MX-774 missile, and Viking research rocket. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s decision to go ahead with “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm) system [see Sept. 18] was praised by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on floor of Senate: “I indicate my support of this decision [and] under present world circumstances, we have no choice but to go ahead with [abm] system.” (CR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, North American Aviation President J. Leland Atwood denied that pressures to meet 1970 lunar-landing goal had prompted naa engineers to take shortcuts in Apollo program. Terming the Apollo 204 Review Board’s study “a good and penetrating report,” Atwood conceded that deficiencies existed in the Apollo capsule, but disputed Board’s charge that “deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship, and quality control. . . .” naa’s Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy said that although an electrical arc “probably” caused the fire, there were “various other possibilities”—such as Astronaut Gus Grissom accidentally kicking loose a wire that could have later initiated the blaze. Under stern questioning by subcommittee members, however, Dr. McCarthy admitted that this theory was pure speculation. In response to charge by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that prevailing attitude prior to fire was not “just a feeling of over-confidence” but “real negligence” by naa and NASA, Atwood reasserted that the most serious error made by naa and NASA was classification of the AS-204 test as “non-hazardous.” Questioned about the reasoning behind designing to minimize fire hazard, Dr. McCarthy pointed out that naa had concentrated on eliminating possible ignition sources while it turned out that the amount and placement of flammable materials was crucial. He characterized this as a “grave error in judgment.” Atwood assured the Subcommittee that naa and NASA had “placed great stress” on the importance of quality and workmanship: “The procedures followed and the depth of inspection which have been employed far surpass those . . . used on any other program. The fact of the accident itself makes it obvious that we must do more than we have done, that we must—guided by the finding of the board—redouble our efforts to approach perfection. Already we have gone over every other design feature of the spacecraft to identify any other area of possible failures . . . [and] we have found none.” (ATT, 4/12/67, 34; W Star, 4/12/67, A6)
White House Office of Science and Technology (ost) had failed to move effectively in the direction of long-range planning and had been seriously hampered by a “thinly spread” staff, concluded report prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service and released by House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Military Operations. Presented as a background document for future congressional action or legislation, report reached no direct findings or conclusions but noted that during four years ost had been in existence its “most conspicuous operating characteristic has been the wide span of issues in which it has become involved. “But with the office numbering only seventeen to twenty professionals its staff must be thinly spread.” Although ost had not moved spontaneously in the direction of long-range planning, report said questions posed by various groups of Congress “at least imply a need for this policy planning, systems analysis capability, especially to deal with issues of transportation, waste management, water resources, and energy development.” (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying on NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 6470) before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, urged congressional approval for funding to begin program to develop Nerva II nuclear rocket engine. Estimated cost over 10 yrs would be $2 billion: $500 million would be needed to develop nuclear stage and $1 billion for ground testing. NASA’s decision to develop Nerva II was based primarily on “our own national objectives in space; what do we do in the future; now looking ahead to the late ’70s and ’80s, as a requirement for booster capability in this country. . . . However, we also must consider our capability in the world arena and, of course, specifically today we have to be cognizant the best that we can of the Russian capability and the Russian plans.” Dr. Seamans noted that Soviet Proton booster could launch 50,000 lbs into earth orbit, cornpared to 40,000-41,000-lb capability of Uprated Saturn I. “We have every reason to believe that in the [Soviet] program they recognized the same kind of needs that we recognized for our program and that they are moving on a broad front, including the development of very large boosters,” (Transcript, 1131-4)
U.S. patent No. 3,402,295 was issued to Robert W. Astheimer, Vice President of Barnes Engineering Co., for process by which aircraft pilot could spot clear air turbulence (cat) far enough ahead to avoid danger. To discover rise in temperature which marked cat, pilot would scan ahead with radiometer to detect significant heat radiation from carbon dioxide uniformly distributed through air. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 9/21/68,45)	' nonproliferation treaty by vote of 13 to 3 after three previous meetings failed to attract majority of members. Senate Democratic leaders expressed hope treaty could be brought to vote on Senate floor before mid-October Congressional adjournment. In formal statement after Committee approval, Vice President Humphrey, Democratic Presidential candidate, called upon Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon to support ratification. U.S.S.R.’s occupation of Czechoslovakia, Humphrey said, should not deter Senate approval of “crucial” treaty. It was not agreement between Washington and Moscow, but a treaty already signed by 81 nations and developed among many signers as well as the United Nations. (Sherman, W. Star, 9/17/68, A5; Unna, W. Post, 9/18/68, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/18/68,1; Furgurson, B Sun, 9/19/68, 1)
nas in The Mathematical Sciences: A Report said that before World War II U.S. was consumer of mathematical talent but now was “universally recognized as the leading producer.” Graduate education in mathematical sciences at major U.S. centers was “far superior to that in all but two or three centers in the rest of the world,” but shortage of college teachers was likely to worsen. Report recommended increased Federal support for basic research, including NASA programs, computer science, applied mathematics, graduate apprenticeships, and faculty improvement. (Text; Schwartz, NYT, 11/24/68, 74)
Test pilot Map William j. Knight (USAF} was named winner of Harmon International. Aviator s trophy. In photo, he inspects connection between, external tank and rocket-powered X—15 No. 2, which he flew to record 4£2Q mph Oct. 3, 1967. Two tanks supplied additional engine propellant for increased speed. On Oct. 24, 1968, NASA test pilot William H. Dana took X—15 No. 1 on last flight of research program. Philadelphia, Boeing Co, Vice President John M. Swihart announced abandonment of swing-wing design for SST in favor of fixed-delta-wing aircraft with four independently mounted engines under triangular tail. Final detailed design would be given to FAA by Jan. 15, 1969, deadline. New design differed from delta-winged Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet Tu-144 in wider wing span and horizontal tail which, according to Boeing Vice President in charge of SST H. W. Witbington, made possible superior control at low speeds and compensated for more drag encountered with sweep-back angle of wing. Aircraft cost would be same as swing-wing, $40 million. It would carry same number of passengers, 280 or more, at same maximum speed, 1,800 mph. (Witkin, NYT, 10/22/68, 77; dpi, W Post, 10/22/68, All; AP, W Star, 10/22/68, A3)	...	. Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received $5,000 AIAA Louis W.	Hill Space Transportation Award “for devising, developing and supervising significant space and satellite programs for military and civilian agencies of the United States Government.” arc Director H. Julian Allen was named Honorary Fellow of AIAA, highest membership award given by Institute. It was presented annually to two Americans and one foreign national. Other 1968 recipients were James S. McDonnell, Chairman of Board, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and England’s Sir Frank Whittle, often called father of jet engine, (aiaa Releases; arc Release 68—15; arc Astrogram)
Dr. Finn J. Larsen, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “If our civil aviation is to continue its dramatic progress, the greatest single requirement is to accomplish . . . complete system engineering. The . . . planning must consider not only the aircraft in flight as a system, but also the entire problem of moving people from destination to destination,” requiring “planning and resources on a considerably larger scale than are now available.” NASA’s responsibility for U.S. aeronautical research “should continue.” DOD had used NASA research, augmenting it for defense as necessary, with “excellent coordination for many years.” Military R&D was specialized, but much was transferable to civil aviation. Long-term goals of smokeless combustors and silent aircraft would be of mutual benefit, sage air defense computer system had contributed to faa radar beacon system and new national standards. Much improved altimetry reporting came from dod development for high-performance jet aircraft. Common digitizer was joint dod—faa project, as was TPX—42 airport traffic control facility. Eleven aircraft carriers had pilot “hands-off” capability for blind landing. Microwave scanning-beam landing systems were in testing. Collision avoidance, v/sTOL, and cargo-handling R&D had civil application. (Text)
Edward J. Schmidt, Special Assistant to General Electric Co.’s Vice President for R&D, was sworn in by NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, as consultant to the Administrator in management operations as affected by scientific and technical information, (nasa Release 68—189)
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that House Committee on Science and Astronautics cut of $48.3 million from request for FY 1969 nerva program “would essentially wipe out the entire program. With the $11.7 million authorized by the House Committee [see March 1]—it is not clear that would even cover termination of the contracts. ... We would immediately have to start termination of not only the engine development, but also termination of the technology work. I feel that we would waste a very valuable investment.” Dr. Adams described “substantial progress” in OART programs in 1967: initial acoustic absorber tests showed reduction in jet transport noise; parawing (steerable parachute) showed promise for spacecraft and precise military landings; static firing of 260-in-dia solid rocket motor had reached 5.9-million-lb thrust in 80-sec test; NERVA had been successfully tested at full power 60 min; all major components of SNAP—8 nuclear turbo-generator system had completed 1,800 hr of endurance tests, one exceeding 13,000 hr; and new Beta cloth for astronaut clothing had passed wear and flammability tests. In “beneficial crossflow between engineering and life sciences,” he named development of garment to give physicians three-dimensional data on heart activity, new blood velocity meter, and sensor to measure blood pressure in heart—small enough to be threaded through hypodermic needle and derived from instruments developed for small flight models for wind-tunnel tests. (Transcript)
Press reported recently released testimony at February hearings of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Defense. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell had described Foxbat as only Soviet fighter aircraft “that we cannot match.” Undergoing late stages of testing, it had estimated mach 3 maximum speed, 70.000-	to 75,000-ft maximum altitude, 1,600-mi combat range without external fuel tanks, and 1,400-mph cruise speed at 50,000-ft altitude. U.S. observers believed fighter-bomber version could be operational in 1969 or 1970; advanced radar-equipped interceptor version with internally carried missiles could be in squadron service by 197Q or 1971. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, had testified that U.S. was not behind U.S.S.R. in aircraft development, while Gen. McConnell had said that F—X (fighter experimental), U.S. fighter in Foxbat class, was still being designed and was “a little late.” (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 6/11/68,1)
Testimony on NASA’s FY 1969 Budget request was presented to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by three NASA Associate Administrators. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented ossa’s budget for “an austere program for the immediate future,” yet one that would make “effective use in the years ahead of the capabilities we have developed in the past decade” and that would advance scientific knowledge and useful applications. “New starts are at a minimum,” he said, “but if this budget request is approved, we can continue the most useful of our on-going programs, we can avoid abandoning the field of planetary exploration, and we can hold together teams and capabilities to meet future national needs. ...” Authorization request for ossa for 1969 was for $538.2 million, $14.7 million below FY 1968 operating plan, with “the decrease . . . primarily in the Lunar and Planetary Programs budget, reflecting the completion of the initial automated phase of lunar exploration and cancellation of Voyager.” Space applications budget request had increased for FY 1969 (to $112.2 million) because of “demonstrated value of communications and meteorological programs and the potential value of applying space technology on a global basis.” NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, Dr. Mac C. Adams, described oart program as “the key to tomorrow’s leadership in aeronautics and space.” He explained: “. . . our FY 69 budget request for the R&D line items ... is $336,800,000, up 5.7 percent over FY 68. The increase is primarily due to increases in effort on aircraft technology [up to $10.1 million] and nuclear rockets [up $6 million], . . . Major changes also included more v/stol research, noise research for subsonic jets, and development of NERVA I nuclear rocket engine at thrust level of 75,000 lb. nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski presented FY 1969 budget request of $304.8 million for R&D and $21.8 million for construction of facilities and reported that “50 satellites by the end of 1968” would be supported by network while “some 16 new missions” would be launched in FY 1969. For FY 1969, “the great majority of funds requested will be directed toward operating and maintaining present network capability. Much of the existing equipment has been operated almost continuously for at least eight years and must be refurbished or replaced.” Construction of facilities budget would fund: two 210-ft-dia antennas for Spain and Australia; power generating plant for Fairbanks, Alaska, tracking station; and Sunblazer antenna. (Testimony)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
House Appropriations Committee cut $550.5 million from dod FY 1969 appropriations, including $85 million from usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. (CR, 7/18/68; SBD, 7/19/68, 71)
Opening session of 3rd Eurospace U.S.-European Conference at Munich discussed disparity between U.S. and European space funding. Total spent on Western European space research in 1967 was $300 million, 0.005% of gross national product of cooperating countries; NASA budget was 14 times that amount. West German Minister for Scientific Research, Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, proposed merger of ELDO and ESRO, 10% increase in total funding, and possible cooperation with U.S. in developing launch vehicle lor use after 1975. International Space Research Committee Vice President Richard W. Porter urged increased cooperation with NASA, which already had concluded bilateral agreements with several countries for scientific satellite launchings, eight of which had proved successful thus far. Some 42 countries were working with U.S. on meteorological satellite programs; 11 were cooperating oil communications projects. There were 20 tracking stations in 11 countries cooperating in U.S. launching projects and 395 foreign technicians, engineers, and scientists had worked in U.S. space centers. European industrial sources expressed hope system could be evolved for joint U.S.-European work on projects. (InteraviaAirLetter, 6/19/68, 1)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski, testifying on FY 1969 budget before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee, cautioned: “The many actions we have taken to reduce operating costs have, however, lowered the level of support we provide to the flight projects. In our judgment, further reductions are not possible without reducing network reliability to the point of jeopardizing the success of flight missions.” (Testimony)
Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D-Wis.), Chairman of House Committee on Government Operations’ Research and Technical Programs Subcommittee, released Scientific Brain Drain from the Developing Countries (dated March 28). Immigration to U.S. of scientific manpower from developing countries had more than quadrupled in past 12 yr. Report, based on Subcommittee hearings held Jan. 23, said, “the long-sustained U.S. foreign aid program has devoted substantial sums and given high priority” to educating and training professional manpower. When these countries “suffer an emigration drain of the very skills and talents they are attempting to increase, an important part of the foreign aid program is undermined.” (Text; NYT, 3/28/68, 33)
Resignation of Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, announced May 21, became effective. He rejoined Avco Corp., where he had worked from 1955 to 1965, as Corporate Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Government Products and Services Group. (NYT, 7/2/68, 63)
Juan T. Trippe, founder, Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer of Pan American World Airways, Inc., announced his retirement at annual meeting in New York. Board of Directors selected President Harold E. Gray, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and Senior Vice President Najeeb E. Halaby, President. Citing Trippe’s 41-yr service with PAA, New York Times termed him “last of the aviation pioneers” to retire. One of four who forged major U.S. trunk airlines in industry’s infancy, Trippe had led PAA to be first airline to fly across Pacific, first to fly across Atlantic, first to order and fly American-made jets, first to order Boeing 747, and first to order SSTs. New Chairman Gray, hired by PAA in 1929 as its 10th pilot, had made first scheduled transatlantic flight, in 1938. He had served as President since 1964. Halaby, pilot since age 17 and former faa Administrator, had joined airline as senior vice president in 1965. (Hammer, NYT, 5/8/68, 63; 5/12/68,16)
U.S.S.R. was expected to make more successful launches than U.S. during 1968 for first time since 1957, with both nations emphasizing military goals, Howard Benedict of Associated Press wrote. In 1957,	U.S.S.R. had launched two Sputniks, U.S. had launched none. In 1958,	U.S. had launched five to U.S.S.R.’s one; thereafter, U.S. had maintained substantial edge, building to 73-46 margin in 1966. In 1967, U.S. had led by only one launch, 67—66. Through 1967, U.S. had had 400 successful launches, with 532 payloads orbited. U.S.S.R. had had 240 launches with 289 payloads. In 1968 to date, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 40 rockets with 40 payloads; U.S. had launched 22 rockets with 31 payloads, 23 fewer than in 1967, while U.S.S.R. launches had increased by five. Reasons for decline in U.S. launch rate were NASA budget cuts and improved instrumentation and data recovery in military launches (60% of U.S. firings). U.S. military payloads in 1968 numbered 22 to U.S.S.R.’s 24 out of total 40. Tracking experts had reported 16 of 1968 U.S.S.R. satellites on reconnaissance assignments, with 13 reentering after 8-day orbit, two after 12 days and one still aloft. Sole U.S.S.R. Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) test, Cosmos CCXVIII, had been launched and returned to earth in less than one orbit April 25. Drop from nine fobs tests in 1967 indicated U.S.S.R. might have perfected at least first stage in FOBS development. Neither U.S. nor U.S.S.R. had launched men into space in 1968 but experts listed Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII launchings April 15 as forerunners of manned lunar mission. In 1968, U.S.S.R. had launched nine scientific satellites, three for navigation, and two each for communications, weather, and deep space probes. U.S. had made two unmanned Apollo rocket and spacecraft tests, five scientific payloads, and one moon shot. (Huntsville Times, 8/5/68)
Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., received AIAA Structures and Materials Award for his “original, definitive, and continuous research leading to the use of random processes in aircraft gust loads design.” (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford asked House Committee on Armed Services to restore funds cut by Senate for compromise development program for Navy F— 111B aircraft. According to compromise plan, USN would continue tests on F—11 IB experimental models and exploratory work on alternate aircraft, VFX—1, until March 1969 and then decide whether to proceed with F—11 IB or to cancel program after first eight models and develop alternate. If VFX—1 were chosen, F—11 IBs already produced would provide sophisticated air defense until alternate aircraft became operational in 1973. dod had requested $425 million for 8 F—11 IBs and 60 Phoenix missiles and $30 million for R&D. on VFX—1. Senate instead had approved $170 million for VFX—31. (Testimony; Sheehan, NYT, 5/1/68, 4; upi, W Star, 5/1/68, A12) '
Lawrence A. Hyland, Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was selected by naa to receive Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics in 1967 as Hughes Surveyor program director. Trophy would be presented May 7. (naa Release; AP, W Post, 4/16/68, A3)
Explaining decision to develop flight-rated nerva engine at 75,000-lb rather than 200,000-lb thrust level, NASA Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee that lower level would be suitable for most missions in which nuclear rocket was significantly advantageous. It was “substantially off-optimum for manned planetary landing missions,” but with manned exploration delayed, “less emphasis is now properly placed upon that mission, and the 75,000-pound-thrust nerva class is appropriate. . . . The 75,000-pound-thrust nerva gives somewhat better payload performance for orbital operations missions which start from low Earth orbit and involve a single Saturn V launch,” but its use for manned planetary missions “entails a significant performance penalty.” Further development might be required “to extend operating time and to accommodate more extensive clustering and staging if such a mission were to be undertaken.” (Testimony)
NASA management officials continued to testify on their programs, within NASA’s FY 1969 budget request, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said omsf’s $2.815-billion FY 1969 request was lowest request since FY 1963, $332.8 million below FY 1968, and “almost $700 million below the peak Manned Space Flight budget year, Fiscal Year 1966.” Dr. Mueller included $2,483 billion for R&D, $18.7 million for construction of facilities, and $313 million for administrative operations. Over 80% of total r&d report was committed to Apollo. “The program of Apollo and Apollo Applications Flights, with the development of the Saturn V Workshop and the Advanced Missions studies leading to a space station of longer duration and greater earth orbital capabilities, constitute a minimum effort to continue manned space flight into the early 1970s.” Dr. Mueller warned against failing “to capitalize on the investment in the Apollo Program” and said it was “economically prudent to proceed now with the Apollo Program and the definition study of the . . . long duration space station . . . keystone in the future of manned space flight.” NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Harold B. Finger, citing 27% decrease in procurement for first three months of FY 1968 below same period in 1967, predicted 94% of procurement dollars going to industry would decrease to less than 90% by end of FY 1969 as industry-developed systems came into NASA for testing and launch. Presenting $ 10-million Sustaining University program budget—equal to 1968 budget but one-third 1967’s $30 million—Finger stressed need for university contributions and combining universities’ “demonstrated competence in physical sciences with their social science strengths to deal with the total impact of the nation’s aerospace effort.” Finger submitted statement of Dr. Richard L. Lesher, Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization, describing programs “to experimentally test and develop methods for bringing about the multiple use of the new knowledge gained as a result of NASA activities.” nasa Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly charged $7.8-million increase in FY 1969 administrative operations budget request (from $640.4-million budget for FY 1968) to cost of 1967 Pay Act and conversion to civil service of certain gsfc support services. He cited personnel reduction of 1,704 positions since freeze on hiring new employees on Aug. 24, 1967. (Testimony)
Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) wrote in Data he believed sonic boom problem would be eliminated, permitting transcontinental flight and realization of estimated 1,200 ssts in service by 1990. “No federal program since World War II had ever had the thorough analysis, careful examination and close scrutiny accorded the present SST plan.” (Data, 5/68, 8)
NASA announced creation of Research and Technology Advisory Council to assist in planning and evaluation of research and technology for aeronautics and space. Council would assess relative importance of ongoing research, suggest additional work, and advise on methods for developing national resources. Headed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Head of mit Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and supported by committees representing seven major technology areas, Council included: Dr. David Altman, United Technology Center; Dr. Allen V. Astin, Director of National Bureau of Standards; Dr. Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of California School of Medicine; Dr. Howard W. Emmons, Harvard Univ.; Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of AFSC; Dr. Nicholas J. Hoff, Head of Stanford Univ. Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics; Dr. Hans W. Liepmann, Cal Tech; Dr. John G. Linvill, Head of Stanford Univ. Electrical Engineering Dept.; Matthias E. Lukens, Deputy Executive Director of Port of New York Authority; Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; Dr. Chauncey V. Starr, Dean of Univ. of California Engineering School; and Edward C. Wells, Vice President, Product and Development, Boeing Co. Dr. Allan E. Puckett of Hughes Aircraft Corp. accepted appointment later. (NASA Release 68-4; NASA oart)
Lawrence A. Hyland (right), Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., looks at Surveyor model with Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey at Smithsonian Institution. Vice President presented Hyland 1967 Robert /. Coffier Trophy (background) in Smithsonian ceremonies honoring Hughes Surveyor team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and General Dynamics Corp. for program which “put the eyes and hands of the United States on the moonP the frontiers of the unknown—is the test of a vital society, a nation that intends to meet the challenge of tomorrow.” (Text; AP, W Star, 5/8/68, A4; Aero Tech, 5/20/68,19)
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
NASA announced changes in Aerospace Safety Panel personnel: Dr. Charles D. Harrington, President of Douglas United Nuclear, Inc., was elected Chairman. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical) at MSFC and Special Assistant to Apollo Spacecraft Manager, resigned from panel to devote full time to these assignments. Newly named to panel were: Frank C. Di Luzio, President of Raynolds Electrical and Engineering Co., Inc., and Vice President of eg&g, Inc.; Gen. Orval Cook (usaf, Ret.); and Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Dr. William A. Mrazek, Assistant Director for Engineering and Chief Engineer for Industrial Operations at msfc, was named consultant, (nasa Release 68-98)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, LeRC Director, described progressive decline of LeRC funding from peak $389.2 million in FY 1965 to $242.4 million in FY 1967, to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Dollar value of procurement had decreased, from $324.5 million in FY 1964 to $211.6 million in FY 1967, while workload was maintained and lead time reduced. Power usage had increased “but costs had declined significantly.” However in last several years, “funds available for maintenance had been less than those believed necessary for proper upkeep and repair.” In long run, Dr. Silverstein said, delays “may prove more costly to the Government.” (Testimony)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
In Air Force and Space Digest interview General Electric Co. Vice President Gerhard Neumann, head of GE Aircraft Engine Group, said postponement of essential R&D during past several years had “mortgaged” nation’s techological future. He saw hazards in current DOD contracting policies which kept industry from taking “reasonable risks” because they imposed implacable performance guarantees. He blamed parsimonious funding on Vietnam War requirements and urged lost ground be regained as soon as priorities permitted. In era of R&D austerity, Neumann advocated “lot more” work in advanced-engine research by nasa. (AF/SD, 11/68, 58)
Air Force, Academy announced selection of Gen. Carl A. Spaatz (usaf, Ret.) to receive its Thomas D. White Award, given annually for contribution to national defense and security. Gen. Spaatz was fighter pilot in World War I. During World War II he helped plan strategic bombing of Germany and commanded air forces in North Africa, U.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe, and final bombing operations against Japan. (Rocky Mountain News, 5/4/68, 13)
U.S patent No. 3,390,336 was issued to Dr. Michael J, DiToro, Vice President for Science of Cardion Electronics, for Adapticom, instrument that corrected multipath reception or time-spread responsible for fuzziness and consequent errors in high-speed radio and telephone communications and eliminated ghosts from facsimile transmission. (Jones, NYT, 6/15/68,49)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of House Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Senate: “Ten years from now nasa will be celebrating its 20th anniversary. I hope that the chairman of the Committee ... at that time will be able to stand here and congratulate the agency and its people for 20 years of accomplishment and say that the United States is still first in space and in aeronautics. But unless we are vigilant and supply the agency with the needed authorizations and appropriations, that statement will not be made.” (CR, 10/2/68, SI1844)
National Academy of Engineering announced award of its third Founders Medal to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin, Honorary Vice President of Radio Corporation of America and technical consultant to RCA Laboratories, in recognition of his many contributions to engineering and to betterment of human society. Dr. Zworykin, known as “Father of Television” for invention of iconoscope, first practical picture transmission tube, was cited also for “his role in developing the first commercial electron microscope in the western hemisphere . . . promoting the cause of traffic safety through the imaginative concept of an automated ‘electronic highway,’ and . . . working ... to bring about a union of electronics and medicine.” Medal would be presented April 24 during nae’s 4th Annual Meeting, (nae Release, 2/20/68)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics decided on $153-million cut in NASA’s authorization request of $4.37 billion for FY 1969. Reductions included cut from $48.3 million to $11.7 million for nuclear rocket program [Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee had recommended cut of entire $48.3 million], $36.5 million from unmanned space program, and $60.3 million from request of $2.8 billion for manned space flight program. (AP, W Star, 3/2/68, A3; W Post, 3/2/68, A10; HR 1181, 3/19/68)
Apollo and Apollo Applications, staff study released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, included statement by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Subcommittee Chairman: “. . . the general posture of the programs is good [but] the Apollo program, with its inherent complexity, has had and can be expected to have a variety of problems. Yet this study identifies the fact that confidence in the governmental-industrial team accomplishing this work is well placed.” Report found “that the NASA industry team is continuing to effectively employ its resources in the solution of those problems which currently face the program. NASA has indicated that, given the stretchout in the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident, nasa is not constrained by total funding for the Apollo program during [FT] 1968. The continued reduction in total effort in the Apollo program as the program passed its peak effort in fiscal year 1967 is beginning to cause dislocation in the contractor and nasa center effort to the extent that personnel that will be needed during the flight portion of the program may not be available in the event a major flight problem occurs. Timely support for the Apollo Applications program and other post-Apollo effort could have a major effect on minimizing this problem.” (Text)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices and HUD that there would be no duplication of experiments on DOD’s Manned Orbital Laboratory (mol) and NASA’s Orbiting Workshop. They would operate in different orbits, nasc, Welsh said, was stressing “those types of space activities from which we can see relatively direct benefits to the general public.” (Transcript; Aero Daily, 4/23/68, 11-F)
New Republic reported interview with Dr. Ralph E. Lapp, physicist and assistant laboratory director of World War II Manhattan Project. Dr. Lapp said: “We are pushing our luck, gambling that everything will work perfectly” on Apollo 8 mission. He advised delay in program so that Apollo 9, configured to have relief-capability, would be on pad ready for launch should Apollo 8 “run into trouble.” Asked if U.S. could afford to delay Apollo 8, Dr. Lapp said, “The basic factor is not really technical. We are racing the Russians to the moon. A lot of people in NASA and in industry are hoping that a successful Apollo-8 orbiting of the moon—or even circumnavigation—will build up public support for an invigorated manned space program. It’s just one of the weighty techno-decisions facing Mr. Nixon. He is committed to funding out the Apollo program—but post-Apollo programs await his decision.” (AP, W Star, 12/9/68; W Post, 12/9/68, 3; New Republic, 12/14/68, 16-9)
The successful completion of the current phase of the automated exploration of the Moon and our planetary successes to date provide the capability, experience, and framework for the next step forward in the exploration of the planets,” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced Planetary Mission Technology (apmt) effort, begun in Fiscal Year 1968 at the conclusion of the Mariner Y, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor Programs, and deferral of Voyager was “directed at planning and technology for potential planetary missions in the early 1970’s.” Emphasis had shifted from automated to manned exploration and return of lunar samples. “Regardless of missions planned by the U.S.S.R. during the opportunities in 1969, 1971, and 1973,” Dr. Naugle said, NASA’s “systematic approach . . . will be meaningful and more likely to be complemented by the U.S.S.R. missions than duplicative.” (Testimony)
Ham, first chimpanzee successfully launched on space flight [Jan. 31, 1961], and now 11 yr old, was among five great apes at National Zoo who reacted positively to tuberculosis tests, according to zoo veterinarian, Dr. Clinton W. Gray. Animals were under treatment and expected to be fit for exhibiting again within 60 to 90 days. (Schaden, W Star, 11/6/68, B2; Elsberg, W News, 2/14/69, 5)
On nationwide “Meet the Press” TV interview, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., commented on NASA budget cuts: “We’ve built up a fantastic technology [but] talented people are starting to leave. ... We should let it be known that we are in this for the future, not just one flight.” Cost of manned missions was justified in quest for knowledge not only outward, but earthward, too. Astronauts were “looking at portions of the earth that had never been documented before. A crew can see something and respond to it, on earth or the moon.” Fellow Apollo 7 crewman R. Walter Cunningham said never had Soviet crewmen “functioned in the same operational conditions as we.” U.S.S.R. was putting fewer higher trained persons in orbit, “mainly as biological specimens.” (AP, W Post, 11/11/68, A2; AP, B Sun, 11/11/68, A5)
President Johnson submitted $186.1-billion FY 1969 budget request to Congress, including $6.76-billion total space budget. Of this sum, NASA would receive $4.37 billion, smallest amount since 1963; dod space efforts, $2,216 billion; AEC space applications, $143 million; and ESSA satellite system, $30.6 million.	: NASA FY 1969 budget, $218 million less than for FY 1968, provided for $3,677 billion to be spent for R&D (down $233 million from FY 1968	and $557 million from FY 1967); $45 million for construction of facilities; and $648 million for administrative operations. Project Apollo would be kept on schedule, development of NERVA I would be continued, and launch plans would be made for two pioneer flights toward Jupiter and one Sunblazer probe. Research on Earth Resources Observation Satellite would continue, but development would be postponed, ogo program would be phased out after OGO—f. NASA’s $2.5-billion Voyager program would be replaced with a $500-million, four-mission Mars orbiter project. Although NASA’s $2.039-billion Apollo budget request accounted for 47% of total NASA budget, amount for Apollo was $517 million less than for FY 1968, reflecting declining expenditures as program neared its completion. Requested $439.6 million for Apollo Applications (aa) program was less than half of amount originally sought and necessitated cancellation of planned 14-day AAP—1A flight. Some $76.9 million—a $10.1-million increase over FY 1968—was allotted for NASA’s aeronautics program, with most of increase attributed to additional supporting research in subsonic aircraft technology. XB—70 and X—15 research programs would be phased out by December 1968. Space science and applications were allotted $538.2 million, with 18 major NASA launches and 13 non-NASA launches scheduled for 1968. Major portions of DOD space budget would be spent on mol—$600 million, compared with $431 million requested for FY 1968., Some $60.4 million was allocated for defense and tactical satellite communications programs, and $10.5 million for Vela nuclear test detection satellite program. AEC space budget—$11 million higher than for FY 1968—included $72 million for Project Rover, with $39 million for nerva system. Most of essa’s funds would be used for development of sensors and satellite system in support of World Weather Watch and improved techniques for warning services, faa’s request included $351 million for SST development, $251 million increase over FY 1968 and one of largest increases given to any domestic program. It was principal item in dot’s $449-million request for r&d. (Text; dod Budget Summary; W Post, 1/16/68, A5; AP, B Sun, 1/16/68, A3; McNamara Statement; dod Background Briefing; NASA Release, 1/29/68; W Star, 1/29/68, A7; Clark, NYT, 1/30/68, 16; Aero Tech, 2/12/68, 17-35) '
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Survey of Views of Leading Industrial Executives on the National Space Program. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Subcommittee on nasa Oversight, had queried 750 U.S. senior executives; 449 had replied. Majority considered $5 billion annually for nasa funding to be “about right”; 54% favored maintaining goal of manned lunar landing in this decade; 96% ranked national defense high-priority assignment; 69% felt nasa had made “much” scientific and utilitarian contribution. In context of Vietnam War, 47% favored same level of funding for space program on basis of contribution to national security. (Text)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics its report Managing the Environment. Subcommittee recommended development of national policy for environment, including: use of environment for benefit of all mankind; maximized productivity consistent with continued usage into very long-term future; systematic management of applied science and technology; incentives to industry, land developers, and local governments; international agreement on projects with widespread or longterm effects; assessment of new and extended applications of science; avoidance of speculative statements and emotional appeals; and increased education and information program in ecological principles. (Text)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, said Nimbus B would be launched in meteorological flight program in spring 1968. Nimbus D continued on schedule for 1970 launch as major step in charting earth atmosphere with new techniques. Nimbus E and F were planned for 1971 and 1973. First of next-generation meteorological satellites (Tiros M) would be available for launch for essa in 1969, providing in single spacecraft both stored picture data for global use and local readout of cloud photos, day and night. Dr. Naugle foresaw “in more distant future the possibility that several economic applications of satellite technology can be combined on single, multiple purpose satellites, thus achieving economy through the sharing of many basic spacecraft systems.” (Testimony)
Arthur C. Clarke, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, told Los Altos Morning Forum proposed Federal cuts in NASA budget would curtail progress in “medicine, agriculture, weather forecasting, communication and other endeavors.” NAS^t budget now was “smaller than the amount American women spend oil cosmetics in a year.” (Anderson, San Jose Mercury, 5/23/68)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, Charles W. Harper, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, explained NASA’s increased emphasis on aeronautics. Air transportation “has grown to dominate the long range transportation systems” and “has created an industry of great importance to the economic strength of the nation,” showing $850 million in export value in first 10 mo of 1967, more than any other product, according to Dept, of Commerce. NASA planned to direct major effort at providing noise suppression, increasing aerodynamic and propulsion efficiency and advanced avionics, while avoiding “major new airport complexes” by increasing development efforts for v/stol aircraft. Harper presented FY 1969 aircraft technology budget: $91.3 million for r&d, $20.6 million for “other NASA support applicable to aeronautics,” and $54.5 million for administrative operations (AO) (for both OART and non-OART). He said, “A large part of the most fundamental aeronautics research is carried out by nasa scientists using nasa facilities. . . . Without this continued support the foundation of the whole program is in jeopardy and the research supported by R&D funds is much less effective.” (Testimony)
House Appropriations Committee struck all funds for sst development from Administration’s FY 1969 budget and asked return of $30-million carryover to Treasury. President Johnson had requested authorization of $223 million. Cut was unlikely to postpone development of project, which would be continued during FY 1969 entirely with carryover funds. First flight had been scheduled for first quarter, 1972. (CR, 6/27/68, H5766-7; Hoffman, W Post, 6/28/68, A3)
James C. Elms, Director of ERC, discussed “the NASA Biomedical Program in Perspective” before Third Annual Meeting of Assn, for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation in Houston. “Despite the rapid advance of biomedical techniques since World War II, the main thrust of the activities was directed toward studying sick individuals in a normal environment. The manned space program has provided the opportunity for intensive controlled study of a select group of normal and healthy individuals in an abnormal and stressful environment. By so doing, we have achieved a better definition of the range of normality of the healthy organism which, in turn, is useful in the study and understanding of disease.” Interaction of space and medicine had led to many medical applications of aerospace hardware. Application of electron probe microanalyzer—used for chemical analyses of microelectronic circuits—to study of red blood cells had led to unexpected clues in study of blood cancer. System to monitor heart rate, respiration, and galvanic skin response was being considered for use in measuring efficiency of dental anesthetics on children and in training teachers for retarded children. Accomplishments of bioelectronics research in interdisciplinary electronics environment included remote measuring technique for eyepointing direction, meaningful measurement of aerosol concentration and size distribution, and automatic tracking system to identify thresholds of mental alertness. (Text)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 15086, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee, (nasa LAR VII/9)
Aerospace sales reached record high of $30.1 billion in 1968, an increase of almost $3 billion over 1967, Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told Washington, D.C., meeting of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%, to record $6.4 billion; aerospace exports rose 32%, to $3 billion. Military space programs in 1968 rose 3%, from $1,088 billion in 1967 to $1,121 billion, reported AlA’s “1968 Aerospace Industry Review and Forecast,” which Harr released. N'onmilitary space sales declined 3.7%, from $4,202 billion in 1967 to $4,047 billion in 1968. Sales of products and services for use of aerospace technology in nonaerospace areas—such as marine science, water desalination, crime control, and rapid transit—increased from $2,579 billion to $2,726 billion. Harr predicted slight decline in total aerospace sales to about $29.6 billion during 1969 because of 25% drop in jet transport sales before deliveries of new high-capacity aircraft; continuing increase in helicopter, executive, and utility aircraft sales; modest increase in defense and nonaerospace sales; and decline in civil space sales. He noted that in third quarter of 1968 backlog of Government aerospace orders was less than that of other customers for first time since before World War II. (Text: aia Release 68—60; W Star, 12/19/68, A19)
House passed, by 262-to-105 vote, NASA FY 1969 authorization bill (H.R. 15856) of $4,031 billion, including $3,383 billion for r&d, $45 million for construction of facilities, and $602 million for administrative operat-i.ons. NASA had requested $4.37 billion. House cut $142.4 million from Apollo Applications program—leaving $252.2 million, $186.4 million less than nasa had requested for orbiting workshop and lunar exploration. Administrative operations allocation was cut by $43.5 million, making total of almost $186-million reduction in $4,217-billion authorization recommended by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. During floor debate Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, answered Apollo Applications program critics’ charge that nasa’s Orbiting Workshop would duplicate usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory, explaining that projects differed in nature and purpose, mol objectives were to develop, operate and evaluate specialized experiments and military equipment requiring manned space operations, and DOD would draw on NASA experience in systems involved in Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo, mol was “example of utilization by another department ... of NASA-developed space technology.” (CR, 5/2/68, H3229—661; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/3/68, 1; Lannan, W Star, 5/3/68; Griffin, H Chron, 5/3/68; SBD, 5/3/68, 15; Aero Daily, 5/7/68)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member, introduced S. 2918, FY 1969 nasa authorization bill. Measure was referred to Committee. Total authorization of $4.37 billion would provide r&d, $3,677 billion; construction of facilities, $45 million; and administrative operations, $648.2 million, (nasa LAR VII/8)
Within limited budget, nasa was “attempting increased emphasis on Astronomy” using manned spaceflight capabilities, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced studies and supporting R&T programs would be expanded in FY 1969 to lay “ground work for a major program in space astronomy.” Flight program in space physics was being “supported at reduced levels,” primarily because of OGO phaseout, but resources would be needed “to capitalize on analysis of data obtained.” Decline in data and experiments, despite output from Explorer and Pioneer programs, might be stemmed, but nasa “considered it much more important to use our requested resources to develop a program which will enable us to fly new experiments, to make new investigations, and to explore new regions of interplanetary space.” Development of two new Pioneer spacecraft would be initiated in FY 1969, to reach past Mars and toward Jupiter, with first launch proposed for 1973. (Testimony) *	nsf announced award of first nine grants under National Sea Grant College Program Act of 1966 to encourage development of national marine resources. Grants, which totaled nearly $2 million, included three to help higher education institutions develop broadly based major programs for increasing utilization of marine resources and six to support individual sea grant projects, (nsf Release 68—112)
Bernhardt L. Dorman had resigned as nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs to return to Aerojet-General Corp., NASA announced. He would be succeeded Aug. 5 by Philip N. Whittaker, Vice President of IBM Federal Systems Div. (nasa Release 68—137)
Two-volume Review Board report, Status of Actions Taken on the Apollo 204, was submitted to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kasa Oversight Subcommittee by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. According to report, major changes made in Apollo project included: installing quickopening hatch; eliminating most combustible materials in cabin; remaking spacesuit, primarily of glass fiber instead of nylon; equipping and training launch pad workers for fire fighting; placing metal shielding over exposed electrical wiring; and replacing aluminum oxygen pipes with more-fire-resistant stainless steel pipes. NASA reported spacecraft had been modified by North American Rockwell Corp. so that it could use ordinary air or oxygen-enriched air, as well as 100% oxygen, while on launch pad. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 1/20/68, 1)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, had asked bob to place $20 million in FY 1969 nasa authorization for Earth Resources Observation Satellite (eros). White House budget-cutters had eliminated eros from new budget, George C. Wilson said in Washington Post. Secretary of the Interior Stewart L. Udall and NAS scientists also were expected to press for restoration of funds. NAS report to nasa would urge eros funding as “one of the potentially big pay-offs for the national space program.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/10/68, B7)
Research on concepts for high lift capability for stol aircraft and special hover and speed requirements for VTOL aircraft would continue in FY 1969, nasa Director of Aeronautical Vehicles, oart, Albert J. Evans reported to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee. Aircraft noise program would pursue efforts to suppress noise by acoustic treatment of engine nacelles (with results expected from McDonnell Douglas Corp. and Boeing Aircraft Co. investigations by October 1969 and January 1970), by engine redesign (with construction of engine components in Quiet Research Engine Program initiated in FY 1969), and by operational techniques. Major NASA program in flight dynamics and propulsion in support of sst program would be continued. Phase III of Hypersonic Research Engine (hre) program, test of hre on X—15 in flight as well as on ground, would not be conducted because of X—15 program termination. Major emphasis in general-aviation technology would be on flight safety, with flight tests of “typical twin-engine vehicle” at frc in FY 1969. (Testimony)
House Committee on Government Operations’ Special Studies Subcommittee, chaired by Rep. Porter Hardy, Jr. (D-Va.), ordered NASA to make every effort to cut escalating costs of its June 16, 1967, contract with Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in assembly of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle. Contract, negotiated by NASA in drive to improve safety after Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire, had been listed tentatively as costing $20 million; NASA officials now placed cost of carrying work through 1968 at $73.4 million. (Transcript; UPI, W Post, 7/16/68, A6)
Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., testified before House Committee on Armed Services on FY 1969 defense research, development, test, and evaluation program. “We have a strong technical-military position today only because we built a strong research and technology base in the past. . . .Yet there are some indications that the program is eroding.” The “net effect of continuing this trend will be a serious weakening of our long-term national security position.” Research and technology funding in FY 1968 was “about 70% of the FY 1964 level, a critical 30% reduction.” (Text; P SB, 6/9/68)
Panel of scientists testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics symposium on unidentified flying objects (UFOs) in unanimous support of further, more detailed UFO research. Northwestern Univ. astronomer Dr. J. Allen Hynek said U.S. should seek U.N. cooperation in setting up “international clearing house” for scientifically respectable UFO reports because there was almost a total lack of quantitative data about the phenomenon. Cornell Univ. exobiologist Dr. Carl Sagan told Committee it was not inconceivable that there were other planets with civilizations and technologies more advanced than earth’s, but he cautioned against a widespread UFO investigation program which would require “some harder evidence than is now present,” thus being expensive. Computer Science Corp. mathematician and celestial mechanics specialist, Dr. Robert L. Baker, Jr., revealed space-based sensor system operated from Colorado Springs Air Defense Command Hq. had received several anomalous UFO alarms that had not been explained. Dr. James A. Harder, Univ. of California at Berkeley engineer, suggested that power which permitted UFOs to undertake their reportedly incredible maneuverings might depend on a theoretically possible “second gravitational field” interacting with electrical field in a manner corresponding to reaction between conventional electrical motors and generators. (Transcript; Lyons, NYT, 7/30/68, 10; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/68, A3)
aiaa announced Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of arc’s Space Science Div., would receive Space Science Award, including $500 honorarium, “for his personal contribution as planner, leader and individual experimenter in maj or space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” He had worked’ in magnetospheric physics and nuclear physics and was currently concentrating on interplanetary physics. He had been principal investigator on several NASA experiments and ALSEP. Award would be presented at ALVA 7th Aerospace Science Meeting in New York Jan. 20—22, 1969. Dr. Stanley G. Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol Engine Div., Rolls-Royce Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., had been selected to share $10,000 Goddard Award for their separate work in developing gas turbine engines. Goddard Award, named for late rocket pioneer Robert H. Goddard, was awarded annually to “a person who has made a brilliant discovery or a series of outstanding contributions over a period of time, in the engineering science of propulsion or energy conversion.” Prof. Rene H. Miller, head of mit Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, would receive Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for “outstanding contributions” to rotary-wing aircraft. Dr. Robert D. Fletcher, usaf Air Weather Service’s Deputy Chief of Staff for Aerospace Sciences, would receive Robert M. Losey Award for “outstanding and dedicated leadership and service” for 30 yr to aeronautical meteorology, (aiaa Release; NASA Biog, 11/29/68; NYT, 12/31/68, 52)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.) on Senate floor said: “President Johnson is properly called the principal architect of America’s space program. As Senator and Vice President he worked unceasingly to assure this country a role of leadership in the exploration of space. . . . Under President Johnson’s leadership in the Senate the Space Act was passed in 1958, creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . . setting up a charter to win for this country a preeminence in the peaceful exploration of space. NASA pulled together widely scattered efforts in space and built an organization unique in this country’s history. It has contributed to the technological competence so vital to modern industrial society.” (nasa LAR VII/108; CR, 10/10/68, S12423)
Response from U.S.S.R. and other nations to proposal for international decade of ocean exploration in 1970s had been “quite favorable,” Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, Chairman of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, said in report released by council. “I welcome the enthusiasm with which the Decade is being received. . . . We look forward to a continuation of this spirit of close collaboration, for the seas can, and must serve the interest of mankind.” (Text; ncmred Rpt, 5/68; Madden, NYT, 6/18/68,16)
House Committee on Government Operations issued report urging immediate curtailment of Federal grants to foreign scientists, especially in developed countries, to conduct nonessential research. Committee said, despite balance of payments deficit, Government grants for foreign research projects amounted to $20 million yearly, more than $15 million in developed countries. Committee recommended limiting funds to projects urgently needed by U.S. until end of emergency. (H.R. 1578; AP, W Star, 6/24/68)
House Appropriations Committee released hearings on dod appropriations for FY 1969 which helped explain why Vietnam war had produced strain on President Johnson’s budget, usaf was now paying $2.4 million for single rescue helicopter; during World War II, each B—17 aircraft that had bombed Germany had cost $190,000 and each B—29 used over Japan had cost $635,000. Government had bought 200 World War II fighters for the $1.1 million it cost USAF for technical manuals for single type of aircraft in 1968. usn was spending $30,000 for single torpedo and $20.3 million for ammunition for battleship U.S.S. New Jersey to fire at Vietnam shore targets. It was requesting $51.8 million for one-year supply of aerial targets. Super Jolly helicopter which USAF was introducing in Vietnam was twice as expensive as predecessor, Jolly Green Giant, and could carry 60 passengers or 18,500-lb cargo at 195 knots. F—111 was being produced at $8 million each; C—5A, world’s largest aircraft, had a unit cost of $25 million, with USAF requesting 120 aircraft. (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 6/30/68, 2)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices that NASA was still uncertain as to exact levels at which a number of projects could be included in FY 1969 operating plan and that at House-passed $4.008-billion appropriations level NASA’s aeronautical and space activities would have to be sharply curtailed. “We will have to reduce and stretch out ongoing programs and eliminate or defer the work that would have enabled us to continue the research and development . . . looking toward a future resumption of tests and missions which will soon grind to a halt.” Because of reduced budget, Webb said, nasa would have to accept one-year gap in Saturn V production, discontinue production of Saturn IBs, delay initiation of nerva development, either severely limit all proposed planetary orbiter missions or eliminate 1971 or 1973 missions, and curtail work toward using space systems for direct economic benefits. If NASA budget were further reduced under Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968, requiring $6-billion reduction in Federal expenditures in FY 1969, result could be disastrous to goals of national space program. Although NASA would do everything possible to fulfill commitment to Apollo program and would continue on smaller scale programs of greatest and most immediate national importance, further budget cuts would require complete termination of Saturn production and cancellation of production of associated manned spacecraft; elimination of Titan-Mars 1973 missions and possible elimination of Mariner-Mars 1971 missions; and further delays, curtailments, and cancellations which might require more harsh steps such as canceling orders for hardware already under contract and mothballing entire installations. (Testimony; NASA LAR VII/65)
Westinghouse Defense and Space Center engineer Paul J. Kiefer had received AIAA annual award for “outstanding contribution to aerospace sciences or technology” for overall mechanical design and development of Gemini rendezvous radar system and for development of lunar TV camera for use in Apollo series. (Westinghouse Release; AP, W Star, 7/5/68, A3)
NASA had asked its contractors to cut ksc personnel 10% in effort to save $40 million by July 1. Boeing Co. had already announced plans to reduce 4,400-man force to 4,000. Chrysler Corp. would keep 1,000 of its 1,200. Cutbacks were due to nasa budget cuts and affected only 2% of work force, (nasa pao; W Star, 10/11/68, A3)
Dr. Gardiner L. Tucker, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Electronics & Information Systems), told Military Operations Subcommittee of House Committee on Government Operations dod would proceed with new phase of Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs), procuring more than three advanced synchronous satellites and developing over six new ground terminals. Funding of satellites, which would use very narrow-beam steerable antennas illuminating 1,000- to 2,000-mi-dia area of earth, would start in FY 1969. dscs satellites would be comparable to Intelsat IV series under consideration for commercial service. New dod phase represented technological advance over advanced dscs considered in 1967 but was less ambitious in cost and size, with cost range of $100—200 million, contrasted with earlier $500 million. Current system had 25 satellites in orbit and operational, each equipped with switch to turn it off after six years in orbit. Number of terminals had grown from original two in field and seven transportable to worldwide operational system with terminals near Washington, D.C., and in New Jersey, Colorado, California, Hawaii, Guam, Australia, Korea, Okinawa, Philippines, South Vietnam, Thailand, Ethiopia, and Western Germany, plus six shipboard terminals. Cooperative programs with Allies in satellite communications included procurement of two synchronous Skynet satellites for U.K. as part of Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) with first launch scheduled for mid-1969. Joint efforts were under way to ensure operability of U.S. and U.K. satellites and terminals, and work was under way to procure two Skynet satellites for NATO under program similar to that of U.K. First launch was planned for late 1969, with U.S. controlling satellite. U.S. had signed Memorandum of Understanding with six NATO countries establishing joint testing program utilizing Les V experimental satellite, launched July 1, 1967. (Transcript: dod Release 603—68; Johnson, Av Wk, 6/24/68)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Cal Tech associate prefessor of planetary science, told Space Science and Applications Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics it would be tragic if U.S. were to “ignore the challenge and the opportunity” of planetary exploration. He urged sustained exploration program competitive with U.S.S.R. “We need not always be first, but we must not always be second.” He saw “real possibility of Soviet Mars lander attempts as early as 1969” and other attempts at planetary firsts, (nasa Auth Hearings; Randal, W Star, 3/7/68, A12)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented nasa’s bioscience programs to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Biosatellite flights D and F, 30-day earth-orbiting missions to study effects of space environment on living organisms, were scheduled for second and fourth quarters of 1969 and 21-day flights C and E for 1970 and 1971. Flights would test reactions of central nervous system, cardiovascular system, metabolism, performance, and behavior of pigtailed monkey. Gas management system for two-gas atmosphere would be flown for first time in U.S. satellite. (Testimony)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place 550-lb Italian eldo F—7 into polar orbit failed when technicians lost contact with payload shortly after launch. Satellite launched from Woomera Rocket Range by booster with U.K. Blue Streak 1st stage, French Coralie 2nd stage, and West German Astris 3rd stage stopped transmitting after abbreviated seven-second 3rd-stage burn and could not be tracked. (Reuters, NYT, 12/1/68, 11) During November: Milton Alberstadt reviewed 25-yr history of msfc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. U.S. Government built plant (dedicated Oct. 24, 1943) on Michoud sugar mill site during World War II to assemble Curtiss C—46 Caravan transports. After C-46 contract was canceled, “Flying Dutchman,” air-sea rescue boat carried under belly of Boeing B—17 bomber, was developed. Michoud plant was reactivated during Korean War by Chrysler Corp. to produce 810-hp engines for Patton tanks. It was selected by NASA in 1961 as site to build Saturn rocket to put man on moon. (Boeing Magazine, 11/68, 8—9)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted into Congressional Record his report “Legislative History of Space Nuclear Propulsion for Fiscal Year 1969,” which confirmed “the continued vigorous support of the Congress for this space research and development activity” and that “appropriate agencies should proceed with the development of the NERVA—1 nuclear rocket engine.” Final Congressional action on aec and NASA FY 1969 authorizations strongly supported nuclear propulsion development, he said. NASA authorization had been $55 million for Nuclear Rockets Program. Joint Committee on Atomic Energy had recommended $69 million for aec Nuclear Space Propulsion Systems and strongly recommended program proceed. AEC had requested $72 million for Project Rover, including $49 million for development of NERVA I rocket engine. Final action of both Senate and House Appropriations Committees on Independent Offices bill and aec appropriations bill had restored funds cut by House earlier. It was clear, said Sen. Anderson, “that the view of the Congress is that the Nuclear Rockets Program for fiscal year 1969 is one of the most important and highest priority programs in NASA and should move forward as planned. . . .” Amount finally appropriated for NASA r&d for FY 1969 would not be less than $3.3703 billion, including $55 million for the Nuclear Rockets Program. “The conference committee on the aec appropriations . . . agreed to $53 million on the aec’s program in Reactor Development—Space Propulsion Systems, a figure more than halfway between the House lower figure [$31 million] and the Senate higher figure [$68 million].” (CR, 7/27/68, S9582—4; nasa LAR VII/81)
House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce approved bill to control aircraft noise levels and sonic boom. Committee, by voice vote, agreed on provisions empowering FAA to set standards for measurement and regulations for control (H.R. 1463; W Post, 5/17/68, 5)
Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of Marine Resources Council, told new American Oceanic Organization in Washington, D.C., “We are ready for the next step in Federal management of marine affairs—creation of an independent civilian operating agency.” Chairman of new group, Rep. George E. Shipley (D-Ill.), member of House Appropriations Committee, said, “I think that we will see the time that this country will spend as much in oceanography as we are spending in the space program.” (Corrigan, W Post, 11/17/68, Kl)
Earth Resources Satellite System, report by Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was transmitted to committee and subcommittee, ers system “unquestionably presents NASA with . . . perhaps the best possible opportunity to achieve tangible economic returns from the substantial investment already made by the American taxpayer in the U.S. space program.” Pace of program to date had been “much too leisurely” and financial support, “inadequate.” Report recommended “NASA concentrate a much larger portion of its efforts and resources on this project” and “give the most serious consideration to the recommendation of the National Academy of Sciences’ summer study to the effect that funding for the applications satellite program should be at least doubled, perhaps tripled.” (Text)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
In speech before Chicago Executive Club in Chicago, 111., Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said operation of military systems in space “to enhance the national defense” must be one objective of U.S. future space program to ensure “there will be no hlind reliance on good faith.” Vice President Agnew was also Chairman of nasc and of President’s Space Task Group. Two questions dominated speculation over national space policy, he said: Why space? And Why Mars? “Mars holds the greatest promise of a capability to sustain human life. It is a potential resource and reserve. More important for the present is the fact that the mind of America functions better when it focuses upon a clear target. Manned exploration of the Solar System is too nebulous to capture the public’s attention. A manned landing on Mars is as understandable a challenge to the citizen as it is to the scientist. It is a test that can be put in a time frame and its anticipation can be appreciated by all.” (Text)
Members of Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of House Committee on Science and Astronautics visited msfc for inspection tour and hearings. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) was ranking Representative. (msfc Release 69—72)
Role of ekc in electronics-related aeronautical R&D was described by ERC Director James C. Elms in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Center had continued research on electronic components and devices, especially application of microelectronics and large-scale integrated circuits to advanced avionics systems; on application of advanced technology to instrumentation for sensing and controlling aircraft motion and attitude; on optics and microwaves; on psychological instrumentations; on data processing; and on electrical power systems. erc had 14 programs in aeronautical R&D, including air traffic control, v/stol guidance, navigation and flight control, collision avoidance, use of navigational and communications satellites in aviation, support technology, remote detection of clear air turbulence, physiological monitoring, and NASA intercenter research in high-speed flight using YF—12 aircraft. (Testimony)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 11271, NASA FY 1970 authorization bill introduced May 14. (House Rpt 91—255)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced for himself and Rep. William Chappell (D-Fla.) HJ.R. 834 “to redesignate the area in the State of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as ‘Cape Canaveral.’ ” Measure was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 7/23/69, H6238)
Eastern Airlines, Inc., Vice President A. Scott Crossfield told Aero Club in Washington, D.C., that seven-week experiment with stol aircraft at Boston, Washington, and New York airports begun Sept. 1968 had been “unqualified success.” Airline’s engineers were drafting specifications for STOL aircraft to carry 125 passengers at 250 mph, capable of maneuvering at speeds of 70 mph. It could double landing capacity of airports by using taxiways and ends of unused runways. McDonnell Douglas version of French-designed Breguet 941 aircraft used by Eastern in experiments had used onboard computer-controlled system, “heart” of which was manufactured by Decca in England. It used existing navaids and was accurate within 25-ft altitude and 100-ft latitude. (Koprowski, W Post, 1/29/69, A8)
S. 705 was introduced in Senate by Smithsonian Institution regent Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and regents Sens. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.) and Hugh D. Scott (R-Pa.) to authorize $2 million for planning and land acquisition for world’s largest radioradar astronomical telescope. Proposed 440-ft “big dish” antenna would be enclosed in 550-ft geodesic dome and cost about $37 million. It would be made available to appropriate scientists everywhere. (CR, 1/28/69, S967—8; W Star, 4/1/69, Bl)
Astronaut Prank Borman repeated Apollo 8 reading from Genesis at White House service attended by President and family, Vice President, Cabinet members, Congressmen, and members of Joint Chiefs of Staff, and of diplomatic corps. During sermon, Dr. Paul S. Smith, President of Whittier College and member of Religious Society of Friends, said: “It was a philosopher . . . who, two thousand years ago, first recounted a voyage to the moon. Lucian called it The True History but confessed in the preface that he wrote ‘of things which are not and never could have been.’ It was a political satirist’s precautionary disclaimer because his real subject was the stupidity of human warfare. His lunar voyagers got caught up in internecine strife between the moonmen and the sunmen over the colonization of Venus! If there is something instructive in the thought, it may be the implication that after two millennia of philosophy men are still fighting over real estate and still dying in the name of philosophical abstractions, but that a voyage to the moon is just as feasible (though somewhat more expensive) as a trip to Timbuktu.” (Wiegers, W Post, 1/21/69, Bl; CR, 7/22/69, H6189—90)
In Cape Kennedy interview before Apollo 11 launch, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said, “It is my individual feeling that we should articulate a simple, ambitious, optimistic goal of a manned flight to Mars by the end of this century. Whether we say it or not, someone’s going to do it.” After liftoff, Vice President told NASA launching team, “. . . all the time I was out there I couldn’t help thinking of you, the people in here and all over NASA who have done such a brilliant job in putting together the combined effort behind those three gentlemen who are off on this historic mission. ... I bit the bullet for you today as far as Mars is concerned. But on the other hand ... I may be a voice in the wilderness.” In Washington, D.C., Senate Majority Leader Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) told press, “I think we have a lot of problems here on earth that we must face up to and when we settle those we ought to consider future space ventures.” Senate Majority Whip Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said, “The Apollo program is for landing a man on the moon and exploration and should take another one to two years. I think after that the space program ought to fit into our other national priorities.” (Witkin, NYT, 7/17/69, 1; Transcript, Agnew statement to NASA launch crew; Unna, W Post, 7/17/69, Al)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 4046, FY 1970 nasa authorization bill, totaling $3,760 billion, in House. {CR, 1/17/69, H403)
NAS report to Congress, Technology: Processes of Assessment and Choice, was published by House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Panel headed by Harvey Brooks of Harvard Univ. strongly urged creation of “constellation of organizations, with components located strategically within both political branches, that can create a focus and a forum for responsible technology-assessment activities throughout government and the private sector.” Such organizations “must be separated scrupulously from any responsibility for promoting or regulating technological applications.” (Text)
In Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, J. F. Ter Horst commented on designation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, as Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration Cabinet: “It’s highly unlikely that the Nixon Administration will merge civilian and military space programs—they were back in 1958 when he was Vice President. But if it becomes easier to sell Congress a space budget with a military label than with a civilian one, Mr. Nixon undoubtedly will move in that direction. If he does, he has an uncommonly qualified administrator in Seamans.” (P Bull, 1/11/69, 14)	_
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, nasc Chairman, discussed future of U.S. space program in Space Age News: “It is my personal belief that a vigorous space effort is essential to the welfare of this country, particularly since it has contributed so much to our international prestige, our national security and our economy. I can assure you that the President shares this view.” Through 11 yrs of space activity U.S. had “gained one of its most priceless resources—trained, experienced professionals capable of creating, managing, and operating a complete range of space systems dedicated to bringing the benefits of space within reach of all of us here on Earth.” U.S. had “just begun its space program. The success of the first decade indicates an enlarged effort in the decade to come.” (Space Age News, 12/69)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications published Future of the Bioscience Program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Report concluded bioscientific experimentation on man and animals in first decade of space flight had been “relatively meager.” Scientific research on manned flight had been “minimal” and had not included biomedical experimentation of kind done in Biosatellite program. More research was urgently needed on biological influence of zero gravity and effects of change or elimination of rhythmic daily periodicity of animal and plant life on earth. Space technology now permitted advanced scientific research on these and related biological factors. While professors exchanged scientific theories freely, NASA representatives inclined toward “protecting jurisdiction authority and extending organizational power within the framework of their agency.” Complete information exchange should prevail, especially in bioscience, “which eventually may affect human life.” “Rivalry” between science and engineering was “real.” In NASA, science was “used” but “rarely accepted in its own right by the engineering management.” While knowledge from 14-day missions was adequate to proceed with planning of 28-day aap mission, it was inadequate to proceed safely with proposed 56-day flight or longer planetary flights without monitoring astronauts on 28-day mission in experiments “beyond any yet undertaken in manned flight.” Further biosatellite exploration with primates and instruments was “merited if not indeed prescribed.” Final evaluation of Biosatellite 111 would determine new mechanisms and improved monitoring of test mammals to be programmed. Subcommittee endorsed proposal of Dr. W. Ross Adey, NASA’s principal investigator for Biosatellite III, that basic measurements be required on all flight crews and recommended reinstitution of biosatellite experiments with animals in earth orbit, extension of bioscience research to planets when technologically feasible, uprating of science role as mission objective, and nasa and Congress delegation of “highest relative priority” to “bioscience programs which offer the most immediate return to the taxpayers through . . . medicine and physiology.” Subcommittee further recommended NASA examine and implement “to fullest practicable extent” recommendations of President’s Scientific Advisory Panel for “new level of biomedical research capability,” that OMSF conduct biomedical experiments on astronauts during 28-day aap missions, and that NASA’s scientific investigations be planned “with close and continued participation of the academic research institutions.” (Text)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 12307, Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill, which provided $3,696 billion for NASA—$63,544 million below original budget, $18,544 million below revised budget, $298,290 million below 1969 appropriation, and $269,394 million below total authorizations approved by House. Bill provided $3 billion for NASA r&d, $53,233 million for construction of facilities, and $643,750 million for research and program management. With unobligated carryover from 1969 of $117,473 million, total $3,117 billion would be available for obligation in 1970. H.R. 12307 also provided $418 million for nsf—$79 million below amount originally budgeted but $18 million above FY 1969 appropriation. It provided $500,000 for nasc, $24,000 below budget estimate. (Text; Committee Rpt 91—316)
Lee R. Scherer, Director of NASA’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, testifying on FY 1970 budget request before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described extravehicular activity (eva) planned for first lunar landing. Emerging on lunar surface, astronaut would acquire and seal bagful of surface material and place it in spacesuit pocket, inspect lm, and with geological tools, fill large sample container. Location would be photographed before and after sampling. Passive seismometer would be emplaced to measure “moonquakes” and permit estimates of moon’s internal structure for comparison with that of earth. Instrument, operated on solar power, would record and transmit lunar data to earth for about one year. Laser retroreflector would be emplaced to permit measurement of earth-to-moon distance and monitoring of distance variation. Measurements would be repeated several times daily for year or more and precise times determined by atomic clock. From data on relative motion of moon and earth and of each about own center of gravity, scientists could refine “knowledge of size and shape of the Moon, detect small movements that may occur between the Earth’s continents, and perhaps even test gravitational theories.” If time permitted, second sample return container would be filled more selectively, with greater effort to document and to pack samples individually. (Testimony)
Apollo Program Management: Staff Study was submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. It identified key concepts contributing to successful evolution of NASA-industry management team and areas where additional studies would be useful in application of its expertise. Key factors included clear definition of primary objective, monitoring and auditing systems that allowed vertical and horizontal information flow, refinement in program-control techniques using incentive contracts, correlation and definition of multiple-program interfaces by use of systems-oriented staff groups, real-time and flexible management reporting system, and balance between governmental in-house capability and industrial capability. (Text)
U.K.’s Institute for Strategic Studies predicted U.S.S.R. would overtake U.S. in ICBM production by mid-1969 but U.S. would retain overall lead in nuclear weapons because of greater submarine and air forces. U.S. international role in 1970s could become smallest since pre-World War II. (upi, W Star, 4/11/69, A12)
President Nixon’s amendments to proposed FY 1970 space budget would support post-Apollo manned flight at expense of unmanned planetary space flight, William J. Normyle wrote in Aviation Week & Space Technology. In effect, NASA had received “almost all it wanted for planning post-Apollo manned lunar exploration.” Argument was expected in House Committee on Science and Astronautics over relative apportionment. (Av Wk, 4/21/69, 16—7)
President Nixon announced Ruben F. Mettler, Executive Vice President of trw Inc., would be Chairman of new Presidential Task Force on Science Policy [see Sept. 22]. (PD, 10/13/69, 1376)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., would head $4.5-million summer day camp program for youth to be administered by National Collegiate Athletic Assn, under hew contract. (Text)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics report Engineering Management of Design and Construction of Facilities of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Report concluded that closer economic scrutiny of design and construction management at NASA executive level could “yield dividends in more efficient management and lower costs at the field centers.” Organization of Office of Facilities was “progressive step.” Cost accounting of administrative expenditures needed to be improved and engineering management costs should be clearly identified for all projects at all centers. (Text) Because of anomaly which required excessive fuel to maintain stable spin condition, apogee-kick motor was fired on first apogee instead of second and spacecraft had to be biased so it would drift from position over India to intended station over area west of Ecuador. Maneuver successfully placed Ats V into near-synchronous orbit with 22,927-mi (36,889.5-km) apogee, 22,221-mi (35,753.6-km) perigee, 1,464.0-min period, 2.7° inclination, and 6.9° per day westward drift. Active nutation control was overpowered by unidentified force that caused spacecraft to go into flat spin, preventing ejection of motor case without possibility of damage to spacecraft. Controllers were investigating alternatives—stopping spacecraft spin, restoring spacecraft to normal spin mode, or minimizing ejection hazard—which could be executed Aug. 25 when spacecraft became visible to Rosman, N.C., ground station. Spacecraft was not in danger thermally or electronically and was expected to become stable and operational after successful ejection of kick motor. Ats V was fifth in series of seven ATS satellites designed to investigate and flight-test technological developments common to number of satellite applications and useful to satellites operating in stationary orbits, conduct carefully instrumented gravity-gradient experiments for basic design information, and flight-test experiments peculiar to orbits of various missions. Ats I (launched Dec. 6, 1966) had exceeded test objectives and was still operating satisfactorily. Ats II (launched April 5, 1967), though judged a failure because of eccentric orbit, had transmitted some useful data before being turned off Oct. 23, 1967. Ats III (launched Nov. 5, 1967) had operated successfully and transmitted color photos of earth. Ats IV (launched Aug. 10, 1968) had remained in parking orbit when Centaur failed to complete second burn and had reentered Oct. 17, 1968. ats program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1970 authorization request, outlined goals in space and aeronautics toward which U.S. should move in next decade: “First—We should do all we can to understand and put into early use the promise of space for people here on earth. We should increase our scientific knowledge of the vital earth-sun relationship and study the earth itself from space. We should develop and experiment with new and improved practical applications of satellites, particularly in earth resources. We should continue to foster prompt introduction into the economy of space applications and technology. “Second—We should follow up the first Apollo landing with a sound program of manned lunar exploration. “Third—We should proceed with the development and experimental operation of a permanent U.S. space station in earth orbit. “Fourth—We should move out steadily in the exploration of deeper space, exploring the planets with unmanned probes and the sun, stars, and galaxies from orbital observatories outside the atmosphere. “Fifth—We should provide the technology for developing the full potential of U.S. civil and military aeronautics. “Sixth—We should maintain a strong momentum of broad technological advance in all aerospace disciplines.” Although nasa’s 1970 budget was “ ‘holding’ budget,” Dr. Paine said request did include funds for starting three principal new programs: Earth Resources Technology Satellite Program, with start of erts A and b development; nerva flight-weight engine development, postponed from 1969; and series of planetary explorers for future flights to Venus and Mars. In period of “retrenchment and declining resources,” FY 1969 operating budget was $762 million below FY 1968 budget and over $1 billion below FY 1967. Nationwide employment on nasa work had decreased from earlier peak of 420,000 to 270,000 at end of FY 1968, to about 215,000 at end of FY 1969, and under FY 1970 budget to about 190,000. (Testimony)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology voted increase of $11.8 million over $818.8-million NASA request for research. {CR, 3/26/69, D233)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of nasc, issued statement on Administration’s attitude toward space program: “In response to those who would denigrate our space effort, I think it is clear that this Administration has already demonstrated its belief in the strength and potential of America’s space program.” Administration was taking steps to “evaluate the costs and alternatives available to us in extending the program once man has been placed on the moon and returns.” (AP, W Post, 5/22/69, A5)
Between 750,000 and 1 million persons crowded Brevard County, Fla., to witness launch of Apollo 11, including 5,000 dignitaries headed by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and former President Lyndon B. Johnson. The Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy and 40 representatives of Poor People’s Campaign watched launch from bleacher seats with 10,000 guests including families of Apollo program personnel, while other representatives marched outside ksc. Paris Match had brought 105 European businessmen. Some 3,100 press members were at special stand. As Apollo spacecraft lifted from launch pad there was some applause, but most spectators stared in silence until Saturn V rocket disappeared overhead. Afterward many were caught in monumental traffic jams. Banana River, five miles south of Launch Complex 39, was clogged with several thousand boats registered from New England to Texas. (Greider, W Post, 7/17/69, Al; Weinraub, NYT, 7/17/69, 21; Lyons, NYT, 7/17/69, 21)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), introduced S. 1941, NASA authorization bill, similar to H.R. 10251 [see April 17]. Bill was referred to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. (Text; CR, 4/25/69, S4118)
North American Rockwell Corp. consolidated its Rocketdyne Div. and Atomics International Div. into new Power Systems Divs. headed by Jay D. Wethe, Vice President of Aerospace and Systems Group, (nar Release N—14)
Science magazine published letter from Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, clarifying his views on cost effectiveness evaluation of Earth Resources Satellite system. He reiterated opinion he stated in Dec. 1968 Earth Resources Satellite System report: “Precise determination of cost effectiveness at this early stage ... is not possible. . . . The magnitude of the economic benefits simply cannot be calculated in the absence of the type of data which the system is designed to produce.” Conclusions of studies already completed had constituted “strong evidence that precision was not possible. Yet, I am reassured by the fact that all such studies . . . have concluded that the potential economic benefits will exceed the costs of such a system by a substantial margin and some predict that benefits will someday .be measured in billions of dollars annually. It is my personal conviction that an operational ers system will ultimately prove highly cost-effective.” Karth said he considered it “nasa’s responsibility to experiment with new space systems that appear to have potential, and to conduct the necessary research and development which will lead to a firm foundation for a subsequent determination as to whether operational systems should be built. In this context, I believe cost effectiveness is not an appropriate standard to apply in advance to NASA’s experimental work, though it is certainly applicable when the time comes to decide whether to go forward with an operational system.” (Science, 5/30/69, 1009)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew announced President’s Council on Youth Opportunity and NASA would explain mechanics of scheduled July . Apollo 11 lunar landing to high school and junior high school pupils in 50 cities under summer program to be held in city streets, playgrounds, and classrooms. (W Star, 5/12/69, A3)
First notables to arrive at Cape Kennedy on eve of Apollo 11 launch included former President and Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson and Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy. Johnsons arrived in military aircraft assigned by President Nixon, to attend luncheon honoring James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator. Abernathy led 25 poor southern families to protest Federal funding priorities. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, met group of 150 poor people outside KSC gate where Abernathy requested 40 vip passes to launch, asked Dr. Paine to join fight against poverty, and urged that NASA technology be converted to finding new ways to feed poor. Dr. Paine agreed to admit members of group to launch and pledged to do what he could to adapt space-developed food concentrates to aid undernourished. “It will be a lot harder to solve the problems of hunger and poverty than it is to send men to the moon.” But, “if it were possible for us not to push that button tomorrow and solve the problems you are talking about, we would not push the button.” He said space program and science could be used to help solve poverty problems. “I want you to hitch your wagon to our rocket and tell the people the NASA program is an example of what this country can do.” The poor people said they would pray for Apollo 11 astronauts. By evening 500,000 tourists had arrived in Brevard County, site of ksc, with total one million expected by early morning. Air traffic had quadrupled, with 10 local airfields handling over 1,200 small aircraft, and 200 private jets. Aircraft were to bring Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, over 200 Congressmen, 60 ambassadors, 19 governors, 40 mayors, and other public figures July 16. More than 1,000 police struggled to control road traffic, and hordes settled to sleep on beaches from which they could see illuminated spacecraft on launch pad. (Weinraub, NYT, 7/16/69, 22; Greider, TV Post, 7/16/69)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson ended as President Richard M. Nixon was sworn in as President of U.S. Johnson had served U.S. space program continuously since Sputnik l in October 1957, first on Capitol Hill as Chairman of Select and then permanent Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. As Vice President under late President Kennedy, he had served as Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, post held by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey during Johnson Administration. (EH)
nasa announced appointment of Robert N. Lindley, Vice President Program General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Corp., as Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Ann)
Sperry Rand Corp. announced election of former nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Board of Directors. He had been vice president of company’s Sperry Gyroscope Div. in 1943. (Sperry Rand Release 2/6/69; sbd, 2/11/69, 140)
In interview published by New York Times, Boeing Co. Vice President H. W. Withington said sst cost, quoted at $40 million, would climb to $50 million or $60 million if inflation continued at current rate. He did not expect increase to cut heavily into sales. Under current forecast, Boeing would have to raise “about $2-billion to go into production, and that’s assuming we get 50 per cent progress payments [half of the purchase price] in the 1973—74 period. I’m not so sure we’ll be able to do this.” (Lindsey, NYT, 10/17/69)
Izvestia published article by Soviet space scientist Alexander Koval, Vice President of International Astronomical Commission. It was “high time” that space knowledge was used for advancement of communications, meteorology, geodesy, and navigation. Since space exploration was not cheap, simpler and more reliable experiments must be tried before complex and expensive ones. Three practical applications of space research were industrial use of high vacuum and absolute cold, industrial use of rocketry innovations, and putting “production-technical complexes” in space. (fV Post, 10/15/69, A21)
Roger Lewis, President of General Dynamics Corp., announced appointment of Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, as General Dynamics Vice President, effective immediately. Dr. Mueller’s resignation from NASA would be effective Dec. 10. (General Dynamics Release 1491)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics accepted subcommittee reports on H.R. 10251, FY 1970 NASA authorization [see April 17] and added $258 million to amounts requested by President Nixon. Committee would meet again April 29. (CR, 4/23/69, D302; Lannan, W Star, 4/24/69)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, told House: “. . . I do not at this time wish to commit ourselves to a specific time period for setting sail for Mars. I believe that there are many tasks that can be accomplished that will ultimately provide that capability, but will be less costly and will be necessary in meeting short term objectives.” He urged priority attention to intermediate steps and balanced program “that fully exploits the great potential of unmanned spacecraft, while at the same time maintaining a vigorous manned flight program.” He advocated continuation of lunar exploration to obtain “experience of operating a base for science and exploration on another heavenly body”; manned earth-orbital operations leading to long-term space station supported by low-cost shuttle rocket; greater emphasis on applications satellites that “have the greatest potential for economic return in the near term”; larger funding for unmanned planetary exploration, “an area in which the U.S. may soon be overshadowed by the Soviet Union”; continued nerva development because “improved propulsion is a key to space leadership”; and “special emphasis on ers satellites, “which promise to yield so much ... to agriculture and industry.” (Text; CR, 8/11/69, H7251-4)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 14 briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget at which Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, said $3,878-billion budget approved by President Johnson had been developed “to maintain an austere but balanced NASA aeronautics and space program aimed at major program goals of high national priority.” Goals were continuing advances in space applications, including initiation of experimental earth resources technology satellites and slightly decelerated research on space environment; achieving manned lunar landing and additional Apollo moon missions, with limited provision for studies—not for development—of equipment to achieve longer lunar stay-times and mobility for future exploration; proceeding with Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount; proceeding with Viking Project to land instruments on Mars in 1973; initiating in FY 1970 Mariner flyby in 1973 of Venus and Mercury; producing family of small planetary Explorers for orbiting Mars and Venus; making preliminary observations of Jupiter with previously approved Pioneer spacecraft; continuing work on unmanned orbiting astronomical observatories; continuing advanced aerospace technology work at about current levels; emphasizing noise reduction, with construction of special noise research laboratory; developing full potential of civil and military aeronautics; and undertaking NERVA project for development of flight-weight nuclear engine. Dr. Paine noted FY 1970 budget, as approved by President Johnson, “would halt a four-year downward trend in NASA budget.” It was “austere and does not make full use of the aerospace capabilities that the nation has developed. . . .” But it permitted “a balanced program of useful work in critical areas.” Budget left “the major new program decisions, especially in the manned flight area, for the next Administration,” and was “ ‘holding budget’ that provides for progress, but defers critical program and funding decisions to the new Administration.” (Transcript)
House Appropriations Committee approved full $95.9 million requested by President Nixon for continued sst development. (CR, 11/13/69, D1065; AP, B Sun, 11/14/69) At 42nd scientific session of American Heart Assn, in Dallas, Tex., Dutch scientist Dr. A. C. Arntzenius described application of jet propulsion principle—for every movement in one direction, there is an equal opposite movement—in experiments to increase blood pumped by animal heart without increasing heart action. With research team from medical faculty of Rotterdam he had strapped piglets and dogs to “frictionless” table that slid in synchronization with animal heartbeat. Movement made it unnecessary for ventricle to expend energy to accelerate blood as it left heart. When blood started toward animal’s head, table was moved in direction of its feet, forcing blood in opposite direction without adding to demands on heart, (tipi, W Star, 11/23/69, All; Am Heart Assn pio)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, summarized recent NASA efforts to improve international cooperation in space. He had visited major European capitals and Canada and hoped to visit Australia and Japan, to explain “planning for U.S. space activities in the next decades.” Foreign space authorities had been invited to “sponsor their own industrial participation in the nasa conference on space shuttle concepts” held in October. “Additional mechanisms are being developed to permit foreign space interests to keep in touch with and even contribute to our studies over the next year, especially in the space shuttle and station programs.” In letters to President Mstislav V. Keldysh and Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov of Soviet Academy of Sciences Dr. Paine had invited Soviet proposals for experiments on U.S. spacecraft, offered use of laser reflector left on moon by Apollo 11 astronauts, invited Soviet proposals for lunar sample analysis, invited Soviet scientists to Viking Mars 1973 conference, offered to discuss coordination of planetary programs, and reiterated U-S. readiness “to meet anytime, any place, to consider any possibilities for cooperation or coordination between us.” There had been “no substantial response.” (CR, 1/21/70, S259)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Science, Technology, and Public Policy During the Ninetieth Congress. Report covered 1967— 1968, giving details behind 94 public laws passed that authorized, funded, or otherwise affected R&D in U.S. and 45 additional bills on which Congress took legislative action. It included reviews of U.S. policy for science and technology by Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and by nsf for United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. Both reviews showed pluralistic nature of U.S. public policy for science, built up by laws, executive orders, and other expressions of policy as they occurred. (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
Wall Street brokerage houses were watching effect of Apollo 11 success on stocks as market resumed trading after July 21 holiday. Some firms believed lunar landing would generate enthusiasm, although its impact would be restrained by uncertainties over surtax extension, House committee vote to cut oil depletion allowance (major tax benefit of petroleum industry), and apparent standoff at Vietnam peace conference. (upi, W Star, 7/22/69, C7)
Testifying before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Joseph B. Mahon, NASA’s Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, said NASA planned to use Titan IIIC and Titan Centaur to carry out high-velocity Viking mission in FY 1970. They would provide capability for both orbital and lander scientific experimentation and would expand launch window. After proof test flight in 1972 of integrated Improved Centaur and Titan III, configuration would be flown in support of 1973 Viking mission and other planetary missions, as well as earth synchronous missions using 4,000- to 8,000-lb spacecraft. Titan IIIC also would be used on two synchronous-altitude missions, ats—f and ats—G. (Transcript)
Apollo 10 commander Thomas P. Stafford received Flying Tiger Pilot Trophy, presented every two years by Flying Tigers, group of World War II veterans. Trophy was presented during 27th reunion in Ojai, Calif. (AP, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight voted to add $230.5 million to $2.212-billion authorization requested by NASA for manned space flight in FY 1970. Of raise, $168 million was earmarked for development of scientific payloads for six manned lunar landings between 1970 and 1973 and $66 million for space flight operations to cover flying men in earth orbit for month at a time, in 1970 onward. Flights were to be forerunners of orbiting space stations. (CR, 3/26/69, D233; Committee member)
Richmond, Va., News-Leader editorial approved Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s calling for flight to Mars by end of century [see July 16]: “One day, man will go beyond the planets, to other solar systems; right now . . . that is not within our technological reach. But Mars is, and so are the other planets. The moon is in earth’s, and man’s, own crib. Plans and commitments should be made—now—for man to take grown-up strides in the real world of space.” (R News-Leader, 7/18/69)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Dean of MIT School of Engineering and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, was among persons inside mit Instrumentation Laboratory when students from mit and other Boston, Mass., campuses demonstrated against laboratory’s defense work and were confronted by police. Later Dr. Bisplinghoff said: “The university has set as policy a deliberate movement from Department of Defense and space research to a different mix: more and more research relevant to societal problems. It’s going to take a considerable time to make the transition, however, and if we are going to continue on the same scale of operations . . . we’re going to need lots of time and new money.” It would be up to Congress to change emphasis, not mit. Instrumentation Laboratory, meanwhile, would honor commitments to dod, including work on Poseidon missile. (Nordheimer, NYT, 11/9/69, 61)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced President Nixon had nominated John H. Shaffer, Vice President of trw Inc., as Federal Aviation Administrator. Shaffer would replace Acting faa Administrator, David D. Thomas, who would remain as Deputy Administrator. (dot Release 2469)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development transmitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Centralization of Federal Science Activities. Report, prepared by Library of Congress Science Policy Research Div., described centralization and potential organization of Federal science activities, summarized arguments for and against centralization, examined major functions of Federal Government in dealing with science and technology and present organization, and presented historical summary of evolution of Federal organization for science and of proposals for reorganization and consolidation. (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
In his last State of the Union message, President Johnson told Joint Session of Congress:	. . if the Nation’s problems are continuing, so are this Nation’s assets. Our economy, the democratic system, our sense of exploration, symbolized most recently by the wonderful flight of the Apollo 8, in which all Americans took great pride, the good common sense and sound judgment of the American people, and their essential love of justice.” Quest for durable peace “has absorbed every Administration since the end of World War II. It has required us to seek a limitation of arms races not only among the superpowers, but among the smaller nations as well. We have joined in the test ban treaty of 1963, the outer space treaty of 1967, and the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons in 1968.” {PD, 1/20/69, 60—8)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), as Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had forced NASA to pay $5,522 for usaf jet to transport 32 committee members and wives to Aug. 13 Apollo 11 state dinner in Los Angeles, Rowland Evans and Robert Novak said in Washington Post. NASA also had to pay $19,342 for chartered commercial jet for space officials and $2,800 for Aug. 12 Houston luncheon, and White House was charging agency with most of estimated $75,000 cost of state dinner. (W Post, 8/17/69, B7)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published A Study of Technology Assessment: Report of the Committee on Public Engineering Policy, National Academy of Engineering. Report recommended establishment of technology assessment task force of members of public and private organizations with knowledge of subject under assessment, including behavioral and political scientists. (Text)
NASA named Brian M. Duff, Vice President for Communications of National Urban Coalition, as Public Affairs Officer for msc. He would succeed Paul Haney who was named Special Assistant to Julian Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, NASA Hq. Duff had been Director of Special Events in NASA Office of Public Affairs before going to National Urban Coalition. In new position, Haney would coordinate development of news media materials, with concentration on Apollo manned lunar landing. Haney later told press he had been ordered to new position because of personal differences with Scheer. “I’m definitely uncertain whether to go and have consulted a lawyer,” he said. Scheer said on April 23 transfer was not personal matter but “case of using two very good people where they can best serve our needs.” (nasa Release 69—59; H Chron, 4/22—23/69; H Post, 4/23/69, 1; W Post, 4/23/69, A3)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
Spencer M. Beresford, former special counsel of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was appointed NASA General Counsel succeeding Paul G. Dembling, new NASA Deputy Associate Administrator [see Sept. 10]. (nasa Release 69—173)
Report on aviation safety for 1968 was submitted to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce by Joseph J. O’Connell, Jr., Chairman of National Transportation Safety Board. For all scheduled air carrier services there had been one fatal accident for about every 500,000 hrs, or for every 100,000 transcontinental flights. One passenger had been lost for every 370 million passenger miles flown. Number of fatalities in scheduled domestic and international passenger service had been second worst of decade; but accident rates, fatal and nonfatal, continued downward for total scheduled air carriers. In general aviation, rate for fatal accidents per hours flown had increased but remained below rates of 1965 and before and was third best in decade. Total number of fatal accidents—692, killing 1,374 persons— was highest in history. (Text; NYT, 2/9/69, 94)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
Proposed Nixon Administration program of low-budget oceanic and marine science activities was announced in Washington, D.C., by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. Program sought establishment of coastal zone management program, modest grants for state planning and regulatory mechanisms, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, currently under consideration by Congress and Ash Commission on Federal Reorganization. Program also proposed coastal laboratories for regional problems, pilot project of lake restoration, International Decade of Ocean Exploration, and accelerated program of Arctic research. (Lannan, W Star, 10/19/69, A12)
Dr, Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, resigned as president of aiaa. Letter of resignation said, “It is not in the best interest of either the Air Force or the aiaa for me to continue with aiaa responsibility.” aiaa board of directors elected Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., to replace Dr. Seamans, (aiaa Release)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, introduced S. 539, FY 1970 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,760 billion. (CR, 1/22/69, S659—60)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced in House H.R. 10251, new NASA FY 1970 authorization bill totaling $3,716 billion in line with President Nixon’s April 15 amended budget request. Bill was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (Text; CR, 4/17/69, H2806)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said at press conference following tour of October I: nasa launched Boreas, European Space Research Organization satellite, to study the aurora borealis and polar atmosphere. In the photo the spacecraft teas prepared for launch on a four-stage Scout booster from the Western Test Range. jpl:	, the cities may benefit more from what’s happening right here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory than they do from what’s happening in some community action agency. Now, I’m not downgrading the need to work closely with people . . . but I think it would be a desperate mistake ... to adopt an attitude that we do not challenge the unknown, we do not move forward simply because we can’t predict what we’re going to find.” Columbus “didn’t find what he went for but he found something even better. Maybe that applies to the situation with regard to the ultimate goal . . . about landing a man on Mars. . . . we may do something a lot better.” In reply to question, he said: “We will never reach a point where we’ll have enough money for . . . the problems of the cities and of the population. . . . we could spend every resource we have and forego any scientific exploration and forget the need to research and develop new techniques. ... I suppose you come down to the final determination that you’ve got to put some of your effort in the future and not all of it in the present. And I don’t think the lack of a focus in the space program would be a benefit at all to the future of the cities and the problems you mention.” (Transcript)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, former Assistant Secretary of Defense, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator. He would advise nasa senior officials on scientific and engineering aspects of agency programs and review and advise on work of President’s Space Task Group and nasa— dod cooperation on space shuttle. Before joining NASA Dr. Fubini had been Vice President and Group Executive at ibm. (nasa Release 69-85)
NASA announced selection of Chester M. Lee as Apollo Mission Director, succeeding George H. Hage, who had been elected vice president for product development with Boeing Co. Lee, retired USN captain who had served in Polaris missile program and in Directorate of Research and Engineering in Office of Secretary of Defense, had been Assistant Apollo Mission Director since August 1966. (nasa Release 69—122)
Pentagon sources estimated U.S.S.R. was spending equivalent of $60 billion in 1969 on national defense and space efforts, while U.S. was spending $85.2 billion, of which $29 billion was for Vietnam war. Figures left U.S.S.R. $4 billion ahead of U.S. in spending on weapon and space technology. Between 1965 and 1969, Soviet spending on offensive and defensive strategic forces increased by 40% but amount spent on intercontinental missiles and surface-to-air missile defense systems rose by 75%. (Kelly, W Star, 2/12/69, D4)
nasa advocated “balanced, broad-based Planetary Exploration Program” as “feasible and practical” part of U.S. space program, Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Basic goals were to increase understanding of origin and evolution of solar system and life in solar system and understanding of dynamic processes shaping man’s terrestrial environment—“increasing our understanding of the planet Earth, how it has evolved, and how it may evolve in the future through a comparative study of the other planets in the solar system.” Approach would be broad-based exploration of several planets—• Jupiter, Mercury, Venus—over period of time, combined with direct measurements of Mars surface in orbital and lander missions. Pioneer F and G spacecraft (planned for launch in 1972 and 1973) and new cooperative project with West Germany, Helios, would open “new era” in solar system exploration, studying effects of radial distance on interplanetary medium close to sun. (Testimony)
Total $21.35-billion investment “in the development and demonstration of a national manned lunar landing capability” was detailed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “At the time of its establishment, the national goal of a manned lunar landing and return in this decade represented the most difficult technological endeavor ever to challenge the American nation. During this period, senior NASA officials in testimony before the Congress estimated the cost ... at between $20 and $40 billion.” Estimate was refined to approximately $19.5 billion in March 1964, with assumption “there would be a timely initiation of a follow-on program which would bear a portion of the relatively fixed cost required to develop and sustain this national capability.” Estimates then and annual reassessments had reflected total program cost, including cost of initial lunar landing. Lunar objective “was not simply an end in itself but, rather, provided the focus for the effort to attain space supremacy for whatever the national interest required.” In March 1966 NASA had furnished estimate of $22,718 billion based on assumption that there would not be timely initiation of follow-on program. In April 1969 NASA furnished estimate of $23,877 billion, which would still be valid if negative assumption had materialized. “But with the success of Apollo 11, we have the opportunity to utilize this demonstrated capability in a more meaningful way. By improving payloads and modifying spacecraft to increase lunar surface systems, we can enhance significantly the return of scientific data from both lunar orbit and the lunar surface.” NASA had met national commitment “at a cost nearer the lower end of the range of estimates” despite “unpredictable substantial inflationary conditions.” Actual cost accrued through July 31, 1969, was $21.35 billion, of which $2 billion was value of flight hardware available for future flights. Capital assets included were approximately $2.8 billion and were “of continuing national value.” Apollo was “triumph in management as well as in technology and engineering which united government, industry and universities in a common peaceful undertaking. At least one-half million people worked on the manned lunar landing program . . . during the eight years from its announcement to its initial success.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns from Space Investment (H. Rpt. 91-1446): Space Research “already has produced an extremely broad range of concrete benefits, not only to the American citizenry but to the people of many nations. The flow of ‘hard benefits’ has grown from a trickle to a stream, and it is widening to a river, as expanding technology uncovers more and more ways of improving man’s mode of existence.” Report cited tangible benefits in business, medicine, transportation, construction, new fabrics, and new materials. Future benefits “of even greater impact” included use of satellites for more efficient management of earth’s natural resources, use of satellites in crime detection, and possible development of hospitals in space “which would offer gravity-free treatment to patients with heart ailments.” Illustrations, based on existing or impending technology, were the “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, Government, the medical profession, and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (Text)
Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice President of British Interplanetary Society, told press in London that U.S.S.R. had been testing satellite designed to destroy U.S. military satellites. Claim, he said, was substantiated by studies from Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnbor-ough. Cosmos CCCLXXIII (launched Oct. 20) had been a target; Cosmos CCCLXXIV (launched Oct. 23) had been orbited to same altitude as Cosmos CCCLXXIII and then exploded, apparently on ground command. Six large fragments had been identified. Gatland said objective could have been to destroy Cosmos CCCLXXIII with the fragments or to use radiation from a nuclear explosion to make it inoperable. Cosmos CCCLXXVflaunched Oct. 30) had been test of same system. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/70, A2; W Star, 11/3/70)
NASA announced appointment of Dale D. Myers, Vice President and General Manager of North American Rockwell Corp.’sJSpace Shuttle Program, as NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 12. Myers would succeed Dr. George E. Mueller, who left NASA Dec. 10, 1969. (NASA Release 70-4)
Achievement described as “first artificial synthesis of a living cell” was reported by State Univ. of New York at Buffalo in letter to press signed by Dr. Raymond H. Ewell, Vice President for Research, and Dr. James F. Danielli, Director of Center for Theoretical Biology, who had led experimenters. Amoebas had been partly dismembered and then reassembled, using components from other amoebas. Reconstituted amoebas had reproduced themselves and were indistinguishable from normal amoebas. Work opened “new era for artificial life synthesis, now being explored” and helped clear way for “synthesis of new micro-organisms, new egg cells and an organism capable of living on Mars.” New York Times said officials at NASA, which was supporting the work, had described experiment as “exciting” and “a big step.” (Sullivan, NYT, 11/13/70, 1)
Sixty-second anniversary of Wright brothers’ first successful flight. At ceremonies in Kitty Hawk, N.C.—sponsored by naa, Air Force Assn., and First Flight Society—portraits of aviation pioneers Igor I.	Sikorsky and Wiley Post were added to Kitty Hawk’s First Flight Shrine. Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio, honored Robert E. Gross, founder of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; l/G Ira C. Baker, Eighth Air Force Commander during World War II; Alexander P. de Seversky, military aviation expert; and Juan T. Trippe, founder of Pan American World Airways. At annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Aero Club of Washington, Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy was presented to C. R. Smith, former President of American Airlines and Secretary of Commerce under President Lyndon B. Johnson, (naa News, 1/71, 1; Varbor-ough, W Star, 12/16/70, A18; Flatley, W Star; 12/18/70, C5)
Transition of World War II aircraft industry into 1970 aerospace industry was traced in Air Force magazine by Karl G. Harr, Jr., aia President. Increased performance had increased complexity. Average 1944 combat aircraft had carried 454 kg (Vi ton) of avionic gear; 1948-1950 counterpart needed three to five times as much. Weapon revolution did not signify end of manned aircraft era; it brought forth “new family of aircraft of substantially improved capability.” First operational “barely supersonic” 1954 fighter had been followed by succession of more advanced fighters. “The complexity curve took a sharp upward turn, taking the cost curve with it,” with corollary decline in numbers of aircraft produced. Fewer aircraft were needed because of individual aircraft’s superior performance. With advent of supersonic aircraft production, guided missile output became significant portion of industry workload. Big push had come in 1954 when missile procurement topped billion-dollar level for first time. “Undoubtedly, the space program was the dominant influence in history’s most explosive decade of technological advance. There were two primary contributing factors: breadth and acceleration.” Breadth of program required continual probing of new research frontiers across spectrum of almost every scientific and technological discipline. “The acceleration of effort imposed by the lunar-landing timetable necessitated a forcing of technology, compressing into one decade the normal advance of several.” (AF, 9/70, 84-8)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization bill totaling $3,630 billion, as introduced March 17. (CR, 3/19/70, D262; H Rpt 91-929)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President F. A. Cleveland received $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for 1970 aiaa Wright Brothers Lecture at aiaa Aircraft Design and Operations Meeting in Los Angeles. He delivered lecture, “Size Effects in Conventional Aircraft Design,” during meeting, (aiaa Release; aiaa PIO)
nae President Eric A. Walker announced election of 51 engineers to NAE membership. They included Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for “contributions to the proposal, formulation, and management of Project Apollo”; Gerhard Neumann, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. Aircraft Engine Group, for “contributions to the development of variable stator compressors and high by-pass turbofan engines for jet aircraft”; Kendall Perkins, Corporate Vice President, Engineering and Research, of McDonnell Douglas Corp., for “contributions to aerospace technology, and engineering management in the design of aircraft and spacecraft”; and Dr. Paul Rosenberg, President of Paul Rosenberg Associates, for “pioneering contributions to space pho-togrammetric systems, radar prediction techniques, information storage and retrieval, and the kinematics of human spine motion.” (NAS-NRC-NAE News Rpt, 4/70, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before House Committee: Tracking networks had supported 101 manned and unmanned missions in addition to Apollo 11 in 1969. Meeting basic requirements of flight projects when budget was at “minimum level” had required significant reductions in overall network capability. Planned improvements had been deferred in FY 1969 for second year and, for first time, sustaining equipment items had been deferred. FY 1971 request of $299.3 million—$298.0 million for R&D and $1.3 million for construction—included MSFN equipment to support Apollo Applications program while continuing alsep support. Satellite Network reductions in FY 1969 had terminated or greatly reduced support of several in-orbit spacecraft still capable of transmitting valuable scientific data. Remaining workload of some 45 satellites! continued to require around-the-clock bperationsjatimostlnet-work stations. Many satellites already aloft would require support in FY 1971, as would 10 new spacecraft scheduled for launch. FY 1971 equipment replacement program was critical. Network could support only portion of spacecraft passes and reliability was essential. Continued support from dsn overseas facilities would be needed to support four on-going Pioneer missions and Mariner VI and VII. Major increase in workload in late FY 1971 with launch of dual Mariner ’71 mission would require substantial preparatory engineering effort, as would multimission capability for future programs of Pioneer F and G, Mariner/Mercury ’73, and Helios. (Testimony)
aiaa announced reelection of Dr. Ronald Smelt as aiaa President and of Dr. John C. Houbolt as Vice President-Technical and election of eight new Directors: Dr. Mac C. Adams, Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Avco Government Products Group and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; A. Scott Crossfield, Division Vice President for Flight Research and Development for Eastern Air Lines; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director; Carlos C. Wood, Division Vice President of United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div.; Edward N. Hall, Assistant Chief Scientist for United Aircraft Corp.’s Corporate Technical Staff; Dr. Walter T. Olsen, LeRC Assistant Director; Alan Y. Pope, Director of Aerothermodynamics for San-dia Corp.; and Charles W. Duffy, Jr., Director of Personnel for Boeing Co.’s Commercial Airplane Div., sst Branch, (aiaa Release)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight released Manned Space Flight: Present and Future. Staff study concluded that growth of national space program in decade had “provided major national technological and scientific resource of personnel and facilities.” Decline in resource could increase risk in accomplishing current programs and was causing “dislocations in affected communities throughout the United States.” With termination of Apollo fabrication, 8 Saturn Vs and 6 Saturn IBs, 12 cms and sms, and 1 or 2 lms would be available for manned flight. After 1974, U.S. would have no capability for lifting manned payloads over 27 200 kg (60 000 lbs) into space and would have only three vehicles that could lift 27 200-kg payloads unless Saturn V production was resumed or substitute was developed. Launch rate of less than two manned vehicles per year could materially increase risk of manned launch and spaceflight operations; production rate of two or more Apollo spacecraft and launch vehicles per year would minimize annual cost without inordinate increases in total vehicle cost over current costs, while maintaining critical skills of major subcontractors. U.S. would have no long-duration manned earth-orbital capability after 1973 without extension of orbital workshop program or initiation of development of space station. Early development of low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system appeared to offer greatest opportunity for reducing space flight costs while increasing flexibility and variety of missions in near-earth orbit. For increased flexibility in low-cost earth-to-orbit recoverable transportation system, development of chemical space tug was advised. Report noted that nasa maintained the only U.S. manned space flight capability and advised major decisions on manned space flight program to prolong capability beyond 1974. (Text)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed to press in Washington, D.C., that he had proposed George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for post of NASA Administrator being vacated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine on Sept. 15. Rep. Fulton said he had made recommendation in telegram to President Nixon July 31. (Lan-nan, W Star, 8/31/70, Al)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine’s resignation as NASA Administrator became effective. He was honored at Bolling afb reception and testimonial dinner given by Dr. George M. Low, who would be Acting Administrator until appointment of successor. Dr. Paine told guests he believed requirements of U.S. space program “are not understood at the highest level of our official life” and said he was confident NASA budget would be approved despite President’s Aug. 11 veto of Independent Offices and HUD appropriations bill. U.S., he said, “must be the first nation to put in the first skylab and space stations. We must look to the post-dog-sled era of lunar exploration and develop a more permanent type of lunar exploration.” Dr. Paine warned that NASA must “face the reality that in the 70s the Soviet Union will attempt to overtake us. ... We will be tested against a strong and vigorous Soviet program.” U.S. had “held out the olive branch.. .but if the cold war is extended into space, then NASA will be ready to meet any threat that may develop in space.” According to Washington Evening Star, it was first time Dr. Paine had publicly cited threat of Soviet military supremacy in space. Later, in interview following dinner, Dr. Paine said he meant NASA’s charge was to keep U.S. in forefront of space technology and to be ready to hand that technology to dod if required. He believed defense against icbm might yet be space-based. If so, NASA should be in technologically superior position because of space station, shuttle, and other concepts. (W Star, 9/16/ 70, B8, C7)
Edgar M. Cortnght, LaRC Director and Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized report of Review Board before House Committee on Science and Astronautics and commented: “Total Apollo system of ground complexes, launch vehicle, and spacecraft constitutes the most ambitious and demanding engineering development ever undertaken by man. For these missions to succeed, both men and equipment must perform to near perfection. That this system has already resulted in two successful lunar surface explorations is a tribute to those men and women who conceived, designed, built, and flew it. Perfection is not only difficult to achieve, but difficult to maintain. The imperfections in Apollo 13 constituted a near disaster, averted only by outstanding performance on the part of the crew and the ground control team which supported them. The Board feels that the Apollo accident holds important lessons which, when applied to future missions, will contribute to the safety and effectiveness of manned space flight.” (Testimony)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford attended dedication ceremony of Stafford Field, small airfield in Stafford’s hometown, Weatherford, Okla. Airfield was Weatherford’s memorial to Stafford who had piloted two Gemini missions. At dedication Vice President said: “While Stafford Field may not be equivalent in size to the giant airports of this country and the world, it. . .symbolizes the best of American traditions. . .harnessing that pioneering spirit of old.” (WPost, 4/27/70, A4; Text)
Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development of House Committee on Science and Astronautics transmitted to parent committee The National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies: A Recommendation for Centralization of Federal Science Responsibilities. Report, result of 10-mo study by subcommittee, recommended immediate establishment of National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) to consolidate Federal responsibilities for basic research and graduate education, niras would be independent agency below cabinet level with administrator appointed by President subject to Senate confirmation, nsf, whose charter was basis for niras, would be distributed in new centralized agency, with education programs at undergraduate level or below transferred to hew Office of Education. Basic research programs determined to be no longer relevant to individual agency missions would be considered for transfer to niras. Committee also recommended increase of OST staff with director given Cabinet status and responsibilities extended. (Text)
Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences Mikhail D. Millionshchikov said at second national Convocation on Challenge of Building Peace in New York that exchange of experience in space between U.S. and U.S.S.R. would be “very fruitful.” It was “very dangerous to make a race ... because the lives of human beings are at stake.” Astronaut Frank Borman, chairman of panel discussion, suggested “Soviet-American committee to chart the exploration of the solar system, a group to develop and formulate policy and interchange of ideas, both in the manned and unmanned fields.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 4/30/70)
Boeing Co. would lay off some 18 000 persons in Puget Sound area during 1970, company Vice President Lowell P. Michelwait said in Seattle. Company employed 101 500 in peak year 1968. Nationwide force declined by 25 500 during 1969. Boeing employment in Seattle area was 80 000 and would drop to 62 000. Figures indicated 40% drop in work force in 2 1/2 yrs. Decline was attributed to slower commercial aircraft sales, failure to win new Government contracts, reduced Government spending, completion of current Government contracts, and increased productivity in 747 jet airliner assembly lines. (AP, NYT, 1/14/70)
Appointment of John P. Olsen, Assistant to Senior Vice President of U.S. Smelting, Refining and Mining Co., as Deputy Under Secretary of Transportation was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. He would succeed Charles D. Baker, who had been appointed Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Policy and International Affairs, effective April 28. (dotRelease 8970)
President Nixon, in White House ceremony, presented Atomic Pioneers Award to Dr. Vannevar Bush for his ‘‘exceptional contributions to the national security as Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in marshalling the resources of American science for national defense during World War II and for his pioneering leadership as a Presidential advisor in fostering the establishment of new Federal agencies, including the National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission, which have made possible the unprecedented growth of scientific research and development in the last two decades.” President also presented Award to Dr. James B. Conant for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in overseeing the successful development of weapons systems, including the atomic bomb, during World War II and for his pioneering leadership in the nation’s atomic energy program after the war as Chairman of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Research and Development Board and as a member of General Advisory Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission.” President presented third Atomic Pioneers Award to l/g Leslie R. Groves (USA-Ret) for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army, in developing the world’s first nuclear weapons during World War II, and for his pioneering efforts in establishing administrative patterns adopted by the Atomic Energy Commission in effecting the use of atomic energy for military and peaceful purposes.” (PD, 3/2/70, 279-80)
Formation of Convair Aerospace Div. and Electro Dynamic Div. was announced by Roger Lewis, General Dynamics Corp. President. Both new divisions would report to Dr. George E. Mueller, former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight who had joined General Dynamics as Senior Vice President in December 1969. (General Dynamics Release 1537)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 3374, $3.333billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. [See Feb. 2.] (Text)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed Fourteenth General IAEA Conference in Vienna: “The industrial and technological advances being made in the world are creating increasing demands for electric power that is cheap, abundant, safe, reliable and clean. In my country, the estimated total electrical generating capacity for 1970 is about 300 000 megawatts. I believe that a realistic estimate of the projected growth of our electrical generating capacity by the year 2000 is about 2 100 000 megawatts, which will require adding the equivalent of a total of 1 800 power plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each.” On global scale, “some 5000 new electric generating plants of 1000 megawatts capacity each would be needed over the next 30 years.” (Text) Predominant theme of conference, was that reusable shuttles would substantially lessen cost of practical uses of space. There was little talk of manned space stations or exploration of other planets. Discussions centered on use of satellites for communications, air traffic control, and weather forecasting. European public had become “cool to manned space flight,” New York Times said. ESRO head, Dr. Herman Bondi, said at conference, “We have grown up with the impression that everything in space is devilishly expensive.” Belgian aerospace executive Maurice Desirant said European efforts at joint space programs had been handicapped by pressures to perform national feats. Now, however, European countries had become “more and more aware of the dangers.” They had seen money wasted on duplicated efforts which had achieved limited results. Lefevre said that, to be effective, European contribution to major space effort must be under leadership strong enough to override any differences arising from “divergent technical points of view, reasons of industrial competition, economic whims for national politics or finances.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers outlined shuttle plans. Payload of 22 680 kg (50 0OO lb) had been halved. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/23-24/70; NYT, 9/26/70, 11) September 23: Roy P. Jackson, Vice President and Assistant General Manager of Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div., was named NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, effective Nov. 2. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, also announced appointment of Oran W. Nicks, who had been Acting Associate Administrator of OART, as Deputy Director of Langley Research Center, effective Nov. 2. Vincent L. Johnson was named Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective immediately. (NASA Release 70-155)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Article by Dr. Ralph E. Lapp in New Republic criticized space transportation system and NASA participation in Feb. 4-6 classified conference at Patrick afb at which system was discussed. System, although NASA budget item, was “Air Force finesse to pave the way fora space-bomber or interceptor,” and “could rival the Safeguard abm as a waste of money,” Lapp declared. (New Republic, 2/21/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 16595, NSF FY 1971 authorization bill, after adding $27.6 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $500 million. (CR, 3/24/70, D283; Boffey, Science, 4/3/70,95-7)
Dr. W. D. McElroy, NSF Director, called for reevaluation of U.S. science and technology policies in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. He proposed smooth transition between science and its applications by ensuring continued support of basic science by mission-oriented agencies; raising level of support for academic science from 18% to 35% or 40% of total Federal expenditure; elimination of conflict between “big science” (high-energy physics, etc.) and “little science” (projects of equal importance but smaller scale); long-term, level funding for science to avoid periodic ups and downs; Government sponsoring and funding of research on national problems to avoid competition with “normal” flow of research; and system of priorities with built-in “safeguards to hedge against imprudent judgments.” (Testimony)
Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to fill seat on House Committee on Ways and Means. (CR, 4/30/70, H3719-20)
Dr. Theodore P. Wright, Civil Aeronautics Administrator from 1944 to 1948 and former Vice President and Director of Engineering with Curtiss-WrightCorp., died in Ithaca, N.Y., at age 75. (Bachinski, W Post, 8/24/70, C4)
NASA Hq. briefing on FY 1971 budget, held Jan. 31, was released. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, had said: “We are putting into motion with this budget a program which does not advance toward a single climactic event. It follows the recommendations of the Space Task Group Report’s Option II, although at a reduced pace. The budget to implement the recommendations, however, is austere and, as a result, does not take full advantage of our total capability. But the new program has the flexibility to accommodate this reduced budget in FY 1971.” Lowest NASA budget since FY 1962 “means substantial cutbacks and deferrals in a number of programs. Our best current estimate is that the total nationwide employment on NASA work—which was once 420,000 people—will decline from current level by another 45,000, to about 144,000 people by the end of fiscal year 1971. The impact will be felt in many sections of the country. This is regrettable, but the Administration has faced the hard fact that these steps must be taken to achieve a fiscally responsible balanced budget in this time of inflation. .. .this budget level, which we hope will be NASA’s lowest level, is strongly oriented to the future. The necessary reductions.. .have not been made ‘across the board.’ We have made careful selections and decisions.” NASA would preserve strong future capability centered on development of economical, reusable space transportation system including shuttle, space station, and reusable nuclear rocket; continue efforts on practical applications of space technology for early practical benefits on earth; continue lunar exploration with Apollo vehicles and Apollo Applications earth orbital workshop flights with hardware previously under procurement; continue, “but with stretchouts and deferrals,” balanced program of planetary exploration and scientific investigations in space focused on potentially exciting discoveries; continue increasing emphasis on aeronautics; and maintain “essential cadre of NASA’s technical, operational, and management capabilities on which the continuing and future position of the United States in space depends.” [See Jan. 13.] Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly during briefing had replied to question that planned fund request for space station and shuttle had been for $250 million to $260 million— supporting Task Group’s Option II, to provide operational systems in 1977—but request had been cut to final $110 million. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said program should give CY 1978 operational date. Dates for Mars mission were not yet planned. Michoud Assembly Facility and Mississippi Test Facility were among NASA installations to be affected by budgetary action, Lilly had said. Plans on Michoud would be to “complete the last of 15 Saturn 5’s in 1970; then we will be carrying on activities for the storage, repairing and refurbishing of the 1-B and the Saturn 5 stages, providing the engineering and support necessary for the flights through 1974, and maintaining the capability to restart or reinitiate the production of Saturn 5’s; maintaining the capability to accept new work.. .and. . .attempting to find other, users of that facility in New Orleans.” At mtf, Saturn V static test firings would be completed. “Then, the plans in our budget are to mothball the facilities. Personnel will be phased down.. .to essentially a mothball or caretaker mode.” NASA was working with other agencies to seek other uses for that location. (Transcript)
Soviet Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev (right) and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov (center right), who established a manned-flight endurance record in their 18-day Soyuz IX mission June 2-19, were welcomed at Washington National Airport by Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left), and Neil A. Armstrong, Cosmonauts would tour U.S. gineers unemployed “and this number could easily double next year.1’ Major concern was “that in the future a new shortage of scientists and engineers will arise, based on the growing disenchantment with the unstable labor market for such skills,” Implications were clear: “We are losing the capability to react to a national crisis, should the need arise; we are losing the capability to undertake an Apollo-like adventure, should we in the future desire to do so; and we are losing a capability that today provides an inflow of dollars that exceeds the net positive balance or payments.” Cost of U.S. space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—decrease of $2.5 billion since 1966. In terms of Federal budget, $3.4 billion represented 1.7% or $17 for every person in U.S. “At the same time we are spending $400 per person for our domestic programs. ... In fact, this year’s increase in our expenditures for domestic programs was more than twice the NASA budget." Cancellation of entire space program would not significantly affect Federal spending on domestic programs. “But without the space program, without the capabilities it represents, what would become of the ‘scientific and technological lead’ this generation of Americans gave so much of themselves and their resources to achieve?” (Text)
Public exhibit of lunar samples by nasa was described by George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, in letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of Special Ad Hoc Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Even with a reasonable allowance for overlap in our attendance figures for individuals who may have seen exhibits more than once, these figures indicate that over six and a half million people in the United States have seen a lunar sample.” Public displays had been accompanied by exhibit and supporting material so that viewers “come away.. .with some appreciation of its broader meaning.” nasa believed “exhibits at 15 major science museums to date, with 41 more planned for the coming year, in addition to the exhibit accompanying the Apollo 11 capsule to all 50 state capitals and the Smithsonian exhibit are especially effective.” (CR, 8/7/70, E7445-6)	_
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
House Committee on Appropriations approved H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.197-billion NASA appropriation—$136 million less than $3.333-billion NASA budget estimate. Appropriation provided $2,500 billion for r&d, $18.3 million for construction of facilities, and $678.7 million for research and program management. Report recommended postponement of Apollo 14 mission until 1971 “to give ample time for study, report, and correction of the Apollo 13 problems.” Bill also allocated $497 million to nsf—$16 million less than nsf budget estimate of $513 million. (House Rpt 91-1060; Subcom on Independ Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe testified on DOT action in President Nixon’s program against air piracy, before House Committee on Ways and Means. As first step, dot had urged ICAO to establish basic principles for effective sanctions: State in which hijacked aircraft landed was obligated to permit passengers and crew to continue journey and to return aircraft and cargo to owners. State to which hijacker fled was obligated to extradite or prosecute hijacker. Multilateral sanctions should be taken against states that failed to fulfill obligations. U.S. had urged ICAO to draft international convention providing legal basis for effective sanctions. To finance program of placing armed Government employees on U.S. carriers and extension of surveillance equipment at airports, dot had submitted $28-million FY 1971 budget amendment to Senate Appropriations Committee. Agency proposed costs of program be borne by 0.5% increase in 8% ticket tax on domestic airfares and increase of $2 in $3 head tax paid by passengers on international flights. (Text)
Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp testified before Subcommittee on Economy in Government of Joint Economic Committee on changing national priorities: “If we eliminate the space shuttle and the space station, then the NASA budget can be trimmed to a level below $3 billion per year throughout the rest of this decade. Such a decision will shift NASA’s priorities from sensational manned space ventures to space science and its applications. If the U.S. space program is restructured to this new pattern and the Apollo manned lunar program is allowed to run out, it should be possible to effect further economies in the NASA budget___” When nasa shifted to science base “it would be desirable that the scientific community give some expression of its sense of priorities for space science with respect to the rest of science. The quest for new knowledge of the solar system must be reckoned as pure or basic or fundamental research. As such, it should be related to the federal support of all other basic research.” (Testimony)
Rep. Bertram L. Podell (D-N.Y.) announced resignation from House Committee on Science and Astronautics. He would take seat on House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (NASA LAR IX/\ 30)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The National Space Program—Present and Future, compilation of papers prepared for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Papers represented attitudes of Government, aerospace industry, and academic community on objectives of national space program during next decade and funding level needed to support program. Statements had been prepared for hearings, originally scheduled for September and October 1970, that had been canceled because of press of legislative business and ‘‘uncertain status of the NASA appropriation measure” for FY 1971 because of Presidential veto. Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, had urged that “new initiatives proposed for the 1970s represent not only a space program that will maintain our Nation’s leadership, but also an opportunity to utilize resources which will otherwise remain idle or grossly underemployed. In this sense the ‘real cost’ to the society of NASA’s programs for the 1970s is very low and the cost-benefit of these programs correspondingly high.” Dr. Thomas O. Paine, Vice president and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former NASA Administrator, said in statement that U.S.-U.S.S.R. discussion on common spacecraft docking had been “excellent step forward” in space programming. “The United States, Western Europe, Australia, Canada, and Japan should also work more closely together in the forefront of space science and technology, eliminating duplicative projects and obsolescent developments for purely nationalistic purposes. Space activities are inherently global; they challenge us to develop new international institutions as advanced as our technologies. Attractive new international arrangements should also be established for the developing nations to help them take full advantage for new application opportunities.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, urged vigorous space program with space shuttle as “cornerstone.” Answers to question “Why go to the moon?” would not be found in budget books and cost-benefit analyses but “in the hearts and minds of men, who, responding to a mystical, metaphysical imperative, join hands and reach out to the stars.” Committee found “clear consensus. . .that a vigorous aeronautics and space effort is in the National interest, since it sets the pace for the country’s technological advancement. There is also general agreement that a revitalized space program, given strong direction and adequate funding, is needed for the United States to retain its technological preeminence in the decades ahead.” (Text)
nae announced election of retired General Electric Co. Vice President Clarence H. Linder as first full-time nae President and Dr. Chauncey Starr of ucla as Vice President. Dr. Thomas C. Kava-nagh of Praeger-Kavanagh-Waterbury and of Madigan-Hyland was reelected Treasurer and J. H. Mulligan, Jr., Secretary. Among those elected to Council were Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, and Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, NASA consultant, (nae Release; nae Bridge, 6/70,1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviation and Space Trophy for 1969 to Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) for “extraordinary and brilliant piloting feat” while testing NASA HL-10
Appointment of Apollo 8 commander Frank Borman as Vice President of Eastern Airlines was announced by ea Vice President and Executive Officer Floyd D. Hall. Borman would assume new duties after completing course for executives at Harvard Univ. (ea Release)
L/G Leslie R. Groves (USA, Ret.), former member of Army Corps of Engineers and head of Manhattan Project that developed atomic bomb, died of heart attack at age 73. Gen. Groves, who had described first atomic test in his 1962 book Now It Can Be Told, had been awarded USA’s Distinguished Service medal for his contributions to the project and to shortening World War II. He had also supervised construction of numerous dod facilities—including Pentagon and laboratories at Oak Ridge, Tenn.; Hanford, Wash.; and Los Alamos, N. Mex.—before his retirement from USA in 1948. (Ward, WPost, 7/15/70, C8)
NASA Hq. briefing explained to university administrators effects of NASA budget cuts on funds for educating space scientists. Termination tof sustaining university program in FY 1971 would eliminate more than 200 predoctoral training grants which had been funded at $4.18 million. Funding for multidisciplinary research grants also would end. Students would not be cut off immediately, since grants had been step-funded and would be reduced over three years. NASA Assistant Administrator for University Affairs F. B. Smith said other agencies might assume funding of some grants, since university r&d funding in total Federal budget would increase by $114 million during FY 1971. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, said increase would not compensate for leveling off of r&d budgets in past few years nor for effects of inflation. He noted Government support for graduate students was declining generally and said Government did not need as many scientists as previously. Total $21 million would be cut by NASA in contracts and grants to universities. In ossa, university R&D grants in bioscience would be cut by 30%. Cuts would eliminate a high-energy astronomical observatory. oart would experience 30% cut in university r&d, chiefly affecting electronics and space vehicles research, omsf contracts with mit for Apollo program would be reduced by $2 million. University grants and contracts which survived would be reoriented in FY 1971, with emphasis on what universities could do for NASA. (nasa Off of Univ Aff.; Gruchow, Science, 2/20/70, 1107)
House Appropriations Committee favorably reported H.R. 19830, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill containing $3.269-billion NASA appropriation. Bill provided $2,565 billion for r&d, $25 million for construction of facilities, and $679 million for research and program management. It replaced H.R. 17548, vetoed by President Nixon Aug. 11. NASA appropriation was unchanged. (CR, 11/19/70, D1194; H Rpt 91-1616)
Shrinking profits and widespread attacks on military programs were making 1970s “age of uncertainty” for U.S. defense industry, Max Lehrer, Vice President of rca Defense Electronics Products Div., said in speech before Philadelphia Chapter of Federal Government Accountants Assn. Logistic Management Institute study had shown tax profits for defense firms had dropped from 5.1% average in 1959 to 3.9% in 1968, while profits for comparable nondefense companies over same period rose from 8.9% to 9.4%. (Text)
NASA-Indian Space Research Organization project to broadcast TV from satellite to 5000 small Indian villages had been postponed from 1972 to 1974 because of NASA budget cuts, New York Times reported. Postponement, which also meant year’s delay in launch of India’s first comsat, had been announced in New Delhi by five-man NASA team headed by Dr. Richard B. Marsten, NASA Director of Communications Programs. Team was visiting India for consultations. Launch of Indian comsat depended on data gathered from educational TV experiment. (Schanberg, NYT, 7/27/70, 7)
Charles W. Harper, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology (Aeronautics), discussed NASA’s role in development of anticollision systems for aircraft before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Government Activities. It appeared “impractical” to force small general-aviation aircraft “to avoid controlled airspace or to carry the expensive equipment and undergo the intensive training necessary to place them under positive control of the atc [air traffic control] system. For these reasons, faa has asked NASA to investigate the possibility of developing inexpensive, lightweight equipment for small aircraft which would augment significantly the collision avoidance probability when the pilot is flying on the see-and-be-seen principle. .. NASA program was guided by FAA’s Collision Prevention Advisory Group, of which NASA was member, and by NASA Research and Technology Advisory Committee’s Subcommittee on Aircraft Operating Problems, of which faa was member. Both groups included representatives of industry and other Government agencies. (Testimony)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Toward a Science Policy for the United States. Report summarized hearings held during July, August, and September and recommended that Federal Government establish national policy for support and furtherance of science and technology. Report further recommended that ost be separated from direct administrative connections with President’s Science Adviser or President’s Science Advisory Committee; OST submit annual report to President and Congress reviewing status of r&d in U.S. and recommending r&d program for following year; National Institutes of Research and Advanced Studies (niras) be inaugurated; and Congress seek centralized Senate jurisdiction over science and technology and establish Office of Technology Assessment. Report also recommended, pending establishment of niras, responsibility for basic research be centered in NSF, which should provide one third of all Federal support; ost develop criteria for support of basic research by mission-oriented agencies; Office of Management and Budget develop “stable funding” procedure for basic research; and niras, when established, emphasize science education. Smithsonian Institution should have responsibility for science-information system, with backup from ost’s Committee on Scientific and Technical Information. NAS and nae should assist in explaining to public science and technology’s role in solving major problems (Text)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified in NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Our most serious problem in recent years has been our inability to hire newly graduated scientists, engineers and administrative professionals in sufficient numbers. The average age of NASA employees is now increasing 8/10 of a year each year. While we were able to hire 965 graduating college students in 1966, the number dropped to 738 in 1967, 567 in 1968, 253 in 1969, and an estimated 180 in 1970.” NASA Civil Service staffing would decline from 31 350 at end of FY 1970 to 30550 at end of FY 1971. Of this reduction, 600 would result from phasing out of erc employees. Total of 200 would be reduced at manned space flight centers and NASA Hq. (Testimony)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, oart, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on role of nuclear rockets in future space transportation. Potential for reuse of nuclear stage provided additional prospects for spaceflight economy. Nuclear rocket would be in-space link between earth-to-orbit transportation system and operations at moon and in distant earth orbits. NASA budget request for $38 million for program in FY 1971, however, could “be viewed as maintaining progress in only the most important longest-lead-time development activities in nerva.” Progress made in “early, critical years, will permit later development activities. . .to proceed smoothly.” Effort was essential to meet major milestones: first ground test of series of nerva flight reactors in 1973 and first ground test of series of nerva flight engines in 1974. (Testimony)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics ordered favorably reported H.R. 15695, FY 1971 NASA authorization with amendments that added $297.8 million to President Nixon’s budget request of $3,333 billion. New authorization total of $3,631 billion included addition of $144.9 million to Apollo budget request, for total Apollo allocation of $1.1 billion, and $155 million for space flight operations, making total of $670.2 million in that category. (H Rpt 91-929; CR, 3/12/70, D225; W Post, 3/13/70, A10)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, opened testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA FY 1971 authorization: “Apollo 11 and 12 demonstrated that we can fly across a quarter of a million miles [400 000 km] of space, land with precision, carry out research and exploration, and return safely to earth. We met our commitments for the decade of the sixties. Now we must chart a new course for the next decade in space. The Congress again shares with the Administration the responsibility for continuing progress and leadership in space and aeronautics. At the same time, NASA is going through a difficult period of redirection, and austere budget goals must be met. This is therefore a time of great challenge. But I firmly believe that with your support we can continue to forge ahead in space exploration, in science, in applications, and in aerospace technology. The program which we will lay before you, although austere, provides for balanced progress toward the challenging goals for the 1970’s and the decades to follow.” NASA budget as it came from President included “major reduction in space program,” to achieve balanced U.S. budget in “time of inflation.” By reducing operating base, making selective cut-backs, and deferring new starts NASA had developed program permitting progress toward SpaceTask Group’s Option II goals, but at reduced pace, [see Jan. 13 and Feb. 2], Dr. Paine noted it was significant that, “in a sharply reduced total budget, we have been able to increase our space applications efforts. Our aeronautics effort will also continue to be strengthened.” He urged Committee to keep in mind that proposed program “could not be conducted in the face of further cuts.” NASA had no plans to fly astronauts in space between last Apollo flight in 1974 and the time space shuttle would be operative in late 1970s. “Any significant reduction in our FY 1971 request will further extend this gap in American manned space flight, and reduce other important programs.” (Testimony)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
Selection of Harrison A. Storms, NR Aerospace Div. Vice President, as recipient of 1970 Aircraft Design Award was announced by aiaa. He would receive $500 honorarium sponsored by Northrop Corp. for “direction of the engineering effort that led to the design and development of the XB-70 aircraft” at July 21 AIAA meeting in Los Angeles, (aiaa Release)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics on oart’s FY 1971 program. Primary objective of v/STOL program was “research needed for the development of advanced rotorcraft which will offer hovering capability and low-noise operations for inner-city operations plus the cruise flight efficiency necessary for inner-city to outlying airport service. Experience with conventional helicopters shows that this service is desired but that it falls short of economic success. If the gap can be closed by improved technology, then the way will be clear for rapid development of this type of travel service. To this end, we are working on several advanced rotor concepts.” LaRC v/stol Transition Research Wind Tunnel would be operational in late 1970. Facility would study effect of down flow from rotors on fuselage and tail, high-lift flaps for stol air transport applications, and effect of jet-lift engine exhaust on aerodynamic and propulsion characteristics of vtol fighter configurations. (Testimony) Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div., oart, testifying on human factors program, told Committee: “No seriously limiting effects have been noted in cardiovascular function during the relatively brief manned space flight to date. However, longer duration exposure to weightlessness and the absence of hydrostatic stresses of earth gravity may cause deterioration in cardiovascular reactivity.” (Testimony) Charles W. Harper, Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, testified before House Committee on NASA’s v/stol technology: “In the past few years NASA has focused its research increasingly toward the objective of enabling development of several types of v/stol aircraft, each directed at a single important mission. These include an advanced rotor type with airplane-like cruise capability for those missions where vertical takeoff and landing is mandatory, a small and agile stol aircraft with modest cruise performance and capable of operating easily out of 1500' [460-m] runways having minimum site preparation and a large stol aircraft having jet transport type cruise performance while also operating easily out of well prepared 1500' [460-m] stol ports. In addition to this more focused activity, the v/stol program contains broader research objectives leading eventually to multimission v/stol aircraft satisfying this growing transportation mode most effectively.” (Testimony) Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Director of Research, oart, testified on NASA basic research programs: NASA-supported research had developed new approach permitting for first time step-by-step numerical calculation of growth of disturbances in atmospheric shear flows, which should contribute to detection and avoidance of clear-air turbulence by jet aircraft. First steps had been taken to apply fluid physics knowledge to atmospheric pollution from airborne and ground sources, testing pollutant action in models of city streets. New research programs would apply knowledge of fluid dynamics to noise abatement studies. Establishment of direct relationship between surface structure and electrical characteristics of germanium surface during oxidation had increased knowledge of oxygen’s role in device performance and should increase efficiency in electronic devices. Special attention was being given to evaluation of alloys at the high temperatures of supersonic speeds and to evaluation of rigid polymeric foams as lightweight structural materials for aircraft. (Testimony)
Communist China’s first satellite was believpd to have been planned by U.S.-trained scientist Tsien Hsueh-shen, Wall Street Journal said. Former MIT and Cal Tech scientist had been high-ranking Pentagon adviser during World War II and had left U.S. in 1955 after having been named in deportation order charging him with being Communist Party member. (WSJ, 4/27/70)
House passed by 229 votes to 105 H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization, after agreeing to recommit bill to House Committee on Science and Astronautics with instructions to reduce Apollo program funding by $14.5 million and space flight operations funding by $15.5 million. Action brought authorization total to $3,601 billion, $30 million below $3,631 billion reported by House Committee on Science and Astronautics on March 12, but $268 million more than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. (CR, 4/23/70, H3377-23)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
NASA budget cutbacks would not substantially affect jpl, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told press following conference with jpl leadership teams in Pasadena, Calif. “Our cutbacks will fall most heavily upon the manned space flight program.” Some 16 000 aerospace employees would be cut from Governmental payroll throughout California, Dr. Paine said. (Pottage, Glendale Ledger, 2/5/70)
In 1970 NASAreviewed!priorities and redirected activities to conform to new national goals and budgetary restraints under Nixon Administration, which directed increased funding toward solution of nation’s inflationary and environmental problems. Year was transition from dramatic successes of 1960s to new plans for 1970s and beyond, with balanced aeronautical and space program. Major administrative event affecting NASA was resignation of Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, effective Sept. 15. Dr. Paine, who had been nominated NASA Administrator by President Nixon March 5, 1969, returned to General Electric Co. as a Vice President. Dr. George M. Low became Acting NASA Administrator. In March Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, was sworn in as Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, and in May NASA Planning Board was established under his direction for coordination of NASA planning. NASA adjusted time-phasing of future programs to avoid commitments to excessive funding, but progress was made toward new goals and objectives announced in March. Design, development, and testing for Skylab program went forward and fabrication of flight hardware was begun. System characteristics for space shuttle, key element in program for late 1970s, were established and study contracts were let for vehicle and engine. Program definition studies for space station neared completion, erts spacecraft design was completed and aircraft flights tested remote-sensing devices for gathering earth resources data from space. Two flight spacecraft for Mariner Mars ’71 missions were progressing toward final testing. Mission design for Grand Tour of outer planets later in decade was completed and conceptual design of key elements of spacecraft established. NASA continued aeronautical and space studies in conjunction with dod, dot, noaa, and other agencies—including nasa-faa v/stol avionics program. Scientific analysis of 56 kg (123 lbs) of lunar material from Apollo 11 and /2and data from Apollo experiments contributed significant knowledge on moon and possibly universe, including finding that moon was formed 4.5 billion yrs ago. gsfc research in optical methods for data processing experimented in applying lasers and coherent optics to analysis of large volumes of data from spacecraft. During year NASA’s research centers expanded work on applications of space technology to fields of medicine, engineering, agriculture, manufacturing, safety, and environmental sciences. NASA FY 1971 appropriation of $3,269 billion was $64 million below $3,333 billion requested and $428 million below FY 1970 appropriation. Lowest budget since 1962 necessitated cutbacks and deferrals which NASA Administrator termed “austere.” Cost of NASA space program in 1970 was $3.4 billion—1.7% of total Federal funding, or $17 for each person in U.S., against $400 per person for domestic program funding. Despite its challenging goals for the decade, nasa officials warned of increasing U.S.S.R. competition for space superiority. Observers expressed fears that cutbacks in aerospace industry jeopardized U.S. ability to sustain and capitalize on previous space successes and to maintain technological superiority. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71; House Com on Sci and Astronautics, The National Space Program—Present and Future, 12/10/70)
Fairchild Hiller Corp. Vice President Edward G. Uhl told stockholders at annual meeting that company had filed protest with NASA. U.S. Comptroller General, and President Nixon over April 8 NASA award of $50 000 000 contract to General Electric Co. for design and manufacture of experimental commercial spacecraft, according to Washington Evening Star. Fairchild Hiller General Counsel John F. Dea-ly said company was protesting on four points: GE submitted proposal six days after deadline and made technical changes contrary to NASA regulations; GE’s cost savings were not genuine savings to Government; NASA’s selection procedure on contracts was not adequate; and Fairchild Hiller was not given fair and proper evaluation of its technical innovations for spacecraft. (Harris, W Star, 4/23/70, D9)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics submitted to Congress Issues and Directions for Aeronautical Research and Development, report of Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology. Report recommended that U.S. establish national aeronautics and aviation policy emphasizing aeronautical r&d, Government-industry roles be clarified, and dot be statutory member of nasc. Report found reason for concern over maintenance of long-term U.S. leadership in aeronautics and aviation. Technological r&d base needed to be rebuilt and existing technology should be used more fruitfully. (Text)
Lunar samples returned by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XVI (launched Sept. 12) contained less titanium and zirconium oxide and more ferric oxide than Apollo 11 samples, Soviet Academy of Sciences Vice President Aleksander Vinogradov was quoted as saying. Luna and Apollo samples “have an equally high content of space originated inert gases” but in overall composition the Luna XVI samples more closely resembed those from Apollo 12. Luna XVI material was fragmented basaltic type containing 70 chemical elements; granularity of soil increased with depth. Spherical, glazed formations of congealed droplets similar to those found by Apollo crews were present. Specific heat of lunar soil did not depend on density, Vinogradov said, and, “on the average, corresponds to terrestrial rocks, while heat conductivity is characterized by extremely low values, considerably below those of the best heat-insulating materials on Earth.... It may be assumed that the general course of differentiation of the substance of the Earth and of the Moon and probably of other planets of the terrestrial type proceeded by similar routes, although reached different stages of development.” (SBD, 11/3/70,8-9)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Director of OST and Presidential Science Adviser, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development on need for adequate Federal science policy: “Science and technology policy.. .must be formulated on an evolutionary basis, continuously under review and subject to change with changing conditions. It must be a policy that can be implemented both by the Aministration and by Congress and one which will be supported by the public.” Policy should provide “strong base of science” and “mechanisms for using science and technology to meet changing problems of national concern.” It should “recognize that policies and events wholly outside the field of science and technology may strongly influence our r&d expenditure level.” Dr. DuBridge told Subcommittee some of nation’s “most valuable and productive research projects” had been lost because of FY 1970 amendment to dod appropriation bill which banned defense-financed studies unless they had direct relation to military missions. (Testimony; Cohn, WPost, 7/9/70, A7)	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics had tentatively approved funding of $6.5-million project to convert antenna 300-m (1000-ft) wide at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico to radar 2000 times more sensitive than any in existence, New York Times reported. Modification of world’s largest radiotelescope would enable telescope to map features on Venus down to mile in width. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/70)
Election of Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, as a Vice President and his appointment as Group Executive, Power Generation Group, were announced by General Electric Co. Both positions were effective Sept. 15, date on which Dr. Paine’s resignation from NASA would become effective. (GE Release)
Examination of Federal science policy was essential, Dr. Philip Handler, nas President, said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development. “Substantial changes are being made in the organization of some arms of the executive branch of government that deal with science; the Mansfield Amendment which limits the manner in which research-supporting funds may be utilized by the Department of Defense has begun to influence. , .behavior of other agencies of the government as well; federal funding for fundamental studies has remained essentially plateaued in absolute dollars for four consecutive fiscal years while, in constant dollars, such funding has declined by perhaps 25%.”. NASA appropriation “has been reduced significantly and one frequently hears that federal military and space expenditures for R&D are to be reduced for some years to come; the nation seems determined to mitigate the damage which has been done to our natural environment, but flounders in the attempt; our nation is engaged in the painful exercise of assessing and reassembling our priorities; and our country now seems uncertain in what light, and with what resolution, it should view the pace of future scientific progress. Our national apparatus for the conduct of research and scholarship is not yet dismantled, but it is falling into shambles. Morale of the scientific community is lower than at any time since World War II. Yet, new fields of scientific exploration and application clamor for attention and funding.” U.S. lead in science ‘‘is in jeopardy.” Loss of lead “bodes ill for our future national security and for the vigor of our economy.” (Testimony)
nasa Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on research and program management (r&pm) budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization: FY 1972 request was 821 million less than in FY 1971, primarily because of continuing reduction in permanent positions. Request of $697.4 million was based on further reduction of Government personnel of 1500 positions, lowering employment to 28 350—total reduction of 6971 positions from 1967 peak and lowest level since 1963. Cut of “some 20 percent in the 1967—72 period is by a considerable margin the greatest, proportionately, to be made by any Government agency in the period.” Of total NASA force, scientists and engineers made up 44.8%, technicians 26.7%, administrative personnel 13.9%, and clerical 14.6%. Hiring restrictions had reduced number of new college graduates added to work force and raised average age to 41.3, with rate of 8/10 a year each year, endangering health and vigor of NASA. “In the past decade, the aerospace industry, overall as well as that portion serving NASA, has passed through a substantial perturbation. Contractor employment climbed to a high peak, then dropped drastically. The current estimate for industry employment on NASA work at the end of this year and next is about 108,000—less than one-third of what it was at the peak of the space program. But with the major reductions in the space program over the last several years, this is how it must be.” Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, testified on NASA management of its new technology as “a repository of national resources”: Some 20 000 technical contributions had been disclosed by NASA contractors, 3500 in past year. Another 4000 had been reported by NASA employees from inhouse projects. Contributions reported were evaluated, defined, and published for use by others. Allocations for FY 1972 were increased over previous year as NASA began to work with innovative events of early stages of 1970s R&D programs. (Transcript)
NSF published Unemployment Rates for Scientists, Spring 1971. Rate was 2.6% in 1971, jumping from 1.5% in 1970. National unemployment rate for all workers for first quarter 1971 averaged 6.5%. Doctorates experienced 1.4% unemployment rate in 1971 and 0.9% in 1970, while nondoctorate scientists were reported at 3.5% rate in 1971 and 2.9% in 1970. Defense and space constituted largest areas of activity, with 11% and 4% of unemployed. Approximately 45% of 1971 unemployed scientists reported last science-related job had been supported to some degree by Government funds, (nsf Highlights, 7/2/71, 1)	_	_	_
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 11484, bill permitting sale of land at ksc for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 11/2/71, D1109; H Rpt 92-600)
Apollo 7 Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham announced his resignation from NASA, effective on or about Aug. 1, to become Vice President of Operations for Century Development Corp., developers of Greenway Plaza in Houston, Tex. (nasa Release 71—110)
nasa announced resignation of Ronald J. Philips, Director of Office of Technology Utilization, effective July 3. He would become Senior Vice President of technology application program sponsored jointly by International City Management Assn., National League of Cities, U.S. Conference of Mayors, and Ford Foundation, (nasa Release 71—117)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified in FY 1972 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . true boundaries of our ecological system have not been determined, but they certainly extend to the known dimensions of the universe. The forces and laws which affect the most distant star are directly relevant to the problems of energy generation and control on Earth. Mankind is just beginning to grasp the fact that all natural systems are intimately related and interdependent” and man must learn “to manage wisely what he can, and to live in equilibrium with what is beyond his control. It is to these ends . . . that we have structured the nation’s continuing space activities in science and applications.” Most significant new astronomy program element was heao, “designed to unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” There was evidence that in pulsars and quasars “a whole new regime of power generation exists and operates at levels that cannot be explained by modem nuclear physics.” Understanding these energy processes might lead to harnessing of powers “heretofore unimaginable.” Both planetary and lunar exploration should provide clues to earth’s past and future, to factors that caused long-period environmental changes and how to control them. Earth observations program also was addressed to fundamental problems of environmental and ecological management. Satellites could see, record, and transmit information on causes and effects in global air-ocean-earth interactions. Trend in U.S. space science and applications had been decreasing budget and launch rates; ossa had had to “cut back ongoing projects, dispense with backup payloads, stretch launch schedules and mission intervals, and defer promising new projects,” but had “preserved a steady momentum and a balanced program thrust wherever possible.” High level of productivity in science, exploration, and applications had been possible “because of the background in technology, in engineering, in conceptual thinking that was built up earlier.” But many valuable and important missions had been deferred into future, “a future we expect will permit us to revolutionize the way space is explored and used.” Key feature of this revolution would he reusable space shuttle “that makes access to space for man and machines an economical, routine excursion rather than the difficult task it presents now.” (Transcript)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
Subcommittee on nasa Oversight transmitted report Review of Recent Launch Failures to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Subcommittee had held hearings June 15-17 on failure of Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle to place Ats 4 in planned orbit Aug. 10, 1968, and failure to orbit oao-b Nov. 30, 1970, and Mariner 8 May 8, Subcommittee concluded that NASA’s decision not to attempt recovery program for unsuccessful Mariner 8 mission using proof-test model “seems justified” on grounds Mariner 9 (launched May 30) had been conceived as backup mission for Mariner 8 from beginning; to alter Atlas-Centaur for different project would have been “challenging;” and proof-test model could better be used as Mariner 9 backup, if necessary, or in 1973 Venus-Mercury and Viking projects. While NASA’s backup mission and recovery policies after failures “seem to have been sound in the past,” decision not to have OAO-B recovery program “appears ... to have been an unwise exception.” To forego oao-b goals “which have occupied the talents and efforts of many scientists and engineers for more than a decade in order to initiate new astronomical experiments [heao Project] in different portions of the magnetic spectrum strikes the Committee as a decision of questionable merit.” Committee recommended future use of prototype spacecraft that could be reengineered and launched as part of flight program to extract full value from expensive hardware. Manufacturing and quality control procedures in Centaur program could be improved. “It is quite clear that a great deal can and should be done short of ‘man-rating’ Centaur, which would significantly improve its reliability.” Centaur stage problems “seem serious enough to justify . . . broad scale, independent examination by disinterested experts” so that Centaur, “which figures so importantly in the space program of the next decade, can be utilized with renewed confidence.” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns From Space Investment. Report updated and expanded study of tangible benefits and practical returns from space investment based on material from Government, industry, and press—including extensive NASA research in technology utilization at Committee’s request. Committee concluded that illustrations in report were “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, science, government, the medical profession and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (H Rpt 92-748)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
Development of lift-distribution system to alleviate stress problems in C—5A aircraft by spreading aerodynamic loads through wings rather than concentrating stress on small areas was announced by Lockheed-Georgia Co. Vice President Robert B. Ormsby. Modification could be installed during regular modification and inspection periods and would not affect aircraft’s handling. (AP, W Post, 12/12/71, A3)
Dr. Clarence L. Johnson, Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., received NAE’s sixth Founders Medal for designing advanced aircraft and for experimental and theoretical investigations in aerospace sciences. Dr. Johnson was best known for his work in designing Hudson bomber, Constellation and Superconstellation transports, P-38, T-33 trainer, F-90, JetStar, U-2, Warning Star, YF-12A, and SR-71. (nae Release, 7/13/71; nae Bridge, 7/71,1)
U.S. faced no dire threat from current “numbers or accuracy” of Soviet SS—9 missiles, but must extend its own antimissile system as “bargaining chip” with U.S.S.R. at salt, Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard said in testimony before House Committee on Foreign Relations’ Subcommittee on Arms Control. {NYT, 7/14/71, 7)
Appointment of John P. Donnelly, Vice President for Corporate Communications of Whittaker Corp., as nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs effective Aug. 15, was announced by nasa. He would be responsible for development and direction of public affairs activities, including public information, public services, and educational programs. Acting Public Affairs chief since resignation of Julian W. Scheer March 22 had been Alfred P. Alibrando, Director, Public Affairs Div. (nasa Release 71-137; nasa Ann, 2/23/71)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 3981, $3.271-billion FY 1972 NASA authorization bill. Bill authorized appropriations of $2,518 billion for r&d, $56.3 million for construction of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. (CR, 2/9/71, H588; NASA LAR X/ll)
Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force and later leading test pilot in U.S., died in New York at age 83. He had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)
D. J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of Space Div., told Ninth International Symposium on Space Technology and Science in Tokyo that U.S. did not have monopoly on earth resources programs. “All of us heed the ingenuity of the entire world on how to utilize this technology, so I encourage your expanding participation and cooperation.” (GE Reprint)
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
President Nixon sent $229.2-billion FY 1972 budget request to Congress, including total science r&d budget of $16.7 billion. Total request for NASA new obligation^ authority (noa) of $3,271 billion (1.4% of total U.S. budget) was $27 million less than FY 1971 noa of $3,298 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $216.5 million against decline of $486.4 million in FY 1971. Reduction to $3,152 billion placed proposed NASA FY 1972 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,518 billion would go for r&d, $56.3 million for construction, of facilities, and $697.4 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $302.2 million, to $612.2 million— reflecting cancellation of Apollo 18 and 19—would be partially offset by increase from $515.2 million in FY 1971 to $672.8 million in FY 1972 for manned space flight operations. Manned space flight operations would include $535.4 million for Skylab, $100.0 million for space shuttle, and $37.4 million for orbited systems and experiments. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,286 billion, down $144.6 million from FY 1971. Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $184.7 million, from $565.7 million in FY 1971 to $740.4 million in FY 1972. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for solar observatory ($19 million in FY 1972), High Energy Astronomical Observatory ($13.4 million), and space telescope study ($500 000). Funding for lunar and planetary exploration would increase $166.6 million, to $311.5 million, with $38.3 million going toward Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, $180.4 million toward Viking project, and $18.8 million toward supporting research and technology advanced studies. Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would decrease from $35.5 million in FY 1971 to $17.6 million. Funding for bioscience program, including Biosatellites, was eliminated from NASA budget for FY 1972. Increase of $15.5 million in space applications programs, to $182.5 million in FY 1972, included $48.5 million for Earth Resources Survey, $13 million for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, and $60.3 million for ATS. Total for advanced research and technology programs decreased from $264.2 million in FY 1971 to $212.8 million, stol technology program would receive $15 million, against $1.9 million in FY 1971. nerva rocket funding would decrease from $32 million in FY 1971 to $9.9 million. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $26 million, to $264 million. dod’s FY 1972 budget of $76 billion for outlays included $1.55-billion space funding, $500 000 less than previous year [see April 2]. Budget also included $370 million for B-l intercontinental bomber, up from $75 million in FY 1971; $39 million for lamps antisubmarine-warfare helicopter, up from $4 million, $145 million for air defense aircraft system (awacs), up from $87 million, $47 million for usaf AX close-support aircraft, up from $28 million, $409 million for Poseidon missile system, and $926 million for Minuteman III program, up from $720 million in FY 1971. aec funding for nerva and space electric power would decrease from $84 million in FY 1971 to $39.7 million. Increase of $437 million in total dot FY 1972 budget of $7.8 billion would go mostly to expanded aviation and urban mass transit spending, dot funding for reduction of aircraft noise and study of environmental effects of SST would increase from $27 million in FY 1971 to $54 million. These funds also would he used for pollution reduction from Coast Guard installations, noa of $235 million was requested for sst prototype program, up from $210 million in FY 1971. (US Budget for FY 1972; bob Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; aiaa release 71—2; CR, 1/29/71, H265; ddr&e Dir Foster Testimony, 4/2/71)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Washington, D.C., that cutback in funding for nerva development in nasa FY 1972 budget was gross error reflecting on management capability of NASA. Cutting program funding to $30 million would mean virtual halt in work on nerva. (AP, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 2/9/71)
President Nixon approved H.R. 7109, $3.384-billion NASA FY 1972 authorization bill that became P.L. 92-68. Total authorization was $84 million above budget request of $3,300 billion and $86 million above FY 1971 new obligational authority (noa) of $3,298 billion. Bill authorized for R&D $2,603 billion, increase of $85.5 million over budget request of $2,518 billion and decrease of $90 million from FY 1971 authorization of $2,693 billion; for construction of facilities, $58.4 million, up $2.1 million from budget request of $56.3 million and $24 million above FY 1971 authorization of $34.5 million; and for research and program management, $723 million, down $4 million from budget request of $727 million but $40 million above $683.3 million authorized in FY 1971. Bill included $29.3-million budget amendment to cover Federal pay increases. It added $30 million to budget request for Skylab and Space Shuttle programs, $43 million for nuclear power and propulsion, $2.5 million for earth resources survey, and $12.5 million for aeronautical research and technology. It reduced requested authorization for lunar and planetary exploration by $10 million. (PD, 8/9/71, 1136; NASA Budget Off; A&A 1970)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, submitted to Senate resolutions authorizing printing of Committee reports International Cooperation in Outer Space: A Symposium and Soviet Space Programs, 1966—70 as Senate documents. (CR, 5/13/71, S6844-5)
ComSatCorp announced election of John L. Martin, Jr., as Assistant Vice President for Domestic and Aeronautical Satellite Systems. (ComSat Corp Release 71-11)
Portrait of Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer, was unveiled by artist Peter Stevens and Mrs. Goddard and presented to Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif., Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, by National Space Club. Ceremonies were held in Committee’s main hearing room, where portrait would hang. (NSC News Letter, 11/23/71)
First flight model LRV was formally' delivered to NASA in ceremony at Boeing Co.’s Space Center at Kent, Wash. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msec Director, accepted first of three flight models from Boeing Co. Group Vice President for Aerospace 0. C. Boileau. Model would be shipped to arrive at ksc March 15 for final checks and installation aboard Apollo 15 lm. Delivery would be two weeks before April 1 contract delivery date, (nasa Release 71—38; Boeing Release 3/10/71)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had announced “voluntary” early retirement of Lockheed-California Div. President Charles S. Wagner, Senior Vice President Dudley E. Browne, and Corporate Vice President for Manufacturing W. A. Pulver, Wall Street Journal reported. Browne would remain a director and member of board’s executive and finance committees. (WSJ, 11/2/71, 16)
Mrs. Irene Bolam, named in book Amelia Earhart Lives as being missing aviatrix Amelia Earhart, filed $1.5-million libel suit against authors Joseph Klass and Joseph Gervais. Mrs. Bolam claimed book damaged her reputation by depicting her as bigamist, spy, and traitor. Book claimed Amelia Earhart had disappeared in 1937 while flying U.S. spy mission, was captured by Japanese, and might have been World War II Japanese propagandist Tokyo Rose, (upi, W Post, 9/1/71, D5)
House Committee on Armed Services’ subcommittee investigating Dec. 30, 1970,	crash of usn F—14 Tomcat fighter aircraft during test flight at Grumman facility in Calverton, N.Y., received communication from identified source containing 13 allegations of defects and deficiencies in F—14A design, manufacture, testing, and administrative controls. Rep. F. Edward Hebert (D-La.), as Chairman of investigation subcommittee, ordered full inquiry into charges. (Subcom Rpt, 12/20/71)
William M. Magruder, Director of sst Development for dot, told press in Washington, D.C., that Ataka and Co. of Japan had suggested it could obtain financing of $500 million or more from major Japanese industrial concerns to resurrect SST program. In return Ataka would become 50% partner in enterprise. On May 23, however, Ataru Takizawa, Vice President of Ataka and Co., said in Tokyo there was no truth to report that his firm made exploratory proposal to revive U.S. sst program. (Aug, W Star, 5/22/11% AP, W Post, 5/23/71)
Senate adopted S.R. 15, modifying Senate rules on total number of Senators assigned to certain standing committees. Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was set at 11 members. Senate also adopted S.R. 16, electing majority members of Senate Committees. Members elected to Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) ; Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.); Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.); and Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.). (CR, 1/28/71, S406)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, introduced S. 720, $3.271-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill, identical to House bill introduced Feb. 9 (CR, 2/10/71, S1193)
Willis H. Shapley, nasa Associate Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Foreign Affairs’ Subcommittee on Africa on operation of NASA tracking station in South Africa. Subcommittee was investigating U.S. business involvement in South Africa. NASA station was manned, staffed, and operated by South African Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (csir). “Committed as we have been to attaining the important national objectives entrusted to us, we have thought of our stations overseas essentially in terms of their efficiency in supporting our flight missions. We have monitored station operations mainly from the standpoint of technical effectiveness and sound financial management. While we have recognized that human factors can have a direct bearing on performance, we are limited in our ability to control these factors, particularly in societies where statutes and practices differ markedly from our own.” NASA wished “to do all we can to see that the NASA station in South Africa reflects to the greatest degree that local circumstances permit, the practices and ideals which govern employment at our domestic facilities.” (Testimony)
George H. Stoner, Senior Vice President of Boeing Co,, died in Seattle at age 53. Stoner had previously worked on pilotless aircraft and Saturn programs and was to have received NASA’s highest industry award for his role in development of Saturn V booster. (AP, NYT, 3/2/71, 39) During February: Opportunity for participating in post-Apollo program had resulted in deep division of opinion among European countries, Dr. Peter Stubbs reported in Technology Review. “. . . never has so much furore been generated on the basis of so little hard fact. But politics have taken over the scene to the almost entire exclusion of rational procedures.” France and West Germany had not forgiven U.K. for “welshing on them over the—by U.S. standards archaic!— Europa launcher.” There was fear that without independent launch vehicle for commercial satellites, Europe could not compete on fair terms with U.S. “Beneath the European tussle of threat and counterthreat . . . run deeper waters: France’s desire for her own telecommunications satellite system to propagandize former African colonies; West Germany’s urge to become a fully fledged space power; the British Government’s intense anxiety to enter the Common Market— even possibly, in part, by blackmailing its way in over the space program.” esro had built competency “which should not be allowed to go by the board simply because a bunch of politicians can’t decide to what proper purpose it should be put.” (Tech, Rev, 2/71, 14)
U.S. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of moon and planets, development of space meteorology, and space applications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three working groups representing NASA, and Soviet Academy of Sciences would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration. U.S. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and noaa’s Director of National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R. participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services, U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, (nasa Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported with amendment H.R. 7109, $3.434-biIlion NASA authorization bill [see April 1]. (Text; nasa LAR X/35)
NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski testified on FY 1972 budget request during House Committee on Science and Astronautics authorization hearings. During 1970 otda supported some 50 ongoing scientific, applications, planetary, and lunar experiment missions as well as some 14 new flight projects launched in year by NASA and DOD. During Apollo 13 mission, with safe return after inflight explosion, MSFN “demonstrated that it is, in fact, the astronauts’ life-line to earth.” Valuable clues to origin of explosion were found in analysis of recorded telemetry data, msfn was still supporting experiments left on moon by Apollo 12 and 14 missions. After FY 1972’s Apollo 15 and 16 missions, network would be continuously monitoring 16 alsep experiments. Satellite network provided tracking and data acquisition for average monthly workload of some 40 earth-orbital satellites, including NASA’s scientific and applications satellites and projects of other Government agencies and foreign countries. dsn supported Mariner 6 and 7 probes in extended mission phase and Apollo 13, as well as four ongoing Pioneer missions (6 through 9). Data acquired by Goldstone antenna on effect of solar gravitation on Mariner spacecraft signals had verified Einstein theory of delay of 200 microseconds in return of signals from gravitational field of sun. Construction continued on second 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia, and ground was broken for third near Madrid, Spain. (Transcript)
Director Lee R. Scherer of jiasa’s Apollo Lunar Exploration Office received Soviet lunar samples from Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in exchange for Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Participating in the ceremony at the Academy in Moscow were (left to right) Dr. Paid W. Cast, Chief of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Division; Scherer; Prof. Vinogradov; interpreter Igor Pochitalin; and Soviet Academician Boris Petrov. services at Central Systems Engineering Office, and $10 million to Sperry Rand Corp. for services at Astrionics Laboratory. (NASA Release 71-102) June 10; U.S. and U.S.S.R. exchanged lunar samples in Moscow ceremony to mark expansion of cooperation in space. Lee R, Scherer, Director of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office, presented three grains (0.10 oz) of Apollo 11 and three grams of Apollo 12 lunar material to Academician Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and received three grams of Soviet Luna 16 samples in return. Scherer said, “Although the quantity of material is small, its significance is very great.” U.S. Embassy in Moscow released statement saying exchange provided opportunity for scientists of both countries to benefit from study of material from lunar areas to which they would not otherwise have access. “The exchange of lunar samples exemplifies the desire of nasa, as stated in the agreement of January 21, to expand cooperation in space research and exploration. The U.S. Government looks forward to the broadening and deepening of this cooperation.” (nasa Release 71-103; Shabad, NYTS 6/11/71, 10)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C. He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing to serve as astronaut. Washington Post obituary said he had fought hard for programs to keep U.S. from “dropping out of the space race.” (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
Vice President Spiro T, Agnew told workers at Ksc after Apollo 14 launch that days of declining space budget were past and “we’re going forward together not just to the moon but I’m certain that the American program will continue and press forward into the reaches of interplanetary space.” (AP, W Star, 2/11/71, A7)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) introduced S. 1805, “to provide relocation assistance, training assistance, and interest supplements to adversely affected workers separated from their employment because of the termination of defense and space contracts.” (CR, 5/6/71, S6341)
House agreed to H.R. 461 electing Rep. Mendel J. Davis (D-S.C.) to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 6/3/71, H4628)
Louis H. Brennwald, former Vice President of Northrop Aircraft Corp. in charge of Puerto Rico operations, became Director of Administration for Ames Research Center, (arc Astrogram, 9/2/l\, 1; ARC pro)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Albert C. Hall, Vice President for Engineering and Research with Martin Marietta Corp., to be Assistant Secretary of Defense (Administration). Hall would succeed Robert F. Froehlke, who had become Secretary of the Armv July 1. (PD, 10/25/71, 1430, 1441; usa pio)
President Nixon presented National Medal of Science to nine scientists in White House ceremony. Recipients, announced Jan. 27, included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. {PD, 5/24/71, 784)
Boeing Co. Vice President for Industrial Relations Lowell P. Mickelwait said company would lay off about 7000 workers and disband sst program as result of Senate’s rejection of SST financing. Plans were in anticipation of notice of sst program termination from dot. Of workers to be laid off within seven weeks of notice, 4500 were force working directly on sst production. Others were clerical and office workers. Mickelwait said Seattle-area work force could drop to 26 500 or remain as high as 31 000 after sst program cancellation. Estimate of 29 000 workers was “reasonable.” (AP, B Sun, 3/25/71, Al)
NASA announced appointment of Harry W. Johnson, Vice President for Engineering in Gates Learjet Corp.’s Aircraft Div., as Director of oart’s Aeronautical Propulsion Div. (nasa Release 71-19)
John P. Donnelly, former Vice President for Corporate Communications for Whittaker Corp., became NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Appointment had been announced July 23. (NASA Activities, 8/15/71, 135)
House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 9382, FY 1972	HUD-space-science appropriations bill which contained $3,272 billion NASA appropriation. Committee recommended reduction in Apollo program funding from $612.2 million requested to $610.2 million; increase in Skylab funding from $535.4 million to $550.4 million to provide rescue capability; additional $5 million over estimate for stol development, to total $115 million; deferment of $20 million proposed for space shuttle facilities; and reduction of $6.6 million in $726.6 million requested for research and program management. (H Rpt 92-305)
Soviet progress in science and technology was discussed in Sovetskaya Rossiya article by M. D. Millionschikov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “In recent years there has been an immense improvement in the development of astronomy and astrophysics. Our science has made discoveries of fundamental significance and has shifted considerably the limits of phenomena in the universe known to man. Research into the nature of powerful sources of radiowaves discovered some years ago has led to the conclusion that the objects noted are located almost on the edge of the observable area of the universe at a distance of 5 billion light years. The power of radiation exceeds all currently known scales. In order to explain the colossal energy they radiate from the standpoint of the most powerful known mechanism for emitting energy—thermonuclear synthesis—it is necessary to suppose that its source must be simultaneous thermonuclear explosion of a mass equivalent to a hundred million stars the size of the sun.” (fbis-Sov-71-134, 6/30/71, LI)
Spencer M. Beresford, NASA General Counsel, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during hearing on H.R. 4545, Chapel of the Astronauts bill. NASA had agreed to consider request by Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., to purchase up to seven acres (three hectares) of land adjacent to ICSC Visitor Information Center for construction of “nondenominational, nonsectarian, nonprofit public facility for worship or meditation and a memorial to the astronauts.” NASA was then “actively engaged in the defense of a law suit arising from the reading of portions of the Bible by the crew of Apollo 8 while in space.” Wishing to avoid a further suit, NASA had sought assurance that Chapel of the Astronauts, Inc., purpose was “truly nondenominational.” Corporation had complied with NASA’s request for assurance. “It is my professional opinion that ... if present plans for the Chapel are followed and it is operated with sound discretion, the Chapel Corporation, NASA and the United States Government are as secure from successful legal attack as is possible.” (Proceedings)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 7109, $3.434-billion FY 1972 nasa authorization bill. Bill added $163 million to Administration’s requested $3,271 billion, including additional $45 million for Skylab and $25 million for space shuttle, $39.9 million for nerva engine, and $25 million for aeronautical research and technology. Bill provided $2,668 billion for r&d, increase of $150 million over requested $2,518 billion; $58.6 million for construction of facilities, up $2.3 million from $56.3-million request; and $706.9 million for research and program management, increase of $9.5 million over requested $697.4 million. (H Rpt 92—143)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Portrait of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, third nasa Administrator (1969-1970) was unveiled in nasa Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Paine; and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Portrait, by artist William Draper, would hang at NASA Hq. (Transcript)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences published Statements by Presidents of the United States on International Cooperation in Space—A Chronology: October 1957—August 1971 (Sen. Doc. 92-40). Statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon had been compiled by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian. In letter of transmittal to Committee Chairman Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Committee Staff Director James J. Gehrig said statements revealed “unanimous agreement that space research and exploration should be an international undertaking.” (Text)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) resigned from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to take seat on House Ways and Means Committee. (Off of Rep Karth)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen received National Transportation Award of silver bowl from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Award was for Boeing’s construction of 747 jumbo jet aircraft. (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71)
NASA oart officials testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on FY 1972 NASA authorization. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said aeronautics was largest part of OART program for first time. In military aviation, “work is under way at the Centers in support of the F-14 for the Navy. . . . Over a dozen wind tunnels and simulators . . . are used in this support. We are helping the usaf with . . . the F—15, their new B—1 bomber and we plan to assist” with the A—X. One ARC facility was on indefinite loan to USA. “In all, we use over a third of our available facility time to support military needs. Research on transonic aerodynamics, the NASA supercritical airfoil, fly-by-wire flight controls, spin stabilization, and advanced structures using beryllium or composites are some of the areas where NASA is making research contributions to meet military requirements in the future.” In civil aviation effort, OART was providing DOT with assistance on sst. arc was assisting faa in certification studies of Concorde and sst. arc flight simulator for advanced aircraft was “proving to be the most useful facility available in the free world for studying airworthiness standards for supersonic transports.” NASA and DOT were completing joint study of “relationships between the benefits that accrue to the Nation from aviation and the level of R&D effort. The study displays the ways in which civil aviation can affect regional development, population distribution, [and] land use, and contribute to many other social and economic goals of the Nation.” Problems under study included aircraft noise, air pollution from aircraft engine emissions, and aeronautical operating problems “such as approach and landing safety, delays, congestion, and community noise caused by operation of aircraft.” oart Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. had established joint stol operating problems experiments program with dot and faa, and Aeronautical Life Sciences Div. “to study man’s role in advanced aeronautical systems ... as an operator, as a passenger, and as a member of the community exposed to air operations.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), described improvements in aircraft materials and structural design: “I have been particularly impressed with the progress of the composite materials. The potential of boron and carbon fibers imbedded in an epoxy resin matrix to provide high strength, low weight structures has been discussed with you for several years. This year the testing of special glass fibers has revealed the possibility that low cost, stiff composites may be fabricated with much greater strengths than previously thought possible. Composites are finding application both as a replacement for metallic components and by augmenting metal strengths using selective reinforcement. In the forthcoming year we propose to construct several airplane components of primary structure for installation and flight demonstration. We believe that these new materials will find widespread use in the industry when the technical risk has been demonstrated to be acceptable.” Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Systems Office, reported on progress of nerva program: “Through the systematic engineering design process . . . design concepts to be incorporated in nerva were formulated, requirements were specified, and a baseline engine design has been established. The design provides a thrust level of 75 000 lbs [ 334 000 newtons], and a specific impulse of 825 seconds. High reliability and safety in operation are provided through the use of redundancy in critical areas and conservative design approaches. The endurance goal for the reusable system is 10 hours, coupled with the ability to undergo 60 start-and-stop cycles, and the key fuel element technology continued to make good progress toward that goal.” (Transcript)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
President Nixon approved H.R. 9382, FY 1972 HUD-space-science appropriations bill that contained $3.298-billion NASA FY 1972 appropriation and $619 million nsf appropriation. Bill became P.L. 92—78. NASA total included $2,523 billion for r&d, $52.7 million for construction of facilities, and $722.6 million for research and program management. Bill appropriated $39 million for NERVA program, $13 million for space shuttle main engine test facilities, and $5.5 million for space shuttle thermal-protection facilities. President also signed H.R. 9667, $2.9-billion dot FY 1972 appropriations bill that included $58.5 million to repay airlines for money they invested in sst but eliminated funding for sst program. Bill became P.L. 92-96. (PD, 8/16/71, 1157; NASA Budget Off; H Rpt 92-377)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) introduced H.R. 5529 “to authorize the coinage of 50-cent pieces to commemorate the Apollo 11 lunar landing and to establish the Apollo Lunar Landing Commemorative Trust Fund.” Measure was referred to House Committee on Banking and Currency. (CR, 3/3/71, H1254)
Bruce N. Torell was elected President of Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. at regular meeting of board of directors. Torell would succeed Bernard A. Schmickrath, who was elected a vice president. Changes would be effective July 1. (p&w Eagle, 7/71, 2)
Rep. Joel T. Broyhill (R-Va.) introduced H.R. 10065 “to redesignate the Washington National Airport as ‘Neil Armstrong Airport.’ ” Bill was referred to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (CR, 7/26/71, H7164)
President Nixon announced recipients of 1970 National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering. Recipients included Dr. George E. Mueller, Senior Vice President of General Dynamics Corp. and former nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Dr. Mueller received award for “his many individual contributions to the design of the Apollo System, including the planning and interpretation of a large array of advanced experiments necessary to insure the success of this venture into a new and little known environment.” Other recipients were: Dr. Richard D. Brauer, professor of mathematics, Harvard Univ.; Dr. Robert H. Dicke, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; Barbara McClintock, Carnegie Institution of Washington geneticist; Dr. Albert B. Sabin, president of Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovoth, Israel; Dr. Allan R. Sandage, Cal Tech astronomer; John C. Slater, professor of physics and chemistry, Univ. of Florida; Dr. John A. Wheeler, professor of physics, Princeton Univ.; and Dr. Saul Winstein, deceased, formerly professor of chemistry at ucla. (PD, 2/1/71,124)
NAE announced election of 29 U.S. engineers to NAE, bringing total membership to 356. New members included l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Commander of samso; Joseph F. Shea, Senior Vice President and General Manager of Raytheon Co. Equipment Div.; and Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nae Release)
House Committee on Appropriations by vote of 26 to 15 approved full $290 million requested by DOT for continued SST development. (CR, 3/15/71, D164; AP, NYT, 3/16/71, 62)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science in support of nasa FY 1972 budget request: “We have recently settled on a single set of performance characteristics for the preliminary design of the two-stage fully reusable [space] shuttle. Alternate approaches are also still under study. We expect to be in a position to make decisions this summer on how we will proceed with airframe design or development in FY 1972. The $100 million recommended in the FY 1972 budget will support, in addition to the engine development, either continued intensive design studies and related efforts or the initiation of airframe development.” Dr. Low noted “tremendous interest in exploration during Apollo 11, when an estimated 107 million people in the U.S. watched our first manned lunar landing mission; and we saw it again last month, when 104 million watched Apollo 14.” (Text)
Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) criticized Sept. 13 action of Office of Management and Budget in impounding $44.9 million of $50.5-million FY 1973 NASA appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program. As Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, he signed telegram to Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, protesting action. (CR, 10/14/72, H10111)
John Stack, engineer who had helped develop first high-speed wind tunnel in 1930s, died at age 65 after fall from horse. Stack had joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1928 and had been head of high-velocity airflow research at Laboratory in 1939, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research from 1961 to 1962, and Vice President for Engineering at Fairchild Industries until his retirement in 1971. He had received numerous awards for his work in supersonic technology, including Robert J. Collier trophy in 1947 for work with X—1 rocket aircraft. (AP, NYT, 6/20/72, 38; frc X-Press, 7/21/72, 2) June 18-July 30: Exhibit of kinetic art of Dr. Frank J. Malina—artist, astronautical engineer, and past Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1944^1946)—was held at Univ. of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. Catalog noted Dr. Malina was “pioneering on the new frontier of man’s adjustment to the explosive impact of science, technology and the exploration of space on the world.” Artist believed “man must understand this world in order to survive in it, and that this understanding must be both intellectual and emotional.” Paintings included impressions of space phenomena. (Catalog)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported, without amendment, H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill [see March 23]. (H Rpt 92-976)
v/a Charles E. Weakley (usn, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, died in Bethesda, Md., at age 66. He had retired in 1967 as commander of Atlantic Fleet’s antisubmarine warfare force and had held NASA post since 1968. Adm. Weakley had received Legion of Merit and Bronze Star. During World War II he had devised random-screen method of protecting merchant convoys in experiment with early sonar. (W Star & News, 12/26/72, A6)
Dr. Harlow Shapley, one of world’s leading astronomers, died in Boulder, Colo., at age 86 after long illness. He had been director of Harvard College Observatory from 1921 to 1952 and astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory, Calif., from 1914 to 1921. At Mount Wilson Dr. Shapley had used variable stars and globular star clusters to fix position of solar system at some 30 000 light years from center of Milky Way galaxy. Previously earth and sun had been supposed near center of Milky Way galaxy. Finding had had immense scientific value and import for religious thought and philosophy. After World War II, Dr. Shapley shifted attention from scientific pursuits to public affairs. He had condemned cold war of 1940s and championed peaceful coexistence among nations of world. His advocacy of U.S.-U.S.S.R. friendship had led to his censure by House Un-American Activities Committee. Before retirement in 1952, Dr. Shapley had received 18 honorary degrees, many awards—including Pope Pius XI Prize in 1941—and had published more than 500 writings. (Weil, W Post, 10/21/72, B6; NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
Science commented on June 6 defeat of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) as candidate for reelection to Congress: Since 1961, when Miller became Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Apollo program has reached fruition and starts have been made on Skylab and the shuttle. Miller was NASA’s foremost advocate in the House and took pride in announcing every latest achievement of the space program.” Miller’s committee had been “influential in having NASA expand its investment in . . . scientific satellites.” Science cited Miller’s age, 81, as “decisive factor” in his loss of election. (Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs, would become Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics in January 1973, Washington Post reported. He would replace Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who was defeated for renomination to House. Post quoted Rep. Teague as saying he wanted to push U.S. space program forward because it “seems to be taking a back seat.” (Lyons, W Post, 12/15/72)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences met in closed session to hear testimony from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator; and Apollo 15 astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin on Apollo 15 commercialism. Discussed were selling of stamp covers carried on mission and of replicas of statue “Fallen Astronaut” placed on moon during mission. Following meeting Committee Chairman, Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), issued statement: “The testimony of NASA management and of the astronauts was forthright and complete. There is no doubt that certain provisions of NASA’s Standards of Conduct for NASA Employees were violated by the astronauts for which they have been punished. The question of whether or not they violated any law is being examined. No conclusions were reached by the Committee at this meeting and the Committee will decide at a later time what further action it will take.” (CR, 8/3/72, D869; Text)
Cutbacks in NASA budget would necessitate dismissal of some 40 civil service employees at Kennedy Space Center during March, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, announced. Cutback was part of NASA-wide work force reduction. Similar reduction might be required in 1973. {Today, 3/2/72)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
Reception in House Rayburn Building honored retiring Chairman George P. Miller of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Rep. Miller (D-Calif.)—defeated June 6 in California primary for nomination for reelection to House—had presided over House Committee in overseeing and funding U.S. space program since 1961. House Speaker, Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), said that “never had so much been accomplished in the national interest in so short a time” as by Committee. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., praised work of Committee in evolution of entire U.S. space effort. Rep. Miller responded that U.S. space achievements were “a beginning and not an end” of the national enterprise required to serve Nation and society in the future. National Space Club President Donald R. Rodgers presided over ceremony attended by 300 guests, including Congressmen, NASA and industry representatives, and Senate and House Space Committee staffs. (NASA Hist Off)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
First fighter squadrons of Navy F-14 jet fighters would be formed “sometime this fall,” Grumman Corp. Vice President Michael Pelehach said at meeting of Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Woodbury, N.Y. Eleven test F-14 prototypes had logged 400 flights and nearly 1000 hrs. (NYT, 6/7/72, 11)
Annual Dept, of Defense report to Congress, National Security Strategy of Realistic Deterrence, was presented by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird to House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Dept, of Defense Appropriations during hearings on FY 1973 dod budget and FY 1973—1977 program. U.S.S.R. had reached position “where—unless we take appropriate action—there could be new surprises and new ‘sputniks.’ But they are less likely to be in areas such as the peaceful exploration of space; rather they are more likely to be a part of a major new Soviet military capability.” (Text)
Personal telephone call from Mrs. Rose P. Kennedy, mother of late President John F. Kennedy, to Rep. Thomas P. O’Neill, Jr. (D-Mass.), had helped kill bill to change name of Cape Kennedy back to Cape Canaveral, Miami Herald reported. Paper said Rep. O’Neill had asked Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, to block bill. O’Neill aide had admitted congressman had asked Miller to block bill, but had denied that O’Neill had acted on Mrs. Kennedy’s behalf. (M Her, 10/4/72)
Atomic Energy Commission named its Los Alamos, N. Mex., Meson Physics Facility for Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), member of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, and celebrated “Clinton P. Anderson Day” with ceremonies in Los Alamos. History of space and nuclear rocket programs was recounted by AEC Commissioner James T. Ramey in welcoming speech: “Senator Anderson with some help from the Chairman of the aec almost had the Joint Committee and AEC responsible for the emerging space program after Sputnik.” Joint Committee “held one of the first series of hearings on the development of rocket technology for outer space. These hearings represented one of the times . . . that Senator Anderson . . . and Admiral [Lewis L.] Strauss of the aec were in entire public agreement on a project. Senator Anderson was thinking of putting space under the Joint Committee and Admiral Strauss was interested in the space development program being under aec. Their mutual interest was short-lived, however, since the then Senate Majority Leader Lyndon [B.] Johnson apparently had different ideas on this subject!” (aec Release P—95; Text) April 9:	Americans were wondering why U.S. spent “$40 billion” to land on moon rather than on programs for social action, Jeffrey St. John commented in Los Angeles Times article. “The fact remains, however, that long before the landing of Apollo 11 public funds for social problems on earth had risen far beyond the annual space budgets. In 1972, the federal government has earmarked $100 billion for social action programs, as opposed to $3.2 billion for space. The ratio of expenditures for space and social action programs during the 15 years of the space effort has been roughly 11 to 1 in favor of social action.” Lunar landing had been “triumph of 400,000 scientists, engineers, and technologists and the sophisticated expertise of 20,000 private companies, large and small.” Apollo had been “clear-cut example of a successful government venture” but on earth Government had “made a mess of the social landscape.” Compounding irrationality was refusal of liberals to understand why “space program succeeded, largely as a private endeavor coordinated by government, and why social problems grow worse under government’s guidance.” To accomplish lunar mission, space program participants had needed two crucial elements: “intellectual freedom” to analyze a problem correctly and “strict observance of natural laws.” In social problemsolving, intellectual freedom was abandoned for political expediency that played one pressure group against another and “there is a continual violation of certain immutable natural laws. Namely, the refusal of the social planners to believe the slums and poverty can be the products of an absence of individual initiative and enterprise.” (LA Times, 4/9/72)
Rep. Bob S. Bergland (D-Minn.) was elected member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 1/27/72, H367)
S.S. Stcctendam of Holland-American Line sailed from New York with about 100 passengers for cruise advertised as “Voyage Beyond Apollo.” Itinerary included Cape Kennedy for close-up view of Apollo 17 launch, scheduled for Dec. 6. Passengers included novelists Norman Mailer and Katherine Anne Porter, science writer Isaac Asimov, and Northeastern Univ. physicist Dr. Robert D. Enzmann. Dr. Wernher von Braun—Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator—and former astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell and science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke, who had been advertised as participants in space seminars aboard ship, did not appear. (Buckley, NYT, 12/12/72, 43)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, nasa Director for Life Sciences, discussed spinoff of nasa biomedical research in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Ames Research Center (arc) was evaluating changes in lung tissue of coal miners in collaboration with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare to pinpoint possible damage to astronauts’ lungs from particulate contaminants in atmosphere. Study results suggested “cell destruction can be induced by release of intracellular digestive enzymes into the cell cytoplasm following penetration of the cells by particles, in the case of coal miners, silicates.” Joint NASA and TJ.S. Bureau of Mines program would develop carbon monoxide detecting system, arc and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture would develop hydroponic system for spacecraft to accelerate plant growth under space flight conditions. “The medical information needed to assure man’s safe journey into and return from space has led to the development of many items of information and equipment of great value to terrestrial medicine.” NASA life sciences program “exemplifies the success which can be achieved by combining the special talents of Government, industry, and university scientists.” Dr. Berry also reported there had been “no findings in the manned space flights to date by the United States or U.S.S.R. that would preclude the commitment of man to longer duration missions. Therefore ... we feel confident in committing man to a 28-day mission.” Apollo 16 and 17 and Skylab experiments would study physiological response of body before commitment to 56-day Skylab mission. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Advanced Missions in omsf, testified on space shuttle orbital systems and advanced missions definition and planning: In areas of payloads, research and applications modules (ram), advanced missions, and advanced development, “principal effort is directed toward developing . . . understanding and planning the use of the shuttle.” In RAM program, “we will be continuing the study of concepts of a family of payload carrier modules suitable for transport in the Shuttle Orbiter cargo bay.” Modules would range from “austere shuttle ‘Sortie Can’ with relatively simple laboratory equipment . . . through more sophisticated, dedicated laboratory and observation facilities, including automated free-flyers serviced by the Shuttle.” Sortie mission using orbiter as platform for short-duration experiments was among most promising shuttle operating modes. Mission would use advantages of shuttle in payload design, development, and operation, and, “for the first time, permit the investigator to accompany his experiment into space.” Sortie missions would be modeled after arc Airborne Research Program in which Convair 990 aircraft was used as airborne laboratory. “The goal in developing procedures for managing the Space Shuttle Sortie Missions will be to retain the relatively simple, flexible and highly responsive aspects of the ‘990’ program.” (Transcript)
Lewis Research Center scientists Dr. John V. Dugan, Jr., and Dr. Herman Mark told meeting of Northeast Ohio Congressional Council in Cleveland that space scientists and engineers dismissed because of aerospace recession should be hired for expanded programs to solve environmental and other societal problems. The LeRC scientists were invited by Rep. John F. Seiberling, Jr. (D-Ohio), to testify before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (McCann, Cl PD, 9/23/72)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
Retirement ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., honored l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command. Gen. O’Neill, who was succeeded by l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, received Oak Leaf Cluster to Air Force Distinguished Service Medal from AFSC Commander, Gen. George S. Brown, (afsc Newsreview, 10/72, 4) During August: House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space published U.S.—U.S.S.R. Cooperative Agreements. Report of June hearings to explore scope of scientific and technical agreements signed during May 22-30 summit meeting in Moscow included texts of agreements and comments of experts. Dr. Philip Handler, National Academy of Sciences President, had said of space cooperation agreement: “The symbolism of the proposed link-up in space may prove to be the most significant aspect of the venture.” Agreement was “symbolic of a mutual awareness that the planet earth is a small and fragile spaceship, that all men are its fellow passengers, and that the fate of the people of all nations is essentially a common fate.” Subcommittee had concluded: “While a gradual amelioration of fundamental political conflicts and disagreements is the most that can be reasonably hoped for, the genuine cooperative spirit that has made these agreements possible opens the door to more effective communication and deeper understanding between the world’s two predominant powers that could have the most profound effect on the future of mankind.” (Committee Print)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev died in Moscow at age 84. During 50-yr career Tupolev and associates had pioneered design of 120 different aircraft from 35-hp ANT-1 in 1920s to Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport scheduled for service in 1975. He had been regarded as originator of all-metal aircraft, which he first designed in early 1920s. In 1934 he had built huge eight-engine aircraft with 63-m (207-ft) wingspan. Aircraft, named Maxim Gorky after Russian author, actually flew, but was demolished in 1935 crash. Tupolev, one of most decorated Soviet citizens, had won three Stalin Prizes and one Lenin Prize and was three-time Hero of Socialist Labor—highest Soviet civilian honor. He had been imprisoned in 1936 for allegedly divulging Soviet aviation secrets to Germany. During three years of forced labor he designed Tu-2 dive bomber which was flown by U.S.S.R. in World War II. Among postwar airliners designed by Tupolev design bureau were Tu-134 medium-range, 80-passenger transport and Tu-154, three-engine, 150-passenger transport scheduled to replace Tu-104 on Soviet domestic routes. (NYT, 12/24/72, 42) December 24:	NASA released Apollo 17 photos including one of best full-disc photos of earth taken from space. Photo, taken Dec. 7 as Apollo 17 spacecraft headed toward moon, showed earth from North Africa and Arabia to Antarctic polar icecap. (Photo 12-H-1578; NASA pio)
Washington Post published first of series of articles on U.S. energy crisis. Population had doubled in 50 yrs, while energy use had almost quadrupled. Per capita electricity consumption had doubled five times— twice in last 15 yrs. Nationwide environmental movement had halted Government’s Plowshare program to release trapped oil and gas by nuclear explosions, delayed Alaska pipeline, and forced near-moratorium on dam building. Ecologists had “forced power companies to abandon scenic river and lake sites in 10 states and have caused more than 20 delays in the construction of nuclear power plants.” Disagreement was “rampant” over changes wrought by environmental movement. But ecologists had caused no shortage of energy in U.S. thus far. Many energy experts believed technology would “bail us out by letting us tap new, clean fuels and by cleaning up existing fuels.” Mitre Corp. had recently completed exhaustive energy study. Its Senior Vice President Charles Zraket had said, “We believe the physical resources and technical options exist to get us out of this crisis in 10 years.” (O’Toole, W Post, 11/26/72, Al) November 27:	NASA’s TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and new fuselage fairings, was flight-tested at constant dynamic pressure of 9580 newtons per sq m (200 psf). Pressure distribution and wake survey measurements were made with instrumentation at outboard station. All tests with new fuselage fairings had been made with vortex generator off. Generators would be reinstalled and drag measurements made for direct comparison with previous tests with original fairings and vortex generators on and with wind tunnel results. Some measurement of shock wave dynamics was being made with microphones installed on wings. (NASA proj off)
St. Louis Globe-Democrat editorial commented on high level of Soviet space activity: “It is fine to talk about devoting activities in space to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind, as the United States has done. But the talk is hollow when the space scorecard shows the Soviets at an all-time high in military launches, and the United States at a low point, with the trend still further downward.” There was urgent need for U.S. “to develop military space weapons capable of neutralizing Soviet supremacy.” (St Louis G-D, 3/27/72) March 27-April 3:	Working Group of NASA and Soviet engineers met at Manned Spacecraft Center to discuss technical details of docking mechanisms. Talks continued U.S.-U.S.S.R. study of compatible rendezvous and docking systems for spacecraft. (NASA Release 72—69; msc pao) March 28:	Space leaders endorsed shuttle in supplement published by Washington Daily News: Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said shuttle would “produce substantial flight economies, ease strictures on spacecraft design, lower manufacturing cost, remedy malfunctions in orbit, and afford a built-in versatility that will alter the nature of space planning and operations in major ways.” Editorial writer had described shuttle’s impact on space program as transition from dramatics of a countdown to an airport routine, Dr. Fletcher said. “The dramatics will be fondly remembered by many of us, but nostalgia will not obscure the hard fact that the routine and economic access to space, of which the shuttle is the hinge pin, is the practical and commonsense means by which we shall reap the great harvest of benefits that space holds for mankind.” Supplement interview quoted Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, as eagerly looking forward to shuttle flight. “By the time the first passenger shuttle flies I’ll be 68. I think flying into space in a shuttle will be just like being a passenger in an airliner, only smoother.” Dr. von Braun foresaw use of shuttle for travel to Mars “probably around 1990, or at least before the end of the 20th Century.” Flight probably would begin with Mars spacecraft being hauled, piece by piece, in space shuttle cargo bays, to be assembled in orbit. “I think the only way to fly to Mars is with nuclear power, and because we would never want to ignite a nuclear rock on earth, we’ll have to begin the journey from orbit.” Dr. von Braun saw shuttle preparing way for manned exploration by ferrying small, unmanned spacecraft into orbit and launching them toward Mars in late 1970s and 1980s. Article by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said shuttle offered opportunity “not only to the United States to advance its own aerospace science and technology, but also to countries which could not finance a complete shuttle system. The advantages will be mutual and conducive to needed international scientific cooperation.” Proper use of shuttle “can help us in our efforts toward the resources management necessary to make this planet fit to house future generations of man.” James J. Harford, Executive Secretary of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said in article that guessing shuttle’s significance was “like trying to predict what the DC—3 would lead to in air transportation six years before its first flight. The space shuttle could be that powerful and more.” If shuttle performed the way NASA intended it to—“and NASA’s Apollo track record has to impress even the cynical”—shuttle would “help to create entire new industries and . . . hundreds of thousands of new jobs.” [W News, 3/28/72, 27, 29)
President Nixon in message transmitting FY 1973 budget to Congress said: “We have been reordering our research and development investments in defense and space. We have reassessed the space program and placed it on a firm future footing with increased attention to practical and economical applications of space and reductions in the cost of manned space flight. “. . . we have strengthened our defense research and development capability to insure that the country will not face the possibility of technological surprise or lack of the deterrent power necessary to protect our national security.” Therefore budget authority requested for Dept, of Defense research, development, technology, and engineering (rdt&e) was at all-time high. President proposed measures “to emphasize this Administration’s strong belief that science and technology can make significant contributions to the quality of American life and to economic growth”; to encourage private investment in R&D, including investment by small firms with innovative ideas; to use NASA and Atomic Energy Commission talents on clean, economical energy and safe, fast transportation— “this year we shall have the agency which sent men to the moon and back begin to assist the Department of Transportation in finding better ways to send people downtown and hack”—and to review economic policies which might restrict utilization and development of technical advances. President also said human resources spending would be 45% of FY 1973 budget, while defense programs would total 32%. Outlays requested for major environmental programs in 1973 were $2.5 billion, “more than three times the 1969 level.” {PD, 1/31/72, 104-17)
Officials of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast) testified during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology’s final hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. William H. Woodward, Director of Space Propulsion and Power, cited importance of isotope power systems to NASA planetary program: “The ability of nuclear electric power systems to operate for long periods . . . without consideration to distance from the sun is the primary feature which makes nuclear systems mandatory for outer planet missions. This self-contained energy input characteristic also provides a relative insensitivity to the operating environments encountered and this capability may be important on many missions, e.g., lander missions on planetary surfaces or missions which encounter high natural radiation fields.” Power requirements of most missions could be satisfied with low-level isotope power systems using radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). “Currently, rtg’s are scheduled for flight on the Pioneer Jupiter Flyby and the Mars Viking Lander missions and in addition, are planned for use in future outer planet programs.” Associate Administrator for oast Roy P. Jackson testified that solar energy could prove important energy resource. National Science Foundation’s rann (Research Applicable to National Needs) program had budgeted $4 million for solar energy investigations in FY 1973. Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Interior, and NASA were conducting inhouse studies. Solar Energy Subcommittee had been established by Federal Council on Science and Technology Committee on Energy Research and Development Goals to assess benefits to recommend r&d funds and programs. Subcommittee was first time solar energy had been considered at this level of national planning. NASA was evaluating concept for generating electric power from solar cells in space and transmitting power to earth via microwave beam, which would deliver more concentrated solar energy than naturally received on earth’s surface. Collecting in space also could be continuous, rather than having to stop at night or in cloudy weather. Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, described oast manpower problems and methods to alleviate them. Though oast manpower applied to aeronautics had increased 90% since 1966, manpower for all other efforts had decreased by 56%. Growth in aeronautics could not be provided continuously by transferring personnel from space projects. “In the short term we will continue to meet the increased need for aeronautics manpower by retraining and reassignment of personnel at the Research Centers. For the Ions: term we have initiated a program to encourage the training of students interested in aeronautical sciences. ... we are continuing the cooperative NASA/university graduate research and study program begun in FY 1971 where faculty and students are working with the Research Centers.” R.	D. Ginter, Director of Technology Applications, testified on NASA and National Science Foundation cooperation in applications: nsf’s rann program contained “two broad areas of mutual interest: Advanced Technology Applications and Environmental Systems Resources. One of our senior people has been assigned to focus this effort, coordinate task selection, and provide program management. During the next year we intend to expand our problem definition activity and prepare specific proposals for NSF consideration.” (Transcript)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight held hearing on policies and procedures governing disposal of real property under NASA Administrator’s control. Purpose was to determine whether legislation should be enacted to require formal reports to Congress on real estate disposed. General Services Administration surveys had determined that certain lands at Wallops Station, Langley Research Center, and Lewis Research Center were excess to NASA needs. Congress had not previously been apprised of plans for property’s disposal by gsa. Subcommittee heard testimony of NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz. GSA was surveying LeRc’s Plum Brook Station, Wallops Station, LaRC, and Marshall Space Flight Center. Final decisions had not been made. (Transcript)
Effect of 1972 elections on congressional committees dealing with science and environment was discussed in Science article. Chairmen of both House and Senate space committees had been replaced. Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, was retiring at age 77 after 31-year career in Congress. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had been defeated in Democratic primary and would leave Congress at age 81 after serving in House since 1945. Rep. Earle Cabell (D-Tex.), member of Science and Astronautics Committee, was defeated in the general election. He was to have been one of six House members of congressional board to oversee new Office of Technology Assessment. Board also lost prospective member with defeat of Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). (Walsh, Science, 11/17/72, 25-6) November 18:	NASA and Boston Univ. Dept, of Astronomy sponsored symposium “Life Beyond Earth and the Human Mind” at Boston Univ. Panel Chairman Richard Berendzen, Boston Univ. astronomer, had said symposium was being held because recent findings in astronomy, biology, chemistry, engineering, and physics had indicated high probability of existence of extraterrestrial life. Many scientists believed that “within the next few decades some form of communication will be achieved with intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe.” Panelists were anthropologist Dr. Ashley Montagu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology physicist Dr. Philip Morrison, Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan, Dean Krister Stendahl of Harvard Divinity School, and Dr. George Wald of Harvard Univ., winner of 1967 Nobel Prize for medicine and researcher in biochemical evolution. Dr. Sagan said human technology had reached stage where man could detect another civilization as advanced as his. “Most optimistic estimate of civilizations in our galaxy is one million, which means one per many hundred thousand stars.” Searching stars one by one could take hundreds of years. Dr. Montagu said that “some other forms of life are probably more intelligent than we, which can explain why they haven’t contacted us.” Dean Stendahl said discovery of life elsewhere would teach mem that God’s domain is larger and would give man better idea of his place in it. Contacting other beings might help man to stop viewing God in his own image. Dr. Wald said he was convinced that life existed elsewhere in galaxy but he doubted man would ever contact it. Dr. Morrison predicted man would receive and verify message from another civilization. Message would be technical, scientifically coded communication received over many months or years. NASA filmed symposium to produce educational film. (NASA Release 72-213; Leary, W Post, 11/24/72, CIO)
NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Richard C. McCurdy testified on decrease in research and program management (r&pm) budget in House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearings on FY 1973 NASA authorization: Requested $700.8 million was decrease of $26.5 million from FY 1972. Ceiling of 26 850 was proposed for Civil Service component of nasa in-house work force, 1500 lower than original 1972 ceiling—bringing total reduction since 1968 peak to 8300 positions, or 25%. NASA had planned to achieve 1973 ceiling by normal attrition, but rate of attrition was running 22% lower than required and Center directors had been instructed to use reduction-in-force procedures as necessary to reach ceilings. Deputy Associate Administrator for Organization and Management Bernard Moritz testified that under FY 1973 authorization bill all NASA facility projects would be presented for approval and funding under full disclosure concept. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), Director of Facilities in Office of Administration, entered prepared statement detailing $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities and explained $8 million request for facility planning and design within that total. First $3.5 million was for “regular recurrent” requirements and $4.5 million for “special” requirements. Of the $4.5, $3.75 million was for space shuttle facilities, including preliminary engineering reports for larger 1974 and 1975 programs. Second portion was for large aeronautical facility —$750 000 for design of full-scale subsonic wind tunnel that would ultimately cost $150 million to $200 million if approved, with total design cost of $7 million to $10 million. Requested FY 1973 funds would complete design on drive section of tunnel. Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology George W. Cherry described FY 1973 disbursements for aeronautics: Important part dealt with reduction of jet aircraft noise, with $28.5 million requested for research and technology to continue this work. Roughly one half was for research and technology attacking noise generation and noise propagation; $12.4 million'was for programs for near-term relief from jet aircraft noise. Of the $12.4 million, $9 million was requested for engine-modification development program and $3.4 million for development of operational procedures for noise abatement. Cherry presented audiovisual demonstration of effectiveness of engine modifications and operational procedures. (Transcript)
Former Congressman H. Allen Smith of California was quoted as having said in letters to Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Cal Tech that he would not seek to enforce law passed Oct. 21 to change jpl name to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Smith had written: “I have no intention of bringing any lawsuit or any other action to force this name change. There are many laws on the federal books which are not enforced.” Wall Street Journal said it was “doubtful” that Congress would reverse itself on measure. NASA officials had already found House Committee on Science and Astronautics “unwilling to help provide relief.” (WSJ, 11/24/72) Nov. 24-Dec. 8: U.S.—U.S.S.R. Working Groups 2 and 4, meeting at Manned Space Center on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp), defined antenna locations on Soyuz and confirmed that U.S.S.R. would build antennas; negotiated interface signal characteristics for radio communication and ranging systems and confirmed 428-km (266-mi) ranging capability; agreed on end-to-end compatibility tests of radio and hardline communications; resolved U.S. very-high-frequency amplitude-modulation implementation requirements for Soyuz systems, defined design of cable communications systems including cable lengths, junction boxes, and Soviet supply responsibilities; and discussed intercenter control communications, establishing basis for March negotiations. (NASA proj off)
Boeing Co. Board made executive changes: President T. A. Wilson was elected Board Chairman, succeeding William A. Allen, whose retirement would become effective Sept. 30. Senior Vice President Malcolm T.	Stamper was elected President and member of Board. Wilson would retain responsibilities of Chief Executive. Charles M. Pigott was elected to Board. (WSJ, 10/3/72, 13)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin were received by Vice President Boris Bakrac of the Assembly of Croatia and met with President of Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts, Dr. Grga Novak, during two-day visit to Zagreb, Yugoslavia. Astronauts were touring Europe to discuss Apollo 15 mission with scientists. (FBis-Yugoslavia, 2/4/72, 112)
Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Vice President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, presented report on Luna 20 samples to Academy. He had earlier, on May 4, published data on soil sample in Pravda. Luna 20 had landed near moon’s Apollonius Crater in mountainous area between Sea of Crises and Sea of Fertility and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna 20 soil was light grey, porous consertal (of texture in which irregular crystals interlocked) material containing fewer glassy, fused particles than Luna 16 samples from Sea of Fertility. Average particle size was 70-80 millimicrometers with largest particle in excess of one millimeter. Albedo value was higher than for samples returned by Luna 16, Apollo 11, or Apollo 12. Basic mass of particles were anorthositic rock containing large amount of feldspar, metallic iron, and olivine. “The lunar samples’ surprise proved to be the presence of pulverized metallic iron, which . . . does not oxidize, as distinct from terrestrial iron. This discovery may be of great practical significance. We have shown experimentally that under certain conditions it is possible to obtain such iron in the laboratory from basalts. If we succeeded in developing cheap technology for the industrial production of inoxidizable iron, this would give technology a magnificient construction material.” Understanding nature of formation of anorthosites would be of even greater significance. “Perhaps it will even elucidate the most ancient history of our planet. A popular hypothesis once existed among geologists that the earth’s crust originally consisted of anorthosite rocks. Now it has unexpectedly received strong ‘corroboration’ from the moon. “After study of the lunar rock the nocturnal luminary appears before us as a ‘twofaced Janus.’ On the moon’s visible side vast territories are occupied by basaltic seas, while the entire far side is practically a solid continent, apparently formed from anorthositic rocks. Such a sharp difference is one of the moon’s most exciting secrets.” (Izvestiya, fbis-Sov, 5/17/72, LI; Sov Rpt, 5/19/72, 1)
House Committee on Public Works favorably reported H.R. 16645, bill to amend Public Buildings Act of 1959 to provide for construction of Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Bicentennial Civic Center in District of Columbia. Committee in Report recommended honoring certain members of Congress by naming public works buildings for them, including renaming Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., “H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory.” New name would honor Rep. H. Allen Smith (R-Calif.), who would be retiring after 16 yrs in House. Laboratory was operated by Cal Tech for NASA. (H Rpt 92-1410)
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
NASA anounced retirement of Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective July 1 when he would become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries. Dr. von Braun had joined NASA in 1960 when Army Ballistic Missile Agency development team which he headed was transferred to NASA and formed nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Born in Germany, Dr. von Braun became director of German army portion of Peenemuende Rocket Center. Near end of World War II he led group of scientists to West, surrendering to allies. In 1945 he went to U.S. under contract to U.S. Army to direct high-altitude firings of V—2 long-range ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range. As Director of Development Operations Div. of abma, Dr. von Braun led development of Pershing Army missile and Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile, whose nosecone reentry test vehicle Jupiter-C was used to launch first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (Jan. 31, 1958). Dr. von Braun was msfc Director from July 1960 to February 1970, when he assumed his current position. He had received numerous awards and honors, including Dept, of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, British Interplanetary Society Gold Medal, Herman Oberth Award, NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership, Galabert International Astronautical Prize, NASA Distinguished Service Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Man of the Year Award, and Associated Press Man of the Year in Science Award. Dr. von Braun said he would leave NASA “with a deep feeling of gratitude for the wonderful and unique opportunities the agency has given me during the last 12 years . . . [and] with the knowledge that NASA has enough well thought out plans to keep it moving ahead for many years to come.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said Dr. von Braun’s retirement was “a source of regret to all of us. ... For more than a quarter of a century, he has served the United States as a leader in space rocket development. His efforts first put the United States in space” with Explorer 1 and as director of msfc “he directed the development of the world’s most powerful rocket, the Saturn V. All of us at NASA will miss the daily stimulation of his presence, but we are confident that we will continue to have the benefit of his inspiration and counsel in the continuing exploration and use of space.” (nasa Release 72—113; NASA biographical data)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight met for briefing by NASA on joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. Officials—Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Arnold Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; and Glynn S:'Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager—presented chronology of major events leading to mission, preliminary mission description, description of hardware elements, and data on management of engineering phase and of real-time operation. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. successfully flight-tested new intercontinental missile over 6300km (3900-mi) distance between Tyuratam in central U.S.S.R. to Kamchatka Peninsula. U.S. intelligence experts later said flight was first successful test of improved missile about as large as Soviet SS-9. (Hoffman, AP, W Star & News, 1/7/73, A5) December 31:	Use of solar energy to combat encroaching energy crisis was being examined seriously, Oliver Bell reported in Washington Post article. Solar energy panel had been established in Office of Science and Technology’s Energy Research and Development Goals Study and NASA was “actively researching whether it can become involved in the solar energy picture.” Solar satellite power station concept developed by Peter E. Glaser of Arthur D. Little, Inc., was being considered. Satellite would circle earth in synchronous orbit at 35 900-■ km (22 300-mi) altitude exposed to sun 24 hrs a day. Solar collector— lightweight panel of solar cells—would convert sun’s light into electricity, which would then he changed to microwave energy, beamed to earth, collected on antenna, and reconverted into electricity. Other proposals included earth-based system to reflect sun’s radiation onto solar furnace and boiler atop 460-m (1500-ft) tower, and system to use steel collecting surfaces with “greenhouse” effect to produce temperatures to 813 K (1004°F). Congress would decide whether Government would fund research into unconventional sources of power. (W Post, 12/31/72) During December: House Committee on Science and Astronautics released Solar Energy Research: A Multidisciplinary Approach, responses of Federal agencies to requests for information on solar energy research. NASA and National Science Foundation—agencies primarily responsible for Government’s solar energy efforts—had recommended Federal program of research and development to apply solar energy to U.S. heat and power needs. NASA had recommended development of economical systems for heating and cooling buildings; economical methods for producing and converting organic materials to liquid, solid, and gaseous fuels; and economical methods for generating electricity. If programs were successful, NASA had said, building heating could reach public use in 5 yrs and building cooling in 6 to 10 yrs, synthetic fuels could be produced from organic materials in 5 to 8 yrs, and electricity could be generated from solar energy in 10 to 15 yrs. There were no significant environmental disadvantages to wide use of solar energy. (Text)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. Johnson reported that in 1971 Thor-Delta launch vehicle had had five launches with four successes. One failure, on itos-b mission Oct. 21, had been caused by leak in 2nd-stage oxidizer system. Review board recommendations had been carried out and Jan. 31 launch of Heos 2 had been successful. Thorough design review and certification was in process for launch by new-configuration Thor-Delta of itos-c in April. All critical components of old and new configurations had been completely and intensively reviewed by independent group and most previous qualifications had been verified. Estimated cost of responding to review board recommendations was $2 million for FY 1972, $3 million for FY 1973, and $5 million per year thereafter. (Transcript)
Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, during hearings hy House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology on FY 1973 NASA authorization, testified that recently developed NASA technology could have increased supersonic transport’s investment return rate. Calculations had been made showing that “incorporation of now emerging technology for static stability augmentation and active flutter control could have allowed a weight savings, and thus a payload increase, of better than 16,000 pounds, or an additional return on investment of about 7.5 NASA research and technology in aerodynamics, configurations, materials, structures, propulsion, and avionics applicable to advanced long-haul transport aircraft design showed “real promise.” Application of automated active control concepts “could result in considerable weight savings by eliminating the need for inherent aerodynamic stability and thereby reducing the size of control surfaces. It could also result in reduced structural fatigue for longer life, lower structural loads for lighter structures, and ride quality control and active damping of aircraft flutter for a more comfortable ride.” (Transcript)
Willis H. Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, described functions of NASA advisory committees in testimony before House Committee on Government Operations’ Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Government. Subcommittee was conducting hearings on public access to information under Freedom of Information Act, which required public accessibility to advisory committees [see June 5]. NASA Historical Advisory Committee, established in 1964, advised and assisted NASA management in implementing NASA historical program. Committee met annually to review program and its relation to academic and public activities. Research and Technology Advisory Council and Related Committees (rtac), established in 1967, provided consultation and advice on advanced research and technology goals in aeronautics and space and reviewed work in progress. NASA Space Program Advisory Council and Related Committees (spac), established in 1971, provided comprehensive space program advisory structure for NASA management on goals and objectives. NASA Tracking and Data Acquisition Panel, established in 1972, reviewed and advised on potential application of new technologies in carrying out tracking and data acquisition functions. Panel would be disbanded following its final report in near future. Aerospace Advisory Panel, established by NASA Authorization Act of 1968, reviewed safety studies and operation plans and reported on them to NASA Administrator. Membership of NASA advisory committees was drawn largely from universities, nonprofit organizations, industry, and other Government agencies. Scientific and technical subjects addressed by committees were open to public access through meetings and public had direct access to NASA officials and committee members. (Testimony)
Dr. Karl Klager, Vice President and Director of Science for Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., was named winner of 1972 James H. Wyld Propulsion Award by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for his development of hybrid and solid propellants. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 11; aiaa pio)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Vice President and Group Executive of General Electric Co. and former nasa Administrator, delivered 1972 Tizard Memorial Lecture at Westminster School in London. Discussing man’s future in space, Dr. Paine evaluated role of applications satellites: Their “great economic and social value” was apparent “although their full potential is not yet appreciated. Men on every continent regularly use these services today; shares can be bought in the enterprises that provide them. We must not, however, overlook the equal value of the new information about the earth’s origin, history, environment, and destiny that our more basic lunar and planetary scientific programs are providing. Already studies of radiative energy transport in the atmosphere of Mars have contributed to terrestrial meteorology; lunar geological surveys have provided new clues to the early formation and structure of earth. The line between science and application in this rapidly advancing area is continually shifting and new scientific understanding of such questions as the origin of the Ice Ages might be of incalculable human importance.” (Text)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s FY 1973 authorization request before House Committee on Science and Astronautics as hearings opened. He emphasized importance of space program to U.S. national economy: “Scientific knowledge, scientific exploration, and the practical applications of aeronautics and space are enormously important in their own right. But perhaps most important of all is the need for the United States to have a continuously advancing technology. To meet the pressing social problems of our times requires above all a sound economy operating at a high level of employment to generate the tax revenues required at all levels of government. To maintain such an economy in a competitive world, we must increase our productivity year after year, decade after decade. The only way in the long term to keep increasing our productivity is through advancing our technology. “I know of no other activity which has done and can do as much to keep the United States strong in advanced technology as NASA’s programs in space and aeronautics.” Economic necessity for advanced technology; “the direct practical benefits of space applications and improved aircraft, including their significance for national defense; and . . . the human and future practical values of increased understanding of the earth, sun, moon, planets, and universe—these are the basic reasons for maintaining a strong national program in space and aeronautics.” Dr. Fletcher said that NASA’s FY 1973 program “moves forward in that it fully supports President Nixon’s decision to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle, the keystone to the Nation’s future in space; it continues our major ongoing space programs; and it provides a 50 percent step-up in our work in aeronautics. It is realistic in that it supports these objectives within a fiscal year 1973 budget approximately equal to that of last year, and under a plan that does not commit the Nation to higher total NASA budget levels in future •• years.” (Transcript)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
H.R. 12824, $3.379-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, was introduced by Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/1/72, H556)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) told press in Washington, D.C., that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would include probe of Apollo 14 crew’s decision to carry 200 privately minted silver medals on Jan. 31-Feb. 7, 1971, mission in scheduled Aug. 3 hearings on commercial exploitation of Apollo 15. (AP, Pasadena Star-News, 8/1/72)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics released For the Benefit of All Mankind: The Practical Returns from Space Investment. Updated report of spinoff dividends from space exploration covered application of space technology to communications, weather forecasting, business and industry, management, agriculture, environment, aeronautics, education, medicine, home and marketplace, and municipal and urban affairs and in foreign countries. Committee concluded that dividends were “fallout of ingenious application of space flight experience.” Dividends already paid, “coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on our space investment for the benefit of mankind.” (H Rpt 92-1452)
Subcommittee on NASA Oversight submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Space Shuttle-—Skylab: Manned Space Flight in the 1970’s, status report prepared by Committee staff at request of Subcommittee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague, from information from NASA space flight Centers and key industrial contractors. Conclusions on Skylab program were that program was within projected costs; bulk of equipment and systems were meeting design requirements in performance and reliability; and, despite some problems in procuring and integrating experiments, schedules were being met and no flight delays or significant cost increases were anticipated. Serious consideration was recommended for several options: possibility of flying backup Skylab B in 1974-1976 period; possible revisits to Skylab A after first three flights; and use of remaining Saturn IB launch vehicles in earth resources and applications flights after Skylab A program, during 1974-1978 period. Conclusions on space shuttle program were: Sufficient technology existed to undertake development of fully reusable, low-operation-cost, earth-orbital shuttle. Number of design possibilities had been studied, covering range of development costs. Regardless of design chosen, as development costs were reduced, system recurring operating costs increased. In addition to reducing cost of near-space operations by order of magnitude, shuttle offered many opportunities for increased flexibility of earth resource surveys and management, space manufacturing, and short-term rapid-response laboratory facilities. And shuttle could also be used to improve national security position. (Text)
Sir James M. Lighthill, Research Professor of Royal Society of London, was presented in Moscow with two capsules containing lunar rock samples brought from moon by U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (launched Sept. 12, 1970). In making presentation Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy of Sciences expressed hope that gift would “facilitate a further development of contacts between Soviet and British scientists.” (SF, 12/72, 459)
Senate approved S.R. 261, making minority changes in committee assignments. Sen. James L. Buckley (R-N.Y.) was removed from Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.) was added. (CR, 2/23/72, S2379-80) February 23—24:	NASA officials continued testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson reported “excellent results” in first acoustic tests, completed in November 1971, of experimental quiet engine for conventional takeoff and landing (ctol) aircraft. “In an unsuppressed baseline configuration . . . the noise levels were the equivalent of at least 3 EPNdB [epndb, effective perceived noise in decibels] lower than the original targets. In a first cut simulation of an acoustically suppressed nacelle which was not an optimum design, the noise levels were from 7 to 9 EPNdB lower yet, with aerodynamic performance losses no greater than expected.” It appeared possible to design an advanced version of ctol engine “which will incorporate all the advances in technology and will have a more nearly optimum trade-off between noise reduction and installed weight penalty.” In FY 1973, $2.5 million was requested for program to reduce noise of short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to 95 epndb at 500 ft (150 m). Tests at Flight Research Center of quieted T-34 high-bypass-ratio engine operating with simulated wing-flap system would develop design data for both quiet, experimental stol (questol) aircraft program and quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine program. Vertical takeoff and landing aircraft (vtol) noise reduction program, with budget request of $2.5 million, focused on lift fans with additional work on helicopter rotor noise. Acoustic and aerodynamic data would continue to be developed in tests at Langley, Ames, and Lewis Research Centers. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), described NASA role in Joint nasa, Federal Aviation Administration, and Dept, of Defense microwave landing system (mls) development plan to provide landing system for civil and military use to replace current very-high-frequency (vhf) landing system. NASA would provide personnel in faa mls Project Office, chairmanship of the mls Interagency Advisory Group, flight-test validation of the mls for stol operations, and extension of our work in FY 1973 to include ctol and vtol aircraft. “We are convinced the national microwave landing system program will make significant contributions toward noise abatement, airport congestion relief, and, especially, safety enhancement in the airport area.” Gerald G. Kayten, Director of Transport Experimental Program Office in oast, said on Feb. 23 that NASA programs would “provide a foundation upon which industry can base the design and development of the new stol systems in the late 1970’s, and upon which the Government can establish criteria for certification and regulation of such systems.” Programs also would enable Government to make 1976 decision on vertical short takeoff and landing (v/stol) incorporation recommended in Dept, of Transportation Northeast Corridor Report. “NASA’s main focus is on propulsive-lift technology for effective and economical STOL capability, engine technology for development of quiet and clean STOL propulsion systems, and airborne STOL avionics and system technology.” Technology represented “totally new capability based on major advances in each of several technical disciplines.” Albert J. Evans, Director of Military Aircraft Programs Office in oast, on Feb. 24 described support of military aircraft development programs. NASA had assigned research engineers to F-15 and B-l aircraft and Air Force prototype systems program offices. “This has put NASA ‘on the scene’ as technical problems become recognized and defined, and brings NASA’s technical capabilities ... to bear on the problems at an early date.” F—15 would make first flight early in FY 1973 “with about 12,000 nasa wind tunnel hours behind it, and much technical consultation by NASA staff members with the Air Force and the industry that is developing the F—15.” F—15 operational engine would be installed at Lewis Research Center to analyze air flow through engine components, combustion efficiency, and performance characteristics. nasa would analyze F-15 engine and airframe performance and flight-test aircraft at LeRC, where similar tests would be run on Air Force AX aircraft in cooperation with usaf. In B-l program, four frc engineers would be assigned to usaf Systems Program Office and contractor to assist in establishing flight-test requirements and instrumentation to verify analytical design techniques and ground-test data obtained at small scale in wind tunnels and information from simulator studies. (Transcript)
Former astronaut James A. McDivitt—Special Assistant to Manned Spacecraft Center Director for Organizational Affairs since May—announced his resignation from NASA and Air Force, effective Sept. 1, when he would become Senior Vice President of Consumer Power Co. in Jackson, Mich. He would be on terminal leave from July 1 until Sept. 1. McDivitt, Air Force brigadier general, had commanded Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) and Apollo 9 (March 3-13, 1969) and had left Astronaut Office in June 1969 to become Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA Release 72-131)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics since 1961, was defeated as candidate for reelection to Congress during Democratic primary in California. (Dem Natl Com; Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Gerhard B. Heller, Director of Space Science Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center, died in Nashville, Tenn., at age 58 of injuries received in automobile accident. Heller had begun career in 1940 at Peenemuende Rocket Center in Germany. He had come to U.S. with Dr. Wernher von Braun’s rocket group after World War II and worked with Army Ordnance Corps until transfer of group to msfc in 1960. During nasa career Heller had pioneered in thermal control of earth satellites. He had served as director of Space Sciences Laboratory’s Thermophysics Div. before becoming Laboratory director in 1969. (msfc Release 72-128)
Aviation pioneers to be enshrined in Aviation Hall of Fame at Dayton, Ohio, Dec. 15 were listed by Aviation Week & Space Technology: l/g Claire L. Chennault of World War II Flying Tigers; Leroy,R. Grumman, aircraft designer and manufacturer; James H. Kindelberger, aircraft executive; and Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
Office of Senate Republican Leader Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said Sen. Scott would nominate President Nixon for Nobel Peace Prize to be awarded in winter 1972. Scott aide said Senator was preparing documentation citing President’s initiatives in People’s Republic of China visit and Soviet summit meetings, (upi, NYT, 7/19/72, 15)
Space shuttle was “investment in the future,” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, said in Aerospace article. Controversy over manned versus unmanned space flight had been “negated” by advancing technology that provided “entirely new approach to space operations.” Shuttle combined “advantages of man in the cycle with a degree of economy hitherto unobtainable.” Fundamental reason for shuttle program was “to make available a means of routine access to space, to remove the constraints imposed by an earlier level of technology, to progress from space adolescence to full maturity.” (Aerospace, 4/72, 3-9)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics, at closing session of term, elected to defer action on S.R. 193, bill passed by Senate July 21 to return Cape Kennedy to original name of Cape Canaveral, and on similar House bill originated by Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-FIa.), in 1971. (O Sen, 10/1/72)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on planetary exploration program at opening session of FY 1973 nasa authorizatization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Dr. Naugle presented plan under study for “much more modest outer planets exploration program” instead of originally proposed two-mission, four-spacecraft Grand Tour of all outer planets, canceled because of budgetary restrictions. Jupiter exploration would continue. “We are studying a mission for the initial exploration of Saturn. We would take advantage of the rare alinement of the planets to launch two Mariner-class spacecraft in 1977 on a trajectory which would carry them first past Jupiter and on to Saturn to investigate that strange planet. ... At present, this program appears to be an excellent outer planets mission within the current constraints. However, we are studying other options with our science advisory groups to determine the set of outer planets missions which provide the most significant scientific information.” Viking project to softland spacecraft on Mars in 1976 remained “most significant element of the ongoing planetary exploration program.” Mariner 9’s orbiting of Mars had been major highlight in 1971 planetary program. To date, “Mariner 9 . . . has been in orbit 96 days, is still healthy and operating nominally. ... it has transmitted back to Earth over 5700 pictures of Mars, a number of closeups of its two moons, and measurements of surface features and atmospheric properties by ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers.” NASA had mapped approximately 66% of Martian surface at resolution of 1 km (0.6 mi) or better. “To date we have visited Venus and Mars, and will soon reach Jupiter and Mercury. Within the next year we shall have studied Mars in detail from orbit and within 5 years shall have begun an intensive automated exploration of its surface. By the end of the decade we expect to know whether life exists, has existed, or could exist on Mars.” Three spacecraft to be launched in 1972 would open “brand new areas of research or application.” Pioneer-F would be launched in March to begin study of Jupiter. Next, Earth Resources Technology Satellite would open new field of earth study. In fall, astronomy Explorer satellite would begin to study gamma rays from stars. Major
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space announced it would hold hearings in July on U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for cooperation in space, medicine, science, and environment. (Reuters, W Post, 5/27/72, A23)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 14070, $3.429-billion FY 1973 NASA authorization bill, $50 million above NASA budget request of $3,379 billion. Bill, reported to House April 11, allocated $2,651 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $700.8 million for research and program management. NASA budget request of $163.4 million for aeronautical research and technology was increased $48.5 million to $211.9 million. In House report, Committee scored previous cut in funding for aeronautics and recommended increase to support 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation by expediting solution of “major problems in aviation today: noise pollution and safety.” Bill allocated $41 million of the increase (for $50-million total) toward R&D to retrofit civil aviation fleet with noise reduction modifications and $7.5-million increase (for $24.7-million total) for aviation safety. Of safety funds, $3.8 million was for technology to modify civil aircraft to use Federal Aviation Administration’s new microwave landing system by 1978, $700 000 for turbulence research, and $3 million for research on aircraft collision avoidance. Bill increased NASA budget request for technology utilization from $4 million to $5.5 million. Of increase, $1.2 million was to be spent in applying NASA technology to problems in urban structures, fire safety, transportation systems, and energy conversion and $300 000 for applications engineering products and patent licensing. Committee deleted $4 million from $59.6-million NASA request for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and restored $4 million deleted by Office of Management and Budget for Earth Observation Satellite (eos), follow-on development to Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts). Committee said it was expressing concern that NASA placed “higher priority upon certain expensive scientific projects . . . than it does upon space applications project which Congress considers most important.” Committee considered level of funding for space applications “inadequate” and urged “a substantial increase in the budget for fiscal year 1974.” (H Rpt 92-926; Com Off)
Half-hour documentary film “The Worlds of von Braun” was televised by wmal-tv in Washington, D.C. Documentary, filmed at NASA Wallops Station, included footage never before televised, from NASA, U.S.S.R., and moon. In film, Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, discussed his careers as World War II rocket expert and with NASA in interview with wmal-tv Public Affairs Director James Clarke. Washington Post TV critic Victor Cohn said of film: “Wernher von Braun is a compelling man and a true believer . . . and the joy is that of seeing any man so thoroughly absorbed in a discipline that he absorbs you, even at the distant end of a TV tube.” (nasa Special Ann, 1/4/72; W Post, 1/7/72, Bl)
Need for national technology policy was urged in Science article by Dr. J. E. Goldman, Senior Vice President for Research and Development of Xerox Corp. As U.S. began to channel technical efforts toward programs of social significance, “we must remember one of the important lessons of our recent past; the history of the space program ... is a lesson in the mastery of the institutional technique necessary to bring together the segments of the intellectual, industrial, and technological community needed to fulfill goals in a timely fashion. If we choose to ignore this, if we set aside the space program’s experience as nothing more than a $20-billion waste, then by our irrationality we will endanger the ultimate achievement of such important societal objectives as better housing and the renewal of our inner cities.” (Science, 9/22/72, 1078-80) September 23:	Washington Post reported that U.S.—U.S.S.R. environmental protection committee established by May 23 treaty would permit placement by both nations of seismic devices on each other’s territories. Purpose would be to predict earthquakes but Post said devices also could detect underground nuclear tests and distinguish them from earthquakes. If used for test detection, “devices could close the last possible gap in an extremely controversial field.” U.S. had maintained that underground tests could not be banned because of inability to monitor adherence to ban by both sides. Post said cursory check of Dept, of Defense and Arms Control and Disarmament Agency sources had yielded “no one who knew that the pact contained this provision.” (Berger, W Post, 9/23/72) September 25:	NASA was instrumenting areas in five national parks to monitor any adverse effects of sonic boom generated by test flights of two YF—12 aircraft being operated by NASA, (frc, Flight Operations; Av Wh, 9/25/72, 11)
Directors of North American Rockwell Corp. proposed to change firm’s name to Rockwell International Corp. at meeting in El Segundo, Calif. If change was approved by shareholders at Feb. 15, 1973, annual meeting all trace of name North American Aviation, Inc., founded in 1928, would disappear, Los Angeles Times said later. NR had been formed in 1967 through merger of North American Aviation and Rockwell-Standard Corp. (LA Times, 11/12/72) November 11:	Four hundredth anniversary of discovery of Tycho’s Star by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe. Supernova that increased in brightness by millions of times, Tycho’s Star was first unusual star ever recorded by European astronomers and first definite proof that sky was not immutable. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 11/6/72) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, told press in Rio de Janeiro he did not believe in flying saucers. “Such things do not exist. I gather the whole business is a hallucination.” Dr. von Braun was in Brazil to promote sale of communications satellite equipment to government. (AP, W Star & News, 11/12/72, A5)
Prediction that deep-space probes would be launched by combination rockets propelled by chemical, nuclear, and electric engines by 1980 had been made by Soviet aerospace designer Valentin P. Glushko in interview by Moskovsky Komsomolets, New York Times reported. Rockets would be launched with liquid or solid chemical fuel. Nuclear engine would take over when spacecraft penetrated earth’s atmosphere. Times also reported that color film “The Taming of the Fire” had been released in Moscow. Film, based on life of Sergey P. Korolev, head of Soviet space program until his death in 1966, raised philosophical questions of use of scientific advances for military purposes. Film showed Soviet dictator Josef Stalin at end of World War II calling for Soviet development of military rockets to counter weapons he expected Dr. Wernher von Braun to develop in U.S. Dr. von Braun, while not actually portrayed in film, was “frequently mentioned by name.” (Shabad, NYT, 10/16/72, C17)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews briefed House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Applications Technology Satellites F and G and Synchronous Meteorological Satellite. Projects had been reported to be experiencing technical and cost problems. NASA review had found in ATS project “considerable progress has been made in . . . completion of . . . thermal structural model. Other elements, such as the integrated communications transponder, were not keeping pace . . . significant imbalance had developed in the total project. It has been necessary then to reschedule and reestablish the proper phasing between project elements.” Manpower and expenditure rates had been reduced, management changes had been made, and reporting arrangements had been strengthened. Reduced project content would provide for protoflight ATS-F and required integration and testing. “These actions are expected to be completed this summer. Our appraisal ... is that the ATS—f launch will occur in the early spring of 1974 with ATS—G to follow in a year to eighteen months.” Costs were expected to remain within FY 1973 estimate of $180 million to $215 million exclusive of $48.4-million vehicle costs. Review of SMS had confirmed need for correction in funding and scheduling because of introduction of advanced design features not adequately assessed in program definition. “Primary emphasis is now being placed on completing engineering model verification tests during . . . this year to insure an orderly initiation of the production phase in early FY 1973.” NASA had established and was monitoring milestone schedules, had strengthened contractor’s project management organization—including change in project manager and transfer of key NASA personnel to organization—and had improved flow of information between NASA and contractor to improve project visibility. Parts procurement was proceeding satisfactorily after “special remedial attention.” SMS development schedule would be 33 mos, placing launch of SMS—A in early fall of 1973. Second spacecraft, sms-b, was scheduled to be launched five months later. SMS—B total runout cost was estimated at maximum $50 million exclusive of $8.4-million vehicle cost, reflecting FY 1973 reprogramming requirement of $4.5 million. “I believe that this project is now proceeding on a sound basis and will prove to be a very significant addition to NOAA’s [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s] weather satellite system.” (Testimony)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on earth resources program during FY 1973 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications: Program was probably most significant present element of earth observations program, using advanced satellite and ground-based techniques. FY 1973 funding of $48.4 million would go for procurement (including spacecraft development) and flight operations, data-handling system development, and aircraft program already underway. Queried on pace of program, Mathews said NASA had “good basic program” that would merit expansion. Results from erts-a satellite—to be flown with high degree of participation by users from Government, industry, and universities— should show program merited extension and how it should be done. Mathews also cited need for regulation and control of information as it was gathered more nearly completely and accurately. Gathering information was “less of a problem and less of a challenge than the proper use of this information.” (Transcript)
m/g Don R. Ostrander (usaf, Ret.), former NASA Director of Launch Vehicles, died at Andrews Air Force Base hospital, Md., of cancer at age 58. He had retired from Air Force as Vice-Commander of Ballistics System Division in 1965 and became Vice President for Planning, Bell Aero Systems Corp., until 1971. Gen. Ostrander had been appointed to NASA position in 1959. (W Post, 10/28/72, B10; Rosholt, Administrative History of NASA) October 26—27:	California newspapers reported reaction at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to news of renaming facility for retiring California Congressman H. Allen Smith (D-Calif.) [see Oct. 3 and Oct. 21]. News had come as surprise to officials, who had refused to comment. JPL engineer Charles D. Hepburn had said that several engineers deplored renaming of facility for political office holder when there were many great local scientists who had contributed to space program. Hepburn had said it was “insult to technology .... Our work has to do with the physical universe, not with the meanderings of a political career.” (LA Times, 10/26/72; Pasadena Star-News, 10/27/72) October 27: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 13 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information needed for the operative weather forecast service.” Orbital parameters: 891-km (553.6-mi) apogee, 866-km (538.1-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; fbis-Sov, 10/30/72, LI; SBD, 10/30/72, 266)
NASA applications program was reviewed by Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Objectives of program were “to establish useful applications of space and space know-how through the development of user relationships, through the development of requisite technology, and through the conduct of appropriate ground, airborne and space flight investigations.” Space was “a magnificent vantage point to survey the surface of the earth and to expedite and enhance the flow of information around the globe.” Core of program was new applications of earth observations and communications, but “other areas associated with the unique environment of space, particularly weightlessness, show promises which must be explored, developed and exploited.” Space manufacturing processes offered good example. “Space applications, however, should not be envisioned just as activities that lead to satellites or laboratories in space, for . . . applications relate to contributions to men and women who . . . reside right here on the ground. Know-how provided by experience with the development of space systems can be applied to . . . areas involving housing, transportation, health care and many others.” NASA participation in Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) would increase significantly in FY 1973 as transition occurred from planning to carrying out Tropical Experiment and Data Systems Test, both planned for CY 1974. Planning would be accelerated for Global Experiment during 1976-1977. garp was being conducted by World Meteorological Organization and International Council of Scientific Unions to increase understanding of circulation of atmosphere and provide mathematical and physical basis for long-range weather prediction, determination of feasibility of large-scale climatic modification, and assessment of consequences of man’s pollution of atmosphere. (Transcript)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of members to National Science Board: Dr. Wesley G. Campbell, Director of Hoover Institute on War, Revolution and Peace; Dr. T. Marshall Hahn, Jr., President of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ.; Dr. Anna J. Harrison, Mt. Holyoke College chemist; Dr. Hubert Heffner, Stanford Univ. physicist; Dr. William H. Meckling, Univ. of Rochester economist; Dr. William A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institute of Oceanography; Dr. Russell D. O’Neal, Executive Vice President for Aerospace with Bendix Corp.; and Dr. Joseph M. Reynolds, Louisiana State Univ. physicist (reappointment). Terms would expire May 10, 1978. (PD, 8/7/72,1198, 1205) August 3:	NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched
President Nixon announced appointment of John S. D. Eisenhower as Chairman of new Classification Review Committee to implement security classification system established March 8. President also released text of National Security Council directive governing classification, downgrading, declassification, and safeguarding of national security information. Government departments were requested to establish computerized data index system for classified material. President said: “This application of computer technology across the board should lead to a much more manageable classification system and greatly enhance the flow of information to the public.” Executive Order 11652 of March 8 included NASA among agencies originating classified material. (PD, 5/22/72, 870-1) May 18:	House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation. Appropriation—$58 million less than budget estimate of $3,407 billion, but $39 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,310 billion—allocated $2.55 billion for research and development (r&d), down $50.9 million from budget request; $69.7 million for construction of facilities, $7.5 million below budget estimate; and $729.45 million for research and program management as requested. Committee did not distribute r&d funds but recommended balanced program to continue “useful and significant . . . projects in space science, exploration, practical applications of advanced technology, and aeronautics”; approved authorization bill’s levels for aviation safety and noise reduction program; and deferred request of $5.54 million for construction of facilities for manufacturing and final assembly of space shuttle at “various locations” until “such sites are decided upon and plans are developed.” (H Rpt 92-1071)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space on U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on cooperation in space [May 24]. He described events that led to agreement on joint rendezvous and docking mission: Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, then nasa Administrator, had suggested to Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov during April 1970 meeting in New York “possibility of cooperation in the area of astronaut safety, including compatible docking fixtures for space stations and shuttles.” National Academy of Sciences President, Dr. Philip Handler, had conveyed NASA’s interest to Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. “In July, Dr. Paine suggested directly to President Keldysh that this possibility be considered.” Dr. Low said if docking mission was successful, “both countries will have increased their chances of rescuing astronauts in distress without commensurate increase in the costs of a standby rescue capability. It is here that the joint test mission is particularly important. It will give us the opportunity to identify and resolve under the best possible conditions the problems we can expect to flow from differences in language, equipment, and operational procedures.” Joint working groups were making significant progress. Space meteorology group was organizing experiments to advance temperature sounding from satellites and microwave measurement of precipitation zones, ice conditions, and sea surface roughness and temperature. Another joint working group had provided for coordination of meridional sounding rocket networks in Eastern and Western Hemispheres and had begun to exchange operational and scientific meteorological data. Working group on natural environment was defining coordinated experiments in remote sensing of the environment related to vegetation, geology, and the oceans. Oceanographic effort would continue satellite and ship measurements over same ocean area. In group on scientific investigation of near-earth space, moon, and planets, “experts from both sides have been working on a common system of lunar coordinates and a program for compiling a complete map of the moon on the scale of 1:5,000,000.” Group on space biology and medicine was “considering certain common standards and procedures to increase the comparability of information.” If U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together to achieve “intimate and complex common goal” like joint space mission, “we will have built mutual confidence and trust. The symbol of US and Soviet spacemen meeting in orbit before the eyes of the entire world cannot help but ameliorate attitudes, viewpoints and expectations throughout the world.” (Transcript)
Symposium on use of electronic computing machines in production management was held in Moscow by Soviet specialists and U.S. engineers from Digital Equipment Corp. Digital Equipment Corp. Vice President Theodore Johnson later told Tass correspondent that agreements signed between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in science and technology May 24 would widen firm’s contacts in U.S.S.R. (fbis-Sov, 5/26/72, LI)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union address before joint session of Congress and sent written message to Congress. He said in speech: “In reaching the moon, we demonstrated what miracles American technology is capable of achieving. Now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth, of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man.” He would propose new “Federal partnership” in technological research and development “with Federal incentives to increase private research, federally supported research on projects ... to improve our everyday lives.” In written message President said dealings with U.S.S.R. had “advanced the prospects for limiting strategic armaments. We have moved toward greater cooperation in space research and toward improving our economic relationships.” President said he would request Dept, of Defense budget increase “to preserve the sufficiency of our strategic nuclear deterrent, including an allocation of over $900 million to improve our sea-based deterrent force.” He had instructed dod “to develop a program to build additional missile launching submarines, carrying a new and far more effective missile.” Space program had been reoriented to produce increased domestic benefits: “In recent years, America has focused a large share of the technological energy on projects for defense and for space. These projects have had great value. Defense technology has helped us preserve our freedom and protect the peace. Space technology has enabled us to share unparalleled adventures and to lift our sights beyond earth’s bounds. The daily life of the average man has also been improved by much of our defense and space research—for example, by work on radar, jet engines, nuclear reactors, communications and weather satellites, and computers. Defense and space projects have also enabled us to build and maintain our general technological capacity, which—as a result—can now be more readily applied to civilian purposes. “America must continue with strong and sensible programs of research and development for defense and for space. I have felt for some time, however, that we should also be doing more to apply our scientific and technological genius directly to domestic opportunities. Toward this end, I have already increased our civilian research and development budget by more than 40 percent since 1969 and have directed the National Science Foundation to give more attention to this area .... “I recently announced support for the development of a new earth orbital vehicle that promises to introduce a new era in space research.” Reusable space shuttle would lower cost and risk of space operations and open new opportunities in weather forecasting, communications, monitoring natural resources, and air traffic safety. “The space shuttle is a wise national investment.” Proposals included increase of $700 million in civilian R&D, 15% increase over previous year. And technically oriented agencies like NASA and Atomic Energy Commission would work more closely with agencies with primary social mission like Dept, of Transportation. {PD, 1/24/72, 74-92)
The election of Dr. John V. Harrington, Director of the Center for Space Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as Vice President, Research and Engineering, with Communications Satellite Corp. was announced. He would join the corporation in October. (ComSatCorp Release 73-49)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), Committee member, introduced H. Con. Res. 223 requesting the President to proclaim July 16—22 of each year as “U.S. Space Week.” The resolution was referred to the Committee on the Judiciary. (CR, 5/23/73, H3976)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics published The Federal Government and Energy R, & D.: Historical Background. The report, by the Science Policy Research Div. of the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, said energy research and development in the Federal Government had “followed a typically American pragmatic course. A need has appeared—necessary research has been conducted— development has occurred almost simultaneously.” One exception was the National Science Foundation. “Its support of basic research includes energy R&D projects which may or may not be based on any demonstrated needs for practical results.” To a much less extent, “basic research is conducted in other Federal agencies but their projects are usually mission-oriented.” There was no comprehensive national energy R&D program or policy. (Text)
The General Accounting Office released its study Cost Growth in Major Weapons Systems made at the request of the House Committee on Armed Services. Cost overruns on 45 major weapon systems in the U.S. arsenal had totaled $31.3 billion. Each of the 45 systems had incurred an overrun. (Text) March 26—27:	Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn), Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, delivered the report United States Military Posture for FY 1974 to the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Defense Appropriations: Strategic parity existed between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. “While the Soviet Union has a substantial advantage, not only in the numbers of strategic missiles, but also in missile throw-weight, the United States still has a substantial advantage in other areas of key importance to the overall strategic balance—e.g., missile accuracy, MIRVs [multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles], submarine quietness, sonars, and numbers of bombers and bomber payload. And, while the Soviet Union has enormous advantage in air defense, without an extensive ABM [antiballistic missile] defense . . . the air defense could be substantially undercut by ballistic missile attack, particularly ... a large number of mirvs.” The U.S. advantages were transitory, resting on a “technological lead that has been steadily narrowing over the past decade.” With the momentum of the Soviet offensive research and development program, “we cannot preclude the possibility that our technological lead in this area may further diminish or disappear altogether during the current decade.” Adm. Moorer believed “that the Soviet Union will soon succeed in its efforts to develcrp an effective MIRV system for its strategic missiles. Thus, the Soviet Union may be able to challenge our lead in both missile guidance and mirvs . . . , and thereby pose a significant threat to our Minuteman force.” (Text) In a statement confirmed later by Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim, Adm. Moorer said the U.S.S.R. was actively testing three new intercontinental ballistic missiles and might deploy 60 improved multiple-warhead versions of an existing missile during the summer. He said the People’s Republic of China was expanding production of weapon-grade nuclear materiel and slowly but steadily building a stock of strategic and tactical nuclear weapons. (Beecher, NYT, 3/28/73, 4; dod pio) March 27:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Fernando de Mendonca, Director General of the Brazilian Institute for Space Research (inpe), signed a Memorandum of Understanding to extend the NASA—inpe cooperative project in remote sensing using the Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite launched by NASA July 23, 1972. The project’s purpose was to advance applications of spacecraft and aircraft remote sensing to monitor environmental conditions. INPE would establish a data-acquisition station at Cuiaba, central Brazil, and a data-processing facility in Sao Paulo state. There would be no exchange of funds; both agencies would share all data and information necessary for the conduct of the program; and inpe would make available to NASA, cost free, copies of erts data it acquired and processed. The data would be available to the domestic and international community. (nasa Release 73-82)
U.S.S.R. Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin A. Vershinin died at the age of 74 after a long illness. Vershinin had directed Soviet military aviation during World War II. After the war he had commanded the antiaircraft defense forces and had been Chief of the Air Force and U.S.S.R. Deputy Minister of Defense. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 1/4/74, VI; NYT, 1/3/74, 36) During December:	NASA employee retirements totaled 215 during the month, including 37 at Headquarters, 58 at Marshall Space Flight Center, 50 at Langley Research Center, 22 each at Goddard Space Flight Center and Johnson Space Center, 18 at Kennedy Space Center, and 8 at Lewis Research Center. Among retirees were Dr. Homer E. Newell [see Dec. 26], nasa Associate Administrator; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth [see Dec. 28], NASA Director of Key Personnel Development; Vincent L. Johnson [see Dec. 26], Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences; Dr. Charles A. Berry [see Dec. 21], nasa Director of Life Sciences; General Counsel Arthur D. Holzmann; William T. O’Bryant, Director of Lunar Programs in the Office of Space Science; C. Dixon Ashworth, Manager of the Astronomy and Solar Observatory Programs; Director Adelbert 0. Tischler of the Low Cost Systems Office; and Dr. Hermann H. Kurzweg, Research Council Chief in the Office of Science and Technology, (nasa Off Personnel; nasa Off Comptroller)
Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.), with cosponsors from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, introduced H.R. 8871 to authorize the NASA Administrator to conduct research and development programs to increase knowledge of tornadoes, hurricanes, large thunderstorms, and other short-lived weather phenomena and to develop methods for predicting, detecting, and monitoring such atmospheric behavior. {CR, 6/20/73, H5064)
Resignation of NASA Associate Administrator for Astronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, effective Oct. 26, was announced. Jackson would rejoin Northrop Corp. as Corporate Vice President, Program Management. He had joined Northrop in 1953 and left to become NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Nov. 2, 1970. (nasa Release 73-221)
NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held a joint press briefing at Johnson Space Center on the commercial benefits from Skylab electronics technology. Robert H. Webster of Ampex Corp. said that the 28-track, high-reliability earth resources experiment package tape recorder developed for the Skylab missions was being tested for use by auto and truck manufacturers. Airlines and heavy equipment manufacturers were using it because of its environmental strength. Thomas H. Kenton, Westinghouse Regional Vice President for the Southwest, said that Westinghouse had manufactured two sensitive, low-light-level TV cameras for Skylab. The cameras could operate at light intensities 500 million times less than typical studio lighting conditions and equal to the light level of a dark moonless night. The cameras could be used for commercial TV camera systems. (Transcript)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
President Nixon announced the designation of Robert D. Timm Chairman of Civil Aeronautics Board, effective March 2. He would succeed retiring Secor D. Browne. The President also accepted the resignation of the first NASA Administrator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, as U.S. Representative to International Atomic Energy Agency. He submitted to the Senate the nomination of Alexander P. Butterfield to be Federal Aviation Administrator. (PD, 2/26/73, 189, 244; 3/5/73, 192) February 26-March 3: The nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine met in Moscow to exchange information on preliminary biomedical results of the Apollo 17 mission (Dec. 7—9, 1972) and Soviet research in weightlessness modeling. The Group agreed on common procedures to test body negative pressure, to make active orthostatic evaluations, and to make biochemical blood and urine studies, permitting comparison of pre- and postflight data on body functions. The Group also discussed biological experiments in space and countermeasures to weightlessness. The U.S. delegation—headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences— visited Soviet medical research facilities and the Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training. They examined spacecraft trainers, medical equipment used for cosmonaut training and evaluation, and medical instrumentation used on Salyut spacecraft. The Soviet delegation was headed by Dr. R. N. Gurovsky. The next meeting would be held in the U.S. in late 1973 or early 1974. (nasa Release 73-79) February 27:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 4567, House version of the $3.016-billion NASA FY 1974 authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said the “historic accomplishments of the Apollo program” were “an open record and an enduring tribute to a basic belief in human progress. The Apollo flights, in three short years, gave us an order of magnitude increase in our knowledge of the solar system. Although the epic Apollo voyages have ended, the results of these missions will provide the scientific, the technical, and medical, and the managerial communities with a rich store of data that will be studied and analyzed for many years to come.” NASA had completed the Apollo program and “moved from the era of learning how to live and work in space to a new plateau, where this Nation can utilize space and its unique capabilities for expanding its horizons in science and in applications, in defense, commercial activities and in international cooperation at reduced costs.” Skylab—scheduled for May launch—would be the “first post-Apollo step into the intensive utilization of space” and toward reorienting manned space activities to earth orbit. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) , scheduled for July 1975 launch, would be “a major step forward in meaningful and beneficial international cooperation in manned space flight” and a significant step in space safety and in reducing costs by cooperation. Later, the space shuttle would provide “ample additional opportunities for meaningful technical and economic cooperation in space.” One opportunity would be to carry sortie, lab being developed by group of European nations using their own funds. Closing out of Apollo activity would include “very careful screening of available production tooling for applicability to future shuttle or other NASA requirements.” Available flight articles included two Saturn V and two Saturn IB launch vehicles, one completed command and service module, two partially assembled csms, and a backup Skylab cluster. This hardware would he placed in storage for potential use. (Transcript)
Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in hearings on NASA’s tracking program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology that the percentage of Spacecraft requiring real-time control would increase from 70% to 90% in 1975. With increased number of satellites and volume of data, as well, new tracking capability would be required. NASA proposed a new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) for the late 1970s—possibly leased from the private sector—to support low-earth-orbit spacecraft. Two synchronous satellites would relay telemetry, voice, and video data from other spacecraft to a single U.S. earth station, or from the station to the spacecraft, tdrss would support all spacecraft below 5000 km (3100 mi), including shuttle, Spacelab, and automated spacecraft. The new system would give 88% continuous contact with spacecraft, realtime interactive experiments, and reduced dependence on foreign-based tracking stations. Half the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network stations could be closed, saving “tens of millions of dollars.” (Transcript)
Office of Technology Assessment: Background and Status, a report to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was published by the Library of Congress Congressional Research Service, Science Policy Div. No appropriations had been approved as yet for the OTA, which had been established “as an aid in the identification and consideration of existing and probable impacts of technological application” under Public Law 92-484 Oct. 13, 1972. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had requested $289 000 for OTA salaries and expenses under H.R. 7447, an FY 1973 supplemental appropriations bill. No funds had been requested by the House, and the requested appropriation had been deleted in conference. The Senate Committee on Appropriations had recommended a $3 980 000 FY 1974 ota appropriation. The FY 1974 legislative branch appropriations bill (H.R. 6691) had been passed July 19, but the conference committee had not yet met to resolve differences between the House and Senate versions, ota funding would not be allotted until the appropriation was available. (Text)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held a hearing on H.R. 8348 [see June 4] and H.R. 9133, duplicate bills to authorize the National Science Foundation to designate certain institutions of higher learning national energy research centers. Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NSF Deputy Director, described the NSF program of Research Applied to National Needs (rann) devoted to energy: “It includes research on analytic techniques and potential conservation measures directed at meeting U.S. energy requirements while satisfying environmental quality restraints; energy conversion research directed at developing technologies that allow more efficient use of our energy resources; research on superconducting transmission lines and other aspects of energy and fuel transportation; and research on advanced coal technology, geothermal energy, and perhaps most importantly, on solar energy.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Armed Services voted in closed session to appropriate $172.7 million to continue production of F-llls at a one-a-month rate through 1975 [see June 6]. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/21/73)
After a 35-yr local dispute, the “Great White Sands Missile Range Lost Gold Treasure Affair” had “blossomed into a national mystery,” the New York Times reported. Attorney F. Lee Bailey recently had been engaged by 50 unidentified claimants who sought prospecting rights to gold bars and treasure said to be buried on the missile range and to be worth up to $1.5 billion. In 1963 the Army, insisting there was no treasure, had banned prospectors from the range because of danger from exploding target-practice shells. Rep. Harold L. Runnels (D-N. Mex.) had proposed a joint Federal-state search for the treasure, said to have originated in various ways. (Sterba, NYT, 10/13/73, 37) October 14:	Doctors in Galveston, Tex., had pronounced the condition of Apollo 13 Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., “good and stable” following skin grafts for bums he received in an Aug. 22 aircraft accident, United Press International reported. Haise had been burned over 55% of his body and had suffered a lung ailment following the crash of a World War II training aircraft he had been piloting for an air show group, (upi, M Her, 10/14/73)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology opened its hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.), Committee Chairman, said the Subcommittee would be particularly concerned with “the extent of progress toward the enunciation of a national aeronautics and aviation policy.” The Subcommittee had been partially responsible, he said, for the reduction of emphasis on aeronautics because it was “not aggressive enough in its insistence that more emphasis be placed on aeronautics during . . . the late I950’s when the Committee was first established, and the early 1960’s when the tremendous emphasis on space tended to push aeronautics . . . into the background.” Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that reorientation of NASA’s space and aeronautical programs to meet changing national goals had been completed “without jeopardizing the continuing development of a broad base for new knowledge, and the potential for meeting future, but presently unseen, needs.” In the oast aeronautics program the research and technology base took priority over experimental programs. The R&T base was “work that is unparalleled in the U.S. It is the data base from which springs new ideas for development in the future.” When faced with the necessity to cut expenditures, “we had to consider primarily a reduction in our work on flight experiments and experimental programs.” Among examples of meeting future needs, hydrogen as a long-term aircraft fuel for the distant future was a “concept of potential major importance to the reduction of air pollution, while simultaneously conserving our increasingly scarce petroleum reserves.” Hydrogen eliminated hydrocarbon pollution and was “a more efficient fuel, but the reduction of NOx [oxides of nitrogen] may require additional effort.” The “earliest likely commercial use of hydrogen as an aircraft fuel will be about 15 to 20 years hence.” Hydrogen was “a low-density, cryogenic fuel which represents problems of relatively large, insulated tanks, the need for materials to keep their strength through wide temperature variations, very low temperature hardware including pumps, valves, seals and associated maintenance. In addition to cost, hydrogen is difficult to store and transport. . . . Our experience with the practical use of liquid hydrogen in NASA’s space program suggests that there will be some complexities to solve but these should not be insurmountable.” Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in OAST, reported on the quiet, clean, short-haul experimental engine (qcsee) program to integrate and demonstrate technology required for an environmentally acceptable and economical powered-lift propulsion system, “qcsee will utilize a basic existing engine core, modified as required to mate with specially designed low-pressure spool fans and turbines to build up an experimental engine. This, together with appropriate flight-type acoustic nacelles and wing section installations, will be tested for noise and performance and operating characteristics. The design and test program will provide the technology base needed to help guide Government . . . environmental rulemaking and to provide industry with data to evaluate propulsion concept effectiveness and development risks.” George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in OAST, described the status of aeronautics programs after revisions necessitated by FY 1974 budget restrictions. The General Electric Co. quiet engine contract had been completed and both engines delivered to NASA. Engines A and C were scheduled for extensive in-house research programs at Lewis Research Center. An in-house study underway at LeRC would determine the technical value of another contracted effort, for a second-generation quiet engine. “In the meantime, we are working to generate component noise design and performance data, so that a significant noise reduction below that demonstrated by the first Quiet Engine can be obtained in any future engine program. No important area in aeronautical propulsion has been terminated, although funding levels for certain portions of the aeronautics programs have been readjusted based on a review of priorities. The F-8 high-speed supercritical wing verification project was not cut back or terminated. During FY 1973, the project was completed according to plan. The results were very encouraging and gave confidence as to wind-tunnel test results at transonic speeds.” A follow-on to the F-8 was under study. Depending upon results, a follow-on F-8 flight-test program might be undertaken in FY 1975. (Transcript)
Capt. John T. Geary (usn) became Director of the Naval Research Laboratory, succeeding Capt. Earle W.„Sapp who was reassigned. Capt. Geary had been Deputy Commander for Planning, Programming and Resources with the Naval Electronics System Command. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27; nrl pio) July 17:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz testified on the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1-2 mission in a joint hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Conrad said the mission had proved the feasibility of maintaining a large space station for manufacturing in space. “I think the data will show that you can do all the things up there that you can do down here and many of them perhaps better.” Skylab 1-2 earth resources and solar telescope data would show “that eventually space has a very definite role in helping mankind and in solving some of these problems that are in front of us. After all, the Sun is probably the most single efficient nuclear device that we know about. We do have an energy crisis. We need to better understand that. We just scratched the surface with our 30,000 photographs we brought back. I think you will find that the Earth resources data, when coupled with . . . erts [Earth Resources Technology Satellites] and those types of sensors will ... as an overall systems design, tie all of these things we talk about with different satellites into a big picture.” At the mission’s completion the Skylab 1—2 crew could hand over to the Skylab 3 crew a Workshop that could harbor “a 100-percent successful 56-day mission.” Dr. Kerwin said Skylab 1—2 medical experience enabled him to extrapolate a 56-day mission “without difficulty.” He felt the inflight portion would be “a piece of cake.” Postflight, the Skylab 3 astronauts might “feel a bit loggier than we did.” But Skylab 1—2 had demonstrated that this was a “minor illness . . . that you get from being 28 days in space and that you can return very rapidly to normal.” Weitz said Skylab’s earth resources survey equipment permitted a more selective data acquisition than that of unmanned erts. “I think we have shown in the past with unmanned satellites that part of the problem is that you have a continuous data flow, not all of which is usable, but all of which must be processed and reduced and analyzed in some form.” With Skylab equipment “we can track point sites” and “be selective . . . pick out specific sites, fields, or a bend in the river, if you want to study silting.” (Transcript)
U.S.S. Wasp, World War II aircraft carrier and NASA prime recovery vessel, made her last voyage—to the ship breakers’ yards at Kearny, N.J. The 30-yr-old ship had been purchased for scrap metal by Union Mineral Alloys Corp. for $505 250. She had served as the prime recovery vessel for NASA Gemini-Titan manned space flights: Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965), Gemini 6 (Dec. 15-16, 1965), Gemini 7 (Dec. 4-18, 1965), Gemini 9 (June 3-6, 1966), and Gemini 12 (Nov. 11-15, 1966). (Phalon, NYT, 6/19/73, 39; nasa Hist Off)
The James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for 1973 was presented by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics to Gerard W. Elverum, Jr., Manager of trw Inc. Energy Systems Operations Div., and Norman C. Reuel, Vice President for Liquid Rocket Programs and Production Operations of Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div., during Las Vegas, Nev., ceremonies. Elverum was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the deep throttling rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” Reuel was cited for “outstanding leadership and technical contribution to the liquid hydrogen rocket engine for the Apollo lunar mission.” (Av Wk, 11/12/73, 9; aiaa pio)
President Nixon addressed himself to the energy crisis in a speech over nationwide radio and TV: “We are heading toward the most acute shortages of energy since World War II. Our supply of petroleum this winter will be at least 10 percent short of our anticipated demands, and it could fall short by as much as 17 percent. Now, even before war broke out in the Middle East, these prospective shortages were the subject of intensive discussions among members of my Administration, leaders of the Congress, Governors, mayors, and other groups. From these discussions has emerged a broad agreement that we, as a Nation, must now set upon a new course. In the short run, this course means that we must use less energy—that means less heat, less electricity, less gasoline. In the long run, it means that we must develop new sources of energy which will give us the capacity to meet our needs without relying on any foreign nation.” The President announced steps to lower energy consumption. He asked the Atomic Energy Commission to speed licensing and construction of nuclear plants and would ask development of an emergency energy act. {PD, 11/12/73, 1312-8)
President Nixon signed S J.R. 37 into Public Law 93-8, redesignating the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President, who died Jan. 22. The President said: “Few men in our time have better understood the value of space exploration than Lyndon Johnson.” As senator, Johnson had written, introduced, and helped to enact legislation which created NASA. He had called NASA the “proudest legislative achievement” of his congressional career. As Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, he had served in the “early years of exploration when the groundwork was laid, and the determination made to put a man on the moon.” As President, Johnson had overseen the first Apollo flights, “in a way that led people beyond the adventure and the pride to the deeper meaning and the deeper benefits of space exploration.” President Johnson “by his vision and his work and his support” had drawn America up closer to the stars “and before he died he saw us reach the moon—the first great plateau along the way.” (PD, 2/26/73, 160)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on geothermal energy. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., Assistant Director for Research Applications with the National Science Foundation, testified Sept. 11 that geothermal energy was recognized as a “currently viable and relatively unpolluting energy resource.” Its importance depended upon development of new technologies and “resolution of institutional constraints.” NSF was recommending a program to develop necessary technologies and “to synthesize these into pilot plants capable of generating power from a variety of geothermal sources.” An advantage of geothermal energy was “that construction of power plants can be carried out in a relatively short time.” With solution of the technical problems in extracting the earth’s heat and converting it into electricity, “the commercial impact of geothermal energy could begin to be felt within this decade. Geothermal energy is, therefore, counted on to contribute at least regionally to a resolution of the energy crisis in the short term as well as to provide sizable blocks of energy in the remaining years of this century.” (Transcript) September 12:	The Federal Communications Commission approved five applications for permission to build domestic satellite networks—from American Satellite Corp., jointly owned by Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc.; rca Global Communications, Inc., and rca Alaska Communications, Inc.; gte Satellite Corp. and National Satellite Services, Inc., a Hughes Aircraft Co. subsidiary; American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; and Communications Satellite Corp. GTE also was authorized to begin interstate toll telephone service in competition with AT&T. ComSatCorp was given interim authorization to proceed with procurement of high-capacity satellites for lease to AT&T “at its own risk.” fcc said ComSatCorp appeared not to have complied with an Fcc order to form a separate corporation to engage in domestic satellite activities, (fcc pio; ComSatCorp Release 73-48; W Post, 9/13/73, D12)
U.S. Patent No. 3 781 647 was awarded to Peter E. Glaser, Vice President for Engineering Sciences of Arthur D. Little Co., for a system to produce electricity with satellite solar power stations. The proposal was to orbit satellites at 37 500-km (23 300-mi) altitude in geostationary position to convert radiation received by solar cells to direct current and then to microwaves for transmission to an earth station. There the microwave beam would be converted to electric power. The patent said a belt of solar cells 5 km [3 mi] wide around the earth could provide more than 200 times the projected world electrical energy requirements for 1980. (Jones, NYT, 12/29/73; Pat Off pio)
The National Science Foundation released National Patterns of R&D Resources: Funds & Manpower in the United States 1953—1973 (nsf 73-303). Total U.S. research and development spending was expected to reach $30.1 billion in 1973, 3% above the $29.2-billion 1972 level. R&D was expected to account for 2.4% of the gross national product (gnp) in 1973, down from 2.5% in 1972 and 3.0% in peak year 1964. The Federal Government would support 53% of U.S. R&D in 1973, with about 70% concentrated in defense and space programs. Almost 40% of R&D spending in the U.S. was for research, with 1973 basic research expenditures estimated at $4.5 billion and applied research at $6.8 billion. Development spending was estimated at $18.8 billion. Colleges and universities would perform nearly three fifths of U.S. basic research, with industry leading in applied research and development. An estimated 525 000 R&D scientists and engineers were employed in the U.S. in 1972, 1% fewer than in 1971. Of these, nearly 70% were employed by industry. (Text)
The U.S. defense outlay continued to increase despite improving relations with the U.S.S.R. and the People’s Republic of China, the U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement to limit strategic arms, the Vietnam cease-fire agreements, and sharp cutbacks in U.S. military forces, the Wall Street Journal noted. FY 1974 spending was projected at $79 billion, up $4.2 billion from FY 1973, “a shade above the Vietnam-war peak and a shade below the World War II pinnacle. While the White House talks detente, the Pentagon speaks of growing Soviet military power and the likelihood, given further price and pay inflation, of $100 billion-plus military budgets by the end of the decade.” (Levine, WSJ, l/Yl/73, 1) July 17—18:	NASA launched a series of 26 meteorological experiments on rockets and balloons from Wallops Station to provide an in-depth com> parison between remote sensors on satellites and sensors on rockets and balloons from a mid-latitude site. The project—divided into a day and night series to provide data both with and without solar energy input—• was conducted in conjunction with Nimbus 5 (launched Dec. 10, 1972) and Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) satellites. Four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched carrying Goddard Space Flight Center acoustic grenades to measure temperature and winds. The grenades were ejected and detonated in flight, one at a time, from 30- to 95-km (19- to 59-mi) altitude. The first Nike-Cajun was launched July 17 and reached an altitude of 117.4 km (72.9 mi). The rocket performed satisfactorily. Thirty of the thirty-one grenades were successfully detonated and the sound returns were received by the ground microphone array. The second Nike-Cajun launched 79 minutes later reached an altitude of 116.2 km (72.2 mi) and detonated all of its 12 grenades successfully. The third Nike-Cajun was launched July 18 to a 114.9-km (71.4-mi) altitude. Rocket performance was satisfactory and all 31 grenades were successfully detonated. The final Nike-Cajun was launched two hours later to an altitude of 120.7 km (75 mi). The rocket performance was satisfactory and all 12 grenades were detonated successfully. In addition to the Nike-Cajuns, the launches included 4 balloonsondes, 3 Viper Darts, and 15 Super Lokis instrumented to obtain density and temperature data. Participating in the program with Wallops Station were White Sands Missile Range, the Air Force, and GSFC. (WS Release 73-7; nasa Rpts srl)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on short-term energy shortages. Acting Director Darrell M. Trent of the Office of Emergency Preparedness testified that the U.S. “economy’s demand for all types of energy continues to increase at an amazing rate. However, our ability to find and produce domestic supplies of energy is not keeping pace with rising demand.” The U.S. was becoming increasingly dependent on foreign supplies. “Except for Alaskan discoveries, additions to domestic petroleum reserves have fallen behind production since 1967. Gas is already in short supply. ... At current growth rates, demand could double within the next 12 years over what it was in 1970. Because of the growing imbalance between domestic supply and demand, we may have to import as much as 60 percent of all the oil and gas we need in 1985. Such reliance on foreign sources of supply could pose serious problems for our national security. . . . The cost of our petroleum products alone could rise from about $6 billion in 1972 to as high as $45 billion by 1985, with grim implications for our troubled balance of payments.” (Transcript)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of James W. Plummer, Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.’s Space Systems Div., to be Under Secretary of the Air Force. He would succeed John L. McLucas, who became Secretary of the Air Force July 19. {PD, 3/12/73, 1378, 1381)
A Washington Evening Star and Daily News editorial commented on the supersonic transport effort: Environmental and economic problems and order cancellations had created a bleak outlook for the French and British Concorde. The modest budget request for research into the environmental impact of the U.S. SST by the Nixon Administration was realistic and should be approved by Congress “for the nation’s protection.” But the Administration should be “resigned to its defeat of 1971 in the building of an SST prototype.” (W Star & News, 2/8/73, A10) February 9:	Aspects of President Nixon’s FY 1974 budget requests were discussed in a Science article: The space program seemed “alive and well as it makes the transition into the post-Apollo era, despite recent fears . . . that its activities might be cut back severely.” NASA officials seemed confident the space shuttle would be built. The President had supported the project “although his new budget message contained no mention of the space program” and, “in Congress, it has survived handily all past attempts to kill it. The fact that the project helps sustain an aerospace industry that has suffered grievously from layoffs is a point lost on no one. And then too, NASA has going for it the fact that, both in Apollo and in the unmanned programs, it has generally met its goals and stayed within its budget.” Evidence existed “that the President does indeed look to a possible revival” of the supersonic transport “but not until later in the 1970’s. The new NASA budget contains $28 million—more than twice as much as last year’s budget—for research and development on supersonic technology. The work focuses on problems of noise, pollution, and efficiency of configuration.” (Carter, Science, 2/9/73, 551-2)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) introduced H.R. 32, National Science and Policy Priorities Act of 1973. The bill differed from S. 32, passed by the Senate in 1972 but never reported out by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics [see Jan. 4]. The new bill sought to protect the National Science Foundation’s pure science functions by allocating at least 40% of the science budget to nsf. {CR, 1/3/73, H27; nasa LAR,
Rep. John W. McFall (D-Calif.) introduced H.Res. 158, providing for 30 members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman, succeeding Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who had been defeated in a 1972 primary; Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.); Rep. John W. Davis (D-Ga.) ; Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) ; Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) ; Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.) ; Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Walter Flowers (D-Ala.); Rep. Robert A. Roe (D-N.J.) ; Rep. William R. Cotter (D—Conn.) ; Rep. Mike McCormack (D-Wash.) ; Rep. Bob S. Berg-land (D-Minn.) ; Rep. J. J. Pickle (D-Tex.) ; Rep. George E. Brown, Jr. (D—Calif.); Rep. Dale Milford (D-Tex.); Rep. Ray Thornton (D—Ark.) ; Rep. Bill Gunter (D-Fla.); Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio) ; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) ; Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) ; Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.) ; Rep. Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. (R-Calif.); Rep. Marvin L. Esch (R-Mich.); Rep. Lawrence Coughlin (R-Pa.); Rep. John N. Happy Camp (R-Okla.) ; Rep. John B. Conlan (R-Ariz.) ; Rep. Stanford E. Parris (R—Va.) ; Rep. Paul W. Cronin (R-Mass.) ; and Rep. James G. Martin (R-N.C.). {CR, 1/24/73, H442-H443; A&A 1972) January 24—25:	Symposium on recycling used glass containers was held in Albuquerque, N. Mex., by Univ. of New Mexico Technical Application Center (tac), Albuquerque Environmental Health Dept., and Glass Containers Manufacturers Institute. Representatives of NASA’s public technology program, glass researchers, and city and county officials discussed recycling glass into glassphalt road surfacing material, foams for building insulation, and other new products, tac operated one of NASA’s six Regional Dissemination Centers for space agency-developed technology. (nasa Release 73-7; nasa pao) January 25:	The Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp) Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate), largest and most complex international scientific experiment, would observe one third of the earth’s tropical belt from June 15 to Sept. 30, 1974, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. A network of satellites, ships, aircraft including NASA’s instrumented Convair 990, instrumented buoys, and land stations would collect meteorological data from the tropical Atlantic and adjacent land areas to improve forecast techniques for the equatorial belt. Brazil, Canada, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Mexico, Netherlands, Portugal, U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, and Venezuela, in addition to the U.S., would process data for compatibility. Data would be integrated by the gate data center and distributed in 1976. U.S. participation would be coordinated by NOAA. (noaa Release 73-5)
Science & Government Report commented on results of the March 19-21 Washington, D.C., meeting of the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation: “What is clear is that after two postponements of the Commission’s debut and a good deal of indecisiveness, at least on the Washington end, concerning how much R&D [research and development] cooperation to offer the Soviets, both parties are approaching the relationship with caution and no evidence of haste. We will no doubt be seeing more Soviet researchers than ever before, and access to labs in the USSR will be eased a bit for American visitors, but the politically inspired match of the two research communities should not be mistaken for a raging love affair.” (Sci & Govt Rpt, 4/1/73, 3)	... April 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, testified on nasa’s role in supersonic transport aircraft development before the House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans during FY 1974 appropriation hearings: “I don’t think we can turn our back on supersonic technology. This is a fact of life. Military planes are flying supersonically in this country; ssts are flying in Europe and Russia. We can not just say we don’t want to build a transport ourselves and therefore we should turn off all technology in this area. What we are doing in NASA is trying to address ourselves to the main problems with supersonic flight, both military and civilian. The main problems include the economic factors involved, the pollution of the stratosphere, and the noise.” NASA was the only agency qualified to investigate these problems but “I do think that the Congress has responsibility to determine any future development of a supersonic transport in this country, at least as far as the Government’s support of such a program, and it is not our intention to in any way change that decision.” (Transcript)
Sir Robert Watson-Watt, Britain’s “father of radar,” had died in Scotland at age 81, the Washington Post reported. Watson-Watt was credited with directing and accelerating development of radar immediately preceding World War II. He was best known for his work in the use of radio waves to detect aircraft, but also had developed an underwater detection system for use against German U-boats during the Battle of the North Atlantic. (Hailey, W Post, 12/7/73, C15) December 8:	The risk to future development of man’s life outside the earth was “that the public will come to denigrate what Skylab has done and rate it below the achievements” of Pioneer 10, an Economist article said. Pioneer 10’s pictures, “passable photographs” of Jupiter, were “better than no pictures at all, but if the evidence of the first space shots past Mars are anything to go by, useful results require the cameras to go in much closer than Pioneer was able to do, and to stay in orbit round the planet for long enough to take ... a set of controlled mapping pictures. Pioneer 10 has shown that it is going to be technically possible to do this; the next stage is to build the space probe that will do it. When it comes to this sort of detailed work, the instruments on board tend to need the fine adjustments that only men can give them.” The U.S. should be planning “another Skylab with instruments calibrated to look further into space than the present ones. The results could be even better than Pioneer 10’s.” (Economist, 12/8/73, 20)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on nasa’s FY 1974 applications program in authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. With communications satellite services being provided throughout the world “on a highly useful, economic, and profitable basis,” NASA had turned its emphasis to earth resources observations from satellites. “Perhaps the most significant event occurred last July [23] with the launch and successful operation of the first Earth resources technology satellite, . . . whose very special images of the Earth’s surface are being provided to users and investigators here and throughout the world every day.” More than 300 investigations were under way and “important uses are being defined in almost every area under study.” The Noaa 2 satellite launched by NASA for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Oct. 15, 1972, “afforded for the first time the measurement of temperatures at various heights in the atmosphere throughout the entire world on a truly operational basis.” The information was being rapidly provided to the U.S. Weather Service for prediction programs. In addition, more precise images of global cloud cover were being obtained night and day. Noaa 2, in conjunction with the continuation of the experimental program through the launch of Nimbus 5 in December, “bodes well for continued progress in meteorology.” New efforts in earth observations to start under the FY 1974 budget were in pollution monitoring, oceanography, and earth and ocean physics. In technology applications, NASA was supporting the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development on integrated utility systems to minimize energy consumption and waste output in housing units and the Dept, of Transportation in urban mass transportation. Special programs also included manufacturing in space. In a new lead-center concept, responsibility for support in particular disciplines had been assigned to Centers: Johnson Space Center—Earth Resources Center; Goddard Space Flight Center—Weather and Climate Center; and Ames Research Center—applications aircraft program. The Applications Program Integration Board (apib) had been established to evaluate major new proposals for applications or modifications to major ongoing efforts. (Transcript)
NASA participation in the National Science Foundation’s Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program was described by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NSF Assistant Director for Research Applications and former NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy. Dr. Eggers testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy during a hearing on energy research and development: “Particularly close ties are developing between nsf/rann and NASA in the field of Energy Research and Technology.” The major focus was on terrestrial applications of solar energy. Lewis Research Center was especially active in joint work on requests for proposals on solar thermal areas, photo-voltaics (use of the generation of electromotive force when radiant energy fell between dissimilar substances), flat plate collection, and heating and cooling of buildings. NASA had made a preliminary inventory of its test facilities applicable to nsf’s solar energy research program. nsf had requested NASA to review the status of solar insolation data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and, working with noaa, to examine the need for better data and methods. Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Cal Tech Environmental Quality Laboratory were jointly conducting workshops and studies in water heating and other solar technology applications. A NASA Wind Energy Workshop at LeRC would pursue plans for a wind energy research program. Other areas of NASA participation included research into bio-conversion of organic materials to fuels, thermal batteries and superconducting transmission technology, earthquake engineering, regional environmental systems, trace contaminants, and fire. (Transcript)
The Senate adopted S.Res. 10, establishing the number of members of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences at 13, and S.R. 12, which elected Chairman and majority members to the Committee. Majority members were Democrats Sen. Frank E. Moss (Utah), Chairman, succeeding Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), who had retired; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (Wash.); Sen. Stuart Symington (Mo.) ; Sen. John C. Stennis (Miss.) ; Sen. Howard W. Cannon (Nev.) ; Sen. James G. Abourezk (S. Dak.) ; and Sen. Floyd K. Haskell (Colo.). {CR, 1/4/73, D6; A&A 1972)
Skylab 2 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was retiring from nasa and the Navy effective Feb. 1, Johnson Space Center announced. He would become Vice President, Operations, and Chief Operating Officer, of the American Television and Communications Corp., a Denver-based cable TV firm, (jsc Release 73-158)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics during hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Dr. Fletcher explained the decision to cancel the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program because of FY 1974 budgetary restrictions. “The Air Force STOL program turned out to use some of the advanced concepts that we had developed in NASA and some of which we were planning to use on the QUESTOL.” The main difficulty with the Air Force advanced medium STOL transport (amst) “is that it doesn’t have the proper engine—you couldn’t operate a noisy transport like that for commercial uses, especially in a city—and we are proceeding post haste with the advancement of technology for an engine for missions such as that, in the quiet, clean, STOL experimental engine (qcsee) program.” It was not clear when the STOL would be phased into the current fleet. “The technology would be developed by and large for commercial aircraft, with quiet engines and at some later date either we or more probably a commercial company can put these technologies together and develop that STOL as the need requires.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics unanimously approved H.R. 11864, Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1973, introduced Dec. 10 as a clean bill incorporating amendments to H.R. 10952 [see Oct. 16] and 17 similar bills. Language changes more explicitly delineated agency responsibilities and two distinct program , phases. NASA would have major responsibility for developing solar heating and cooling equipment in the first phase. In the second, the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development would be responsible for installation, testing, and evaluation. A major amendment would require HUD to establish a Solar Heating and Cooling Information Data Bank. If a law created a permanent Federal energy agency, responsibility assigned to NASA and the National Science Foundation would he transferred to that agency. (House Rpt 93-769, reprint in Com Print, 2/74)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, addressed a joint symposium on space program planning of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the Society of Automotive Engineers in Denver, Colo. Points paramount for the U.S. space program, in his mind, were: “First, despite a year with all the trappings of potential disaster, NASA is coming through in pretty good shape. Second, now is the time for space planners—inside and outside the NASA family—to get serious about how best to use the space shuttle. Third, the single most important need for a healthy future space program is a substantially higher NASA budget request for Fiscal Year 1975. Fourth, Congress is willing to leave overall planning for future space options to the Executive Branch, but cavalier disregard for specific congressional decisions—such as we witnessed last January— is not likely to be so lightly accepted in the future.” (CR, 7/14/73, S13479)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., President testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development that the aerospace industry fully supported U.S. conversion to the metric system. He said the conversion was necessary if the U.S. was to continue to hold a prominent position in precision engineering in international trade, but urged that the conversion be timely, planned, orderly, and not necessarily exclusive of other measurement systems, (aia Release 73—11)
Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., announced organizational changes to strengthen new roles in domestic and international satellite communications. Three new vice presidents were elected by ComSatCorp’s Board of Directors: David C. Acheson, Senior Vice President and General Counsel; John A. Johnson, Senior Vice President; and George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Division. The subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. was formed to carry out ComSatCorp’s U.S. domestic programs. It would be headed by John A. Johnson, President; Joseph H. O’Connor, Vice President and Treasurer; John L. Martin, Jr., Vice President; and Jerome W. Breslow, Secretary. ComSatCorp had formed the International Systems Div. to consolidate all activities related to the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Global Satellite System. The division would be headed by George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Div.; Richard R. Colino, Assistant Vice President for Technical Development and Support; and H. William Wood, Assistant Vice President for International Systems Operations. (ComSatCorp Release 73-9)
President Nixon sent a $268.7-billion FY 1974 national budget request to Congress—an increase of $18.9 billion over FY 1973. The budget projection for the succeeding fiscal year was included for first time, with the FY 1975 budget estimated at $288 billion. The national total for FY 1974 included an R&D budget of $17.4 billion (an increase of $300 million), with $3.1 billion requested for civilian and military space programs. Emphasis was on practical, immediate results from R&D rather than expanding scientific knowledge, with reduced priority for space research. The total request for NASA new obligational authority of $3,016 billion (1.2% of the total U.S. budget) was $391 million less than the FY 1973 noa of $3,407 billion. FY 1973 funds of $91 million were to be carried over to FY 1974. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase $74 million, from $3,062 billion in FY 1973 to $3,136 billion. The FY 1973 increase of $11 million had been largely for space shuttle engine and airframe design and development. Of the FY 1974 budget request, $2,288 billion would go for R&D, $112 million for construction of facilities, and $707 million for research and program management. In manned space flight, elimination of Apollo funding reflected successful completion of the Apollo program with the Apollo 17 mission. Manned space flight operations—including $233.8 million for Skylab; $90 million for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) ; $220.2 million for development, test, and mission operations; $21 million for space life sciences; and $15.5 million for mission systems and integration— would decrease from $879 million in FY 1973 to $580.5 million. The decrease reflected removal of space shuttle funding from the manned spacecraft operations category to separate program status. The FY 1974 budget request allocated $475 million to the space shuttle program for the orbiter, main engine, solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tanks, technology and related development, and vehicle and engine definition. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring the total for manned space flight (including the shuttle) to $1,057 billion, down $100 million from FY 1973. Funding for space science programs would decrease $95.2 million, from $679.2 million in FY 1973 to $584 million in FY 1974. The decrease reflected suspension of the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) program, in which two flights had originally been scheduled during 1976-1978. The physics and astronomy program would receive $95 million, down from $126.2 million; lunar and planetary exploration would receive $312 million, down from $331.9 million; and launch vehicle procurement would receive $177 million, down from $221 million. NASA’s space applications programs would receive $153 million (a decrease of $35.7 million), including $51 million for weather and climate research with satellites, meteorological soundings, experimental instruments and techniques, and for the Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) ; $13.9 million for pollution monitoring, including $9 million for Nimbus-G oceanographic and air pollution observation satellite; $42.6 million for earth resources survey; $10.7 million for earth and ocean physics; $3.1 million for space processing; $22.1 million for communications, including a multi-use communications experiment satellite (ats-f) and a Canadian Cooperative Satellite (cas-c) ; $3 million for a multidisciplinary Earth Observing Satellite (eos) ; $4.5 million for shuttle experiment definition; and $2 million for application studies. The total requested for NASA’s aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $232.5 million in FY 1973 to $240 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $150.6 million in FY 1973 to $171 million, including $22 million for experimental engine programs, $9.3 million for flight experiment programs, and $30 million for system technology programs. Space research and technology would receive $65 million, and nuclear power and propulsion $4 million (a drop from $17.1 million). Tracking and data acquisition funding would rise from $248.3 million in FY 1973 to $250 million. The Dept, of Defense FY 1974 budget of $85 billion was at an1 all-time high,	$4.1	billion above the	FY 1973 budget	authority, but was 28.4% of	total Federal outlays for	FY 1974 (a	percentage decrease from 29.0% in FY 1973 and the lowest proportion since 1950) and 6.0% of the	gross	national product	(the lowest	GNP	percentage in 24 yrs, down	from	6.2% in FY 1973). The dod	total	included $8.7 billion for research, development, test, and evaluation (rdt&e), a $600 million increase over FY 1973. Of the requested rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, the first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, a prototype satellite to demonstrate precise navigation capabilities, continued flight experiment programs, and technology programs in advanced navigation, guidance, sensors, cooling, reentry, and propulsion—would receive $604.6 million (up $169.9 million). Military sciences would receive $509.8 million (up $13.7 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,787 billion (down $86 million), and missiles rdt&e $2,245 billion (up $143 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for the Trident submarine-launched ballistic missile system ($1,712 billion, up $917 million), new Air Force F—4J jet fighter aircraft ($131 million), CVN-70 aircraft carrier ($657 million, up $358 million) and F-15 air superiority fighter ($1,148 billion, up $240 million). Decreases of $198 million in funding for the Safeguard antiballistic missile system, $208 million for the Poseidon missile, and $64 million for the short-range attack missile (sram) reflected a modernization program, as dod continued the transition from combat support in Southeast Asia to strengthening baseline forces. The Dept, of Transportation budget request of $9,025 billion was a decrease of $2,302 billion from FY 1973. dot funding would continue a 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration funding of $2,126 billion would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect the upper atmosphere, and design a safer and more productive airport system. The Atomic Energy Commission FY 1974 budget request of $3,066 billion, up $382 million over FY 1973, would cover production of nuclear materials to make electricity and for use in nuclear weapons and as nuclear reactor fuel, research into availability of source materials, operation safety, and development of techniques for long-term storage of radioactive waste. The National Science Foundation FY 1974 budget request of $582.6 million was down $63.1 million from FY 1973, but r&d funding would increase from $510.3 million in FY 1973 to $554.1 million. Programs would emphasize research into domestic problems, problems of long-range national interest, and effects of R&D on the economy. Priorities would include development of solar power as an energy source and of tunneling technology for urban use under the Research Applied to National Needs (rann) program and development of a very-large-array radioastronomy facility. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in the Dept, of Commerce) budget request of $343.0 million, down from $366.7 million in FY 1973, would permit continued improvements in weather monitoring, prediction, and warning; continuation of its polar orbiting satellite system and implementation of a two-geostationary satellite system in the weather satellite program; major hurricane modification research; and expansion of research on marine ecosystems analysis to determine effects of ocean dumping. The Environmental Protection Agency budget request of $148.7 million was down from $173.1 million in FY 1973. (omb, Budget of the US Govt, FY 1974; US Budget in Brief; Special Analysis; nasa budget briefing transcript; DOD Release 44-73; AIAA Release 73—3; nsf Release 73-106)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified on NASA’s balloon program as the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications concluded FY 1974 authorization hearings: “Balloons are used for a variety of programs in both atmospheric science and astronomy. We, in many cases, launch with a balloon a prototype of an as-■ tronomical instrument which we may later fly on a sounding rocket or orbiting satellite.” Payloads ranged from test instruments to an infrared experiment; “as you get above the water vapor in the atmosphere you can do very good infrared experiments, and you can keep the instrument pointed precisely for quite long periods . . . and do very valuable scientific work at nominal cost.” Balloons were launched from Texas, South Dakota, Missouri, and Alabama in the U.S., and from Canada, Australia, and Argentina. “One of the beauties of the balloon program is that they can be launched from many areas, and we can recover the payloads. . . . We use the same payload many times for balloon observations, and it’s not at all unusual to use the same payload for half a dozen flights with sometimes slightly different instrumentation each time.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held hearings on NASA’s proposed space tug. The hearings sought to determine the tug’s role in the space shuttle program, the tug’s fiscal impact on the program and the overall manned space flight budget, the operational impact on NASA’s latest proposed mission model and on projected cost-per-flight of the shuttle, the Dept, of Defense role in development and use of the tug, and NASA’s and industry’s progress in tug conceptual design. Charles V. Donlan, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and Capt. Robert F. Freitag (usn, Ret.), Deputy Director of Advanced Programs, presented an overview of the tug program Sept. 5 but made no recommendations, pending completion of a study. NASA would later recommend program approach and supporting rationale. Representatives of General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div,, McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Martin Marietta Co. Denver Div., and Grumman Aerospace Corp. presented results of efforts to date, with supporting data to substantiate the options afforded NASA in proceeding with tug development. Options under study included liquid-storable and cryogenic systems for a growth-stage tug, the Centaur as an expendable or recoverable launch vehicle, an expendable Thor-Delta vehicle, an expendable or recoverable Agena vehicle, and an expendable or growth-stage Transtage vehicle. (Transcript) September 6:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 584 from Plesetsk into an orbit with a 331-km (205.7-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 89.9min period, and 72.9° inclination. The satellite reentered Sept. 20. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; Sov Aero, 9/10/73, 110)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director Chester M. Lee testified on the status of the joint 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission, during the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. Activities were being directed to identify and define candidate astp experiments to provide data for U.S. and Soviet scientists, provide for coinvestigators in both countries, require active cooperation by Soviet cosmonauts, and use existing hardware where possible. Experiments would be discussed at the March meeting of U.S.-U.S.S.R. working groups [see March 15-30]. No launch vehicle work specifically for ASTP had begun, but modification, testing, and checkout would begin during the coming year at Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39 and other facilities. The program was “on schedule and moving well toward our current mission date of mid-July 1975.” (Transcript)
The House attitude toward solar energy as a factor in relieving the energy crisis was discussed in a Washington Post guest column by Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, and Rep. Mike McCormack (D— Wash.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Energy, both of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Members of the subcommittees had expressed the urgent need for an accelerated program in solar energy research and development and had encouraged NASA and the National Science Foundation to use funds provided to develop “an expanded, mission-oriented program.” But they warned against expecting that solar energy would provide any significant relief from the energy crisis during the immediate future: “We cannot emphasize strongly enough that this nation must depend primarily upon the combustion of coal, gas, and oil, and on nuclear fission, for energy for the balance of this century. No amount of enthusiasm for solar energy, and no expansion of solar research and development, should keep us from pursuing and expanding the more immediate and urgent research and development programs in coal gasification and liquifica-tion and in research and development associated with nuclear reactors and nuclear breeders.” (W Post, 8/6/13, A23)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA’s third Administrator, became a senior vice president and member of the corporate executive staff of General Electric Co. He had resigned from nasa Sept. 15, 1970, to join GE as Vice President and Group Executive, Power Generation Group. (Av Wk, 7/2/73; GE pio)
President Nixon accepted the resignation of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering, and announced he would nominate as Dr. Foster’s successor Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Vice President for Research and Engineering of Beckman Instruments, Inc., in Fullerton, Calif. Dr. Currie had been with Hughes Aircraft Co. 19541969, serving as Vice President from 1964 until he went to Beckman in 1969. The nomination was submitted to the Senate June 6 and confirmed June 15. (PD, 6/11/73, 736, 752, 753; CR, 6/15/73, D695)
The Federal Aviation Administration had set 1975 as a target date for phase-out of its seven DC—3 aircraft, United Press International reported. FAA was still using the aircraft—known as the workhorse that carved out much of U.S. aviation history—to check aerial navigation aids on the West Coast. Manufactured by the Douglas Aircraft Corp., the DC-3 had carried 95% of U.S. airline traffic by 1938. A 1966 survey had shown that one third of the world’s transport planes were still DC—3s. The aircraft, nicknamed “The Gooney,” had been designated the C-47 in World War II and the Korean war. By 1945 10 000 DC-3s were in military service. Built to carry 29 passengers in civilian configuration, the DC—3 flown by Gen. James H. Doolittle from China after his 1942 Tokyo raid had carried 72 persons. The DC-3 had been redesignated the AC-4.7 and armed with heavy machineguns for service in the Vietnam war. Scores of the aircraft were still flying in the U.S., in private hands and with Government agencies. (Clifford, UPI, W Post, 5/6/73, F15) May 6—8:	The Commission on Education of the National Academy of Engineering held a Washington, D.C., symposium to examine the problems of recruiting minority students in engineering to alleviate an impending engineer shortage. Only one percent of engineering students were members of an ethnic minority, (nae Release 5/2/73, NAE pio)
A New York Times editorial commented on the research recession caused by changing priorities of the Federal Government and insufficient budget appropriations in Federal research programs: “The brilliant record of American scientists . . . testifies to the quality of the national research enterprise. But how long can such top quality survive in the face of the present economic stringency and the threat of even worse times ahead?” (NYT, 1/5/73, 28) January 7:	Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had announced his decision to leave NASA and retire from the Navy effective March 1 to accept a position with private industry, Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Lovell, who had been Deputy Director of Science and Applications at MSC since May 1971, would become Senior Executive Vice President of Bay Houston Towing Co. Lovell was a veteran of four space flights including Gemini 7 (launched Dec. 4, 1965) ; Gemini 12 (launched Nov. 11, 1966) ; Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968), the first mission to circle the moon; and Apollo 13 (launched April 11, 1970), the mission scheduled to make the second lunar landing but aborted after an onboard explosion. He held the record for total time in space— 715 hrs (30 days), (msc Release 73-01)
The National Science Foundation released An Analysis of Federal R&D Funding by Function: FY 1963-73 (nsf 72-313). Federal expenditures for research and development were expected to grow faster than total Federal outlays in FY 1973 for the first time since FY 1965. Between FY 1972 and 1973 r&d expenditures were expected to rise 3.6%, with total outlays up 2.6%. The Federal R&D percentage of the total was expected to be 7.3% in FY 1973. Of total outlays for space research and technology, 98% was expected to go toward R&D, but the R&D share of the total outlay for international affairs and finance, veterans benefits and services, general government, and income security would be less than 1%. Functions other than national defense and space R&T had increased emphasis on R&D significantly 1963-1973, from 10% to an expected 23%. The trend toward more civilian-oriented programs within the Federal r&d total was continuing, with an expected rise of 2% between 1972 and 1973. (Text)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial praised Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev, who died Dec. 23, 1972: “His warmth, intense and lively professional curiosity and sense of humor did much to open channels of communication between the secrecy-shrouded and isolated Russian aerospace industry and the West.” Until close to his death “he was still the gracious host to foreign technicians at his experimental facility outside Moscow.” Tupolev had “escorted astronaut Neil [A.] Armstrong around his supersonic transport prototype in 1970.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 1/8/73, 9) January 8-10:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 9th Annual Meeting and Technical Display in Washington, D.C. Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright was General Chairman. Lane Director for Space Eugene S. Love delivered 1972 von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Technology and the Space Shuttle.” Lecture discussed shuttle development, need to maintain aggressive advanced research and technology programs independent of near-term needs of major systems, and future transport systems that would blend successful shuttle development technology with nonshuttle technology advancements that could be accomplished within the current decade. Guest speaker Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), criticized Administration budget policies that had affected NASA programs and gone “far beyond the space program.” Policies implied “cutback and stand-still philosophy.” Sen. Weicker was “concerned over the recently announced White House directed NASA cuts but Pm much more concerned about the leadership of this nation . . . playing to our lowest, most immediate desires rather than our" highest future potential.” Apollo 17 had been “15 years in the making and thousands of years in the future will benefit.” Vietnam war “in 10 years has undone 200 years of building the American image and contributed not one year to the American dream.” Dr. Holt Ashley, Director of Exploratory Research and Problems Assessment in the Office of Research Applications of National Science Foundation, was installed as 1973 aiaa President. aiaa presented the Daniel Guggenheim Medal posthumously to William C. Mentzer, Senior Vice President for Engineering and Maintenance with United Air Lines, Inc., for “many-fold accomplishments in airline engineering, maintenance, and economic disciplines, which accomplishments contributed significantly to the achievement of today’s civil air transportation system.” The Elmer A. Sperry Award was presented to Leonard S. Hobbs and Perry W. Pratt, United Aircraft Corp. engineering executives, for “their contributions to the development of turbojet engines.” The History Manuscript Contest award of certificate and $500 was given to Dr. Richard K. Smith for First Across—U.S. Navy Transatlantic Flight of 1919. Section Special Event Award went to AIAA Houston Section for the public relations program “Down to Earth Space Program Applications.” The De Florez Training Award was presented to James W. Campbell, Special Assistant, General Aviation Accident Prevention Program, Flight Standards Service of Federal Aviation Administration, for outstanding contributions to improving the skill and knowledge of flight instructors throughout the general-aviation community. The John Jeffries Award was presented to Roger G. Ireland of the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, Dept, of the Navy, for “outstanding efforts and achievements, over a long time span, in improving the flight safety of aerospace flight personnel, particularly in the areas of life support and rescue systems.” The Robert M. Losey Award was given to George H. Fichtl of Marshall Space Flight Center Aerospace Environment Div. for “original work in the definition and interpretation of atmospheric wind environments for the design and operation of aeronautical systems.” The Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to I. Edward Garrick, Chief Mathematical Scientist at LaRC, for “outstanding contributions in the areas of aeroelasticity, structural dynamics, noise, flutter, and landing dynamics of aerospace vehicles.” (aiaa Release; AIAA Bull, 1/73; Program; CR, 1/18/73, S985) January 9:	The first Skylab space vehicle, Saturn IB with “boilerplate” spacecraft, was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center for fit checks and fueling tests. The vehicle would remain at the pad for three weeks before return to VAB for removal of boilerplate spacecraft and mating with flight spacecraft. The launch of unmanned Skylab was scheduled for April 30, 1973. The Apollo spacecraft carrying the first three-man crew to the orbiting Skylab would be launched 24 hrs later, (ksc Release 6-73) January 10:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its honors night banquet in conjunction with the Jan. 8-10 9th Annual Meeting and Technical Display and Jan. 10-12 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, aiaa Fellows inducted included Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center (LeRc) ; and Harris M. Schurmeier, Manager of the proposed 1977 Jupiter-Saturn mission at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, aiaa presented the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to Dr. Richard H. Battin, Director of Apollo Mission Development, and David G. Hoag, Director of Apollo Guidance and Navigation, both of Charles Stark Draper Laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The citation was for “leadership in the hardware and software design of the Apollo spacecraft primary control, guidance and navigation system which first demonstrated the feasibility of on-board autonomous space navigation during the historic flight of Apollo 8.” The G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Marcus F. Heidman, aerospace research engineer, and Dr. Richard Priem, Head of the Rocket Combustion Section of LeRC Chemical Research Div., for contributions to the literature in the field of liquid rocket combustion, particularly on performance and instability criteria for liquid motor design. The Lawrence Sperry Award was presented to Sheila E. Widnall, Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT, for “contributions to the understanding of vortex flows in wing wakes, aerodynamic noise and lifting surface theory.” The Spacecraft Design Award went to Grumman Aerospace Corp. Vice President Thomas J. Kelly for his contribution to the design, development, production, and operation of the lunar module. The aiaa Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., for “significant scientific accomplishment resulting from his examination of material returned from the lunar surface. His precise measurements of lunar sample elements by the stable isotope dilution method has been one of the most outstanding scientific achievements in lunar science.” The Goddard Award was given to Dr. Edward S. Taylor, Professor Emeritus of MIT, for continuous contributions to the advancement of air-breathing propulsion over 45 yrs, “as designer, inventor, researcher, teacher, advisor and as founder and leader of a major educational and research center of aircraft engine activity.” The von Karman Lecture Award was presented to Director for Space Eugene S. Love of Langley Research Center. (Program)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the Skylab 1 Investigation Report [see July 13]. A Senate hearing had been held July 30. Lewis Research Center Director Bruce T. Lundin, Skylab 1 Investigation Board Chairman, testified that the failure to recognize design deficiencies in the Orbital Workshop’s meteoroid shield that led to its loss during the May 14^-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission and the failure to communicate the importance of proper venting of the shield must be attributed to “an absence of sound engineering judgment and alert engineering leadership . . . over a considerable period of time.” There had been no evidence to indicate that “the design, development and testing of the meteoroid shield were compromised by limitations of funds or time. The quality of workmanship applied to the shield was adequate for its intended purpose.” Testing emphasis on ordnance performance and shield deployment had been appropriate. “Engineering and management personnel on Skylab, on the part of both contractor and Government, were available from the prior Saturn development and were thus highly experienced and adequate in number.” The Investigation Board had suggested corrective action: omit the meteoroid shield on any future Workshops, coat the Workshop for thermal control, and rely on meteoroid protection from the Workshop tank walls. If further protection was required, the Board had favored a fixed, nondeployable shield. To reduce the probability of separation failures as had occurred at Saturn S-II interstage second separation plane, linear-shaped charges should be detonated simultaneously from both ends, and all ordnance applications should be reviewed for a similar failure mode. Structural systems that had to move or deploy, or that required other mechanisms or components for operation, should not be considered solely as structure; and complex, multidisciplinary systems should have a designated project engineer. N0I FILMED NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley described nasa’s actions to prevent recurrence of the Skylab Orbital Workshop anomalies: “We established an independent Investigation Board, have accepted the Board’s report, and have directed all our program and project people to examine their projects in light of the findings of the Board. We will follow up to see that changes in formal management systems are made when required.” (Transcript)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics continued hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization. Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, identified locations for space shuttle development: Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., as the launch and landing sites; NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility for the external tank production; and the Rockwell International Corp. facility at Downey, Calif., for orbiter and systems integration. “The major unknown, at the moment, is where the solid rocket boosters will be produced and tested. We expect that this location will be identified when the solid fueled rocket booster contract is awarded this November.” Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in omsf, contrasted a typical operational communications satellite program using expendable launch vehicles with one using the space shuttle. Launched on the Titan IIIB-Centaur launch vehicle, each spacecraft was estimated at 467 kg (1030 lbs). To fulfill 1979-1990 requirements for reliable communications services, 26 spacecraft would be required. Use of the Titan IIIB-Centaur would require 26 new spacecraft and 26 new launch vehicles, at an average cost for each flight of $25.8 million. “If the same program is carried out using the Shuttle and Tug, the cost changes significantly. First, with the Shuttle we can apply the low cost approaches to payload design. We are no longer constrained by weight limitations; therefore, we can ruggedize the spacecraft structure, simplify the design and verification test program, and thus reduce both development and unit spacecraft cost.” The shuttle and tug combination could deploy and retrieve 2 satellites on a single flight, making 13 flights to deploy 26 spacecraft—10 new and 16 refurbished. On 8 of these flights 2 spacecraft would be deployed and retrieved. “The total cost for conducting the program would be $14.9 million per spacecraft flight, compared to the $25.8 million for the expendable approach—a savings of 42 percent.” m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), nasa Director of Facilities, discussed disposition of facilities at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Rrook Station, which would he closed because of FY 1974 budget cuts. LeRC was discussing the station’s availability and capability with potential user agencies—including the Electric Research Council, which planned to establish an electric power research institute, and the Eusi-ness and Employment Council of the Governor of Ohio, which had recommended establishment of a state-funded Ohio Development Center. LeRC was studying possible use of the station’s reactor for environmental research by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Plum Rrook space power facility was being prepared to test the shroud for NASA’s Viking spacecraft but “there are no additional programmatic needs for the use of this facility and it is anticipated that it will be placed in a standby mode by the end of Fiscal Year 1974.” (Transcript)
Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), new Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had promised an “in depth” inquiry into the FY 1974 Nasa budget request at early date, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. The Committee staff was being expanded and Sen. Moss would visit Manned Spacecraft Center in February. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.), the Committee’s new ranking minority member, had urged that more attention be paid to aeronautics. Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), minority member, had said the Committee should be more forceful in pushing aerospace programs “because nasa seems reticent at times to speak for itself.” (Av Wk, 1/29/73, 13)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, with other NASA officials, testified on the FY 1974 NASA authorization request in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the NASA request of $3,016 billion was down $400 million from FY 1973 but said the agency program was significant. In 1972 NASA had completed the transition from manned exploration to a focus on practical benefits, unmanned exploration, and development of the space shuttle “as the means to make more practical and more economical all future uses of space, unmanned and manned, especially for applications of economic, commercial, international, or national security significance.” Work on uses of the shuttle was “reinforcing our view that the Space Shuttle system will not only provide the launch capability needed for future space activities of all types but will revolutionize the ways in which space is used as well. The more the specialists in various fields look at the shuttle’s capabilities, especially in the sortie mode, the more they see how its weight and volume capacity and flexible operations will permit them to carry out experiments and useful applications in a much simpler and economical manner.” Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management Joseph F. Malaga testified that NASA Hq. would have 1581 permanent positions in FY 174 after agency reduction in force, or 6.3% of the total NASA Civil Service employment. “This is down 600 positions from the 1968 peak, when it represented 6.7 percent of the NASA total. Headquarters has thus kept its size consonant with agency size.” NASA’s policy on disposition of manpower and equipment necessitated by FY 1974 budget cuts was described by Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, in a prepared statement: “We are already well into the organization and operation of a comprehensive program to identify specific employee preferences and abilities and corresponding suitable potential employers. We have set up training for staff members in gathering job information and in counseling employees, and have arranged for a coordinated flow of information about job openings throughout NASA, and other Federal agencies, state and local government units, educational institutions and private industry. . . . Rut even more basic ... is our recognition that these people represent a virtually irreplaceable national resource.” He referred not only to “this highly talented and trained professional-technical work force but also to the complex of sophisticated plant and equipment which must be partially idled. ... It would be unconscionable to permit key elements of America’s aeronautics and space capability to be disbanded or retired without making every effort to keep them available for further service to the nation.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified on “practical returns from our space investment,” including the work of NASA Applications Teams in the technology utilization program. Teams assisted local, state and Federal Government agencies in biomedicine, air and water pollution, fire safety, transportation, housing, law enforcement, postal service, and mine safety. “Those teams work with the user to explore important technical problems in his specific field and then, often with the help of specialists at NASA field centers, search for aerospace technology which can be used in the solution of the problems.” A technique used by NASA to inspect space vehicles had been adapted to improve the x-ray diagnosis of tumors and cardiovascular problems, with a tenfold reduction in radiation dosage. (Transcript)
NASA released details of Langley Research Center’s planned program to heat and cool a 5000-sq-m (53 000-sq-ft) Systems Engineering Building by solar energy. The program had been announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Nov. 13 testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy. The program was to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience with a source of clean power as an alternate to fossil fuels and other conventional energy sources. Planned for mid-1975 completion, the building—believed to be first of its size for which solar energy would provide a significant part of its heating and cooling system—would use a 1400-sq-m (15 000-sq-ft) solar collector to provide most of the heating and some of the cooling requirements. It also would test energy-storage capacity. NASA believed the solar collector to be the pacing component in the system and had established heating and cooling cost goals of $1 to $2 per 0.09 sq m (1 sq ft) over a 15-yr life span, (nasa Release 73-282)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy held hearings on solar energy for heating and cooling. Dr. George 0. Lof, Colorado State Univ. professor of civil engineering, testified June 7 that heating and cooling buildings by solar energy was technically feasible and closely approaching economic viability. “With adequate funding, the dual involvement of industry and university . . . can be expected to move solar heating and cooling into public use within a very few years.” Electric power from solar energy, however, would cost several times the present cost of conventional power and the best method was not even known. A major study funded by the National Science Foundation was beginning at Colorado State Univ., with West-inghouse Electric Co. collaboration, of the best system and conditions for generating solar power. (Transcript) June 8:	The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites—believed by Western specialists to be a military communications data-relay system—on a single booster from Plesetsk. The satellites entered earth orbit: Cosmos 564, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1397-km (868.1-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 565, with a 1493-km (927.7-mi) apogee, 1448-km (899.7-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 566, with a 1484-km (922.1-mi) apogee, 1435-km (891.7-mi) perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 567, with a 1486-km (923.4-mi) apogee, 1413-km (878.0-mi) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 568, with a 1483-km (921.5-mi) apogee, 1377-km (855.6-mi) perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 569, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1361-km (845.7-mi) perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 570, with a 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1340-km (832.6-mi) perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 571, with a 1480-km (919.6-mi) apogee, 1322-km (821.5-mi) perigee, 113.7-min period, and 74.0° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/73; SBD, 6/12/73, 233; Shabad, NYT, 6/10/73, 41) • Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, telegraphed congressional congratulations to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, for the Skylab 2 astronauts’ achievements in repairing the solar array on the Skylab Workshop (launched May 14): “The magnificence of this accomplishment and the significance of this achievement is nearly impossible to put into perspective.” Congress sent congratulations to the astronauts, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and his team, and “all of your group who work in complete anonymity hut under the intensive examination of history.” (CR, 6/8/73, S10691)
Newspaper editorials commented on the Sept. 25 successful splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28—Sept. 25]. The Washington Star-News: The astronauts couldn’t have selected a worse evening to return to the earth “in the whole 20th Century.” Their reentry had been “upstaged, unfortunately,” by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew’s vain attempts to clear himself of allegations of bribery and income tax evasion, “and, of course, the Watergate hearings persisted as a distraction. But these latest Skylab voyagers still must receive the recognition they deserve for the longest and most voluminously rewarding space flight in history.” Skylab was “the proper program in space for the years just ahead, because it promises many more revelations about the earth and seas—the condition and potentials of our planet.” (W Star-News, 9/28/73, A18) The Wall Street Journal noted that the Skylab 3 crew could anticipate a small pleasure that eluded most returning travelers. “Unlike the rest of us, they have numbers of people who are absolutely hungering to see the photographs they brought back, despite the fact that they’ve returned with no fewer than 77,600 shots of the sun and 16,800 of the earth.” (WSJ, 9/28/73)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1973. The plan abolished the National Aeronautics and Space Council, including the position of Executive Secretary, and the Office of Science and Technology, including the posts of Director and Deputy Director, nasc had been created under the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, enacted July 29, 1958. Provisions of the plan would take effect July 1 unless Congress acted against the plan. In his transmission message the President said NASC had “met a major need during the evolution of our nation’s space program. Vice President Agnew has served with distinction as its chairman for the past four years. At my request, beginning in 1969, the Vice President also chaired a special Space Task Group charged with developing strategy alternatives for a balanced U.S. space program in the coming years. As a result of this work, basic policy coordination can now be achieved through the resources of the executive departments and agencies, such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, augmented by some of the former Council staff.” In streamlining the Federal science establishment, the Administration was “firmly committed to a sustained, broad-based national effort in science and technology.” The research and development capability of executive departments and agencies had been upgraded. The National Science Foundation had “broadened from its earlier concentration on basic research support to take on a significant role in applied research as well” and had “matured in its ability to play a coordinating and evaluative role within the Government and between the public and private sectors. I have therefore concluded that it is timely and appropriate to transfer to the Director of the National Science Foundation all functions presently vested in the Office of Science and Technology, and to abolish that office.” The President also announced his intention to ask Dr. H. Guyford Stever, nsf Director, to take on the additional post of Science Adviser to advise and assist the Administration “on matters where scientific and technological expertise is called for” and to act as the President’s representative in selective cooperative programs in international science, “including chairing such joint bodies as the U.S.—U.S.S.R Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation.” (PD, 1/29/73, 75-8; nasa Leg Off)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology continued hearings on the FY 1974 NASA authorization. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs in the nasa Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, described the Dept, of Transportation Climatic-Impact Assessment Program (ciap), in which nasa was cooperating: The ciap “undertakes to assess the potential impact on the atmosphere of large fleets of SSTS [supersonic transports] operating in the eighties and the biological consequences of their potential modification of the stratosphere. We are cooperating with dot by contributing to the technology needs of ciap, with particular emphasis on the levels to which pollution can be limited.” Contradictory requirements for civil transport aircraft (low-fuel consumption engines required by SSTs for good range and payload characteristics, tended to be extremely noisy in terminal areas) might be best met by variable-cycle engines that varied their mode of operation in each condition of the flight profile, nasa would “intensively study variable cycle-engine concepts in FY 1974.” Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology in oast, testified that hypersonic research for potential application to military and civil airbreathing cruise vehicles was directed at “the critical aspects of propulsion, structures, and aerodynamics for this flight regime where hydrogen is used both as the fuel and as a coolant.” Hydrogen was the most likely candidate for hypersonic aircraft fuel because its high coolant capacity was essential for a propulsion system to survive in the high-temperature environment, and liquid hydrogen’s coolant capacity could cool portions of the vehicle’s structure away from the engine area. NASA’s structures and materials program provided essential technology for designing lightweight, reliable, actively cooled structures and advanced the technology of actively cooling structures heated to high temperatures. The program also extended shuttle technology on reusable surface insulation toward hypersonic cruise application. Flight Research Center test pilot Gary E. Krier testified on nasa’s digital fly-by-wire program to develop an all-electric flight-control system using intelligence inserted into the digital computer memory. “We did this by using refurbished Apollo equipment and two surplus [Navy] F-8 fighters. Using this approach, we estimate we flew about 2 years earlier than we otherwise could have.” To date, nasa had flown 15 DFBW flights with no major problems. “Airliners that we’ll ride in the 1980’s could profit from fly-by-wrre in the form of smooth flight at very high speeds and the near elimination of the response to turbulence by computer application of smoothing controls.” The “best use of fbw” was to build a control-configured vehicle [ccv] with reduced drag, increased lift, and slower approach and landing speeds. “It has been estimated that landing speed could be cut by 25 percent and range increased 15 percent with no sacrifice in mission capability, just by modifying existing aircraft. A much larger improvement in performance could be gained by starting from scratch with fbw. We have been refining aircraft for years now, and the fbw/ccv combination gives us a chance to make a quantum jump in aircraft performance.” (Transcript)
Mikhail D. Millionshchikov, Vice President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and a principal spokesman in Soviet scientific contacts with the West, died in Moscow at age 60. He had contributed significantly to the studies of the turbulent flow of liquids and gases, nuclear energy, and new techniques for direct energy conversion. On April 28, 1970, Academician Millionshchikov—as head of a 10-man Soviet delegation to a conference sponsored in Washington, D.C., by the Fund for Peace— had suggested U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space exploration. This proposal had been “the first public suggestion by a Soviet spokesman of this hope,” the New York Times reported later. Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, also a conference participant, had proposed the next day that the two countries agree to exchange space engineers as a first step toward joint space cooperation. {NYT, 5/29/73, 32) May 28:	A New York Times editorial commented on the repair of Skylab 1, damaged on launch May 14: “Many people deserve credit for this remarkable turn of events. First there were the Houston ground controllers who maneuvered the crippled Skylab into an optimal position. ... A small but varied army of technicians hurriedly contrived not one but three possible ways of creating a parasol in space so as to replace the missing heat shield that had created the most trouble. Finally, the Sky-lab astronauts mastered their new tasks in an incredibily short time, reached orbit in the neighborhood of Skylab, surveyed the damage, and made the most essential ‘fix,’ the sunshade, which yesterday brought the station’s temperature down to tolerable levels.” It had been a grueling test for all concerned. “But for the moment, at least, the Skylab project has been truly resurrected from near-death.” (NYT, 5/28/73, 14)
NASA activities in solar heating and cooling were summarized by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Aeronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy in hearings on H.R. 10952, the Solar Heating and Demonstration Act. Thermal control of spacecraft had been a NASA challenge since the space program’s inception. NASA and its contractors had developed competency in materials, thermal control coatings, heating and cooling technology, and thermal analysis technology which bore directly on the collection and use of solar energy. In the Skylab program Marshall Space Flight Center had developed a thermal coating with unique properties that increased solar collection efficiencies, resulting in higher operating temperatures. The higher temperatures allowed more efficient operation of absorption refrigeration cycles. NASA’s work in solar heating and cooling included advanced research and technology, a residential systems engineering demonstration program, and the planned use of a large new office building as a test bed to obtain realistic engineering and operating experience. (Transcript)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight resumed hearings on the FY 1974 nasa authorization. Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified that a thorough analysis of the space shuttle’s possible environmental effects had been made in 1972 and a report had been filed with the Environmental Protection Agency. The shuttle’s effect on atmosphere, water, and noise would be “minimal and below allowable limits.” Safeguards to be added would further minimize any potential environmental impact. NASA and Dept, of Defense studies with space-experienced companies to determine the reduction in satellite costs by use of the shuttle for launch and retrieval had shown “payload costs reductions of 40 to 50 percent” from “present-day payload costs.” Plans for FY 1974 called for “an orderly buildup” in prime and subcontractor manpower for the orbiter and space shuttle main engine development and award of contracts for all remaining major elements of the shuttle, including the external tank and solid rocket booster. FY 1974 funds, although less than requested, would provide for “an expanded scope of design, development, and testing activities and for continuation of subsystems and component development.” Director Douglas R. Lord of nasa’s Sortie Lab Task Force testified that the lab would be designed for installation in the space shuttle’s cargo bay “to allow nonastronaut scientists to use nearly conventional laboratory equipment at orbital altitudes.” The lab would consist of a closed, pressurized module for experimenters and their laboratory subsystems and apparatus, as well as a pallet section exposed to space when the payload bay doors were opened, for large sensors requiring space exposure, such as telescopes. The pallet could be used either with the pressurized module or separately, mounted in the payload bay and supported by the shuttle orbiter. The sortie lab would provide “an opportunity for international participation, ... for the first time in the manned program, in the initial development of a completely new capability.” (Transcript)	*
nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during nasa FY 1974 authorization hearings: Support in 1972 had been provided to more than 40 ongoing missions as well as 18 new flight projects. New launches—which included Apollo 16 and 17 and the first probe to Jupiter, Pioneer 10—“placed increased demands on the capacity and reliability of the tracking systems.” During the two-year, 1 000 000 000-km (621 400 000-mi) journey of Pioneer 10 to Jupiter’s vicinity, the Deep Space Network would continuously monitor the spacecraft’s condition and acquire data from its 13 experiments. Major changes in the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) had been the installation of a transportable station at St. John’s, Newfoundland, to provide Skylab launch support and the closing of the station at Fort Myers, Fla. The closing was “the first of the station closures planned to take place over the next few years as the spaceflight tracking and data network moves toward a single integrated network in the post-Apollo-Soyuz test project time.” (Transcript)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight held a hearing on the General Accounting Office’s June 1 report on space shuttle program costs. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator Willis H. Shapley testified: “nasa believes that the results of our cost benefit analyses are important and valid elements supporting the decision to develop the Space Shuttle, even though the principal justification for the Space Shuttle is in the new capabilities it will provide. In our view, the GAO review, which we welcome as an independent review and check of what we have attempted to do, has not found or demonstrated any substantial reasons for questioning the correctness of the decision which has been made to proceed with the development of the Space Shuttle.” The Subcommittee concluded, following their testimony by NASA and Gao representatives: “a. The five noneconomic issues cited by gao ‘ as major considerations in the decision to develop a space shuttle are valid and proper elements in the original decision to proceed and in the future evaluation of the progress and pace of space shuttle development, b. Cost, performance and schedule goals and estimates are both a valid and essential element in the decision making process of the Congress and the GAO studies in these areas . . . must have sufficient depth to encompass all major cost considerations, c. The fragmentary arguments with respect to costs advanced by GAO reports are so incomplete as to fail to validate the GAO conclusions drawn from them. d. That GAO should continue review of the space shuttle program development in conjunction with the legislative and oversight activities of the responsible committees of Congress with emphasis on evaluation of cost, performance and schedule as the space shuttle development program progresses.” (Transcript)
b/g William J. Kennard (usaf, Ret.), former air surgeon of the Military Air Transport Service, died at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at age 67. He had served from 1959 to 1967 as Executive Vice President of the Aerospace Medical Assn, and managing editor of Aerospace Medicine. (W Post, 10/26/73, C8) October 24:	Establishment of the Spacelab Program Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by nasa. The new office, to be headed by Douglas R. Lord, would replace the Sortie Lab Task Force. The reorganization followed the Sept. 24 signing of a cooperative agreement by NASA and the European Space Research Organization which called for European design, development, and manufacture of a Spacelab to be flown in the space shuttle orbiter. (NASA Release 73-228)
The Army announced award of a $1 969 269 firm-fixed-price contract to Industrial Contractors, Inc., for modification of the acoustic model engine test facility at Marshall Space Flight Center, (dod Release 63-73) February 7:	The House passed and cleared for the President’s signature S.J.R. 37, to designate the Manned Spacecraft Center the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in honor of the late President. Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), for himself and Rep. Kenneth J. Gray (D-Ill.), introduced H.J.R. 328 for the same purpose. H.J.R. 328 was referred to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 2/7/73, H838.9, H877)
The Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., released Monopsony: A Fundamental Problem in Government Procurement. The report, prepared by the Orkand Corp., said the problems of a monopsony—a market dominated by a single buyer—were no longer restricted to defense and space suppliers as Government agencies took increasingly active roles in mass transit, education, health, and environmental protection. Results of Government monopsony power were higher final costs and lowered or nonexistent profits that compounded industry’s difficulty in attracting capital. In the end, “what is in jeopardy is not one or two industries but rather our capability, as a nation, to undertake programs in which the resources of government and industry must be committed to the development and implementation of solutions to society’s problems. The study recommended: establishment of a Government Procurement Practices Board (gppb) to limit governmental monopsony power; a continuing review by gppb of procurement policies, regulations, and practices; a “free market test” criterion to govern the procurement process; and formulation by gppb of procurement principles that could be submitted to Congress and enacted into law. (Text)
Rep. Lawrence R. Coughlin (R-Pa.) resigned from the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and was elected to the House Committee on the Judiciary, (nasa LAR XII/26)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews described nasa’s Earth Observatory Satellite (eos) program in continued testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1974 authorization hearings. The satellite, a potential new start for 1974, was intended to provide a multidisciplinary earth observations capability to support the areas of meteorology, environmental quality, earth resources and, in some respects, the earth and ocean physics program. The system would be the first major shuttle-compatible spacecraft with modularity, giving ability to retrieve and repair modular elements of the spacecraft, and the spacecraft might also be modular in basic size. “We may be able to build up a different size and weight spacecraft, using these modular techniques.” Elements were expected to serve the several disciplines without significant changes in components through the modular buildup. George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator in OAST, testified that Lewis Research Center was providing technical management on several Environmental Protection Agency contracts. Turbines, heat exchangers, combustors, and fuel controls obtained from NASA’s low-cost jet engine research would be evaluated for use in automobile turbine engines. A memorandum of understanding with epa would expand LeRC responsibility for component and system development for advanced automotive power systems and would exploit LeRC test facilities. (Transcript)
nasa Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on the scheduled spring 1974 launch of the Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications hearings on research into short-term weather phenomena. Based on utility demonstrated by Applications Technology Satellites for storm monitoring, the first operational prototype geostationary meteorological satellite was a forerunner of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. Once the satellites were placed in orbit and checked out by NASA, they would be turned over to NOAA as a part of the operational system, which could observe the earth’s surface day and night, using visible-light and infrared sensors, and acquire in situ data from ocean buoys, aircraft, ships, river stage stations, and other ground-based remote stations. The GOES system—of two satellites in geostationary orbit viewing the western U.S. and Pacific Ocean area and the eastern U.S. and Atlantic area—would provide near-continuous surveillance of all tropical Atlantic storms, all tropical storms of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean, and all storms of observable size within the limits of the U.S., its territories, and its surrounding coastal waters, except Alaska. Improved sensors were expected to provide new and improved data on severe storm causes and development. (Transcript)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegates met in Vienna to continue Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt). (Tass, fbis-Sov, 5/9/73, HI) May 9:	The House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported H.R. 7528, a $3.074-billion nasa FY 1974 authorization bill replacing the original $3.016-billion H.R. 4567. Increases in research and development funding included $25 million for the space shuttle, to total $500 million; $12 million for space applications, to total $159 million; $34 million for aeronautical research and technology, to total $180 million; $10 million for space and nuclear research and technology, to total $11 million; and $500 000 for technology utilization, to total $4.5 million. Overall R&D decreases were: $7 million in space flight operations, to $548.5 million; $8 million in space science programs, to $37 million; and $10 million in tracking and data acquisition, to $240 million. The budgets for construction of facilities and research and program management remained at $112 million and $707 million. The Committee said its $10-million reduction in Skylab funding, to $224 million (within space flight operations), reflected a “success postured program” without major problems and expressed confidence in NASA Skylab management. Space shuttle funding was increased $25 million to provide more effective program implementation and hold total program funding “at or below the current projection.” Total reductions of $8 million in funding for orbiting explorers, physics and astronomy, and lunar and planetary exploration supporting research and technology would be applied to the Earth Resources Survey Satellite program to permit immediate reinstatement of the erts-b project, on which the Committee placed “the highest priority.” In the aeronautics program, a $14-million increase—from $18 million to $32 million—was recommended “to investigate and demonstrate noise reduction modifications to current narrow-body jet aircraft” and $20 million was added to reinstate the quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program terminated in January. The $10-million increase in space nuclear research and technology funding was “to maintain a viable, long-range capability in advanced nuclear power and propulsion research.” It was probable “that any sensible energy research program undertaken by this nation would involve a significant part of this continued program.” (CR, 5/1/73, D452; H Rpt 93-171; Text)
The Thor-Delta launch vehicle and “its entire missile launch system” were being sold to Japan by McDonnell Douglas Corp., Director Andrew Eiemiller of the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (afl-cio) Dept, of Legislation said in testimony before the House Committee on Finance’s Subcommittee on International Trade. Eiemiller told the Subcommittee that the U.S. aerospace industry, “where the U.S. has held technological supremacy,” was “steadily being exported abroad.” Dept, of State spokesman Charles W. Rray, III, later told the press in Washington that the sale had been approved under a 1969 agreement on space cooperation. Japan would be obligated to use the rocket system for peaceful purposes only. (CR, 3/6/73, S3977-9; Doder, W Post, 3/7/73, A10)
The Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight transmitted Space Shuttle— Skylab, 1973: Status Report (dated January 1973) to its parent House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The report covered the transition from detailed design to development phase of NASA’s shuttle program (in which the first manned flight was planned for 1978) and the updated cost, performance, and status of the Skylab program (to be completed in 1973). The Subcommittee concluded that technology and resources existed for successful development of the NASA configuration for an earth-orbital shuttle and that the shuttle design would permit the total development cost to stay within $5.15 billion and the per-flight operational cost within $10.5 million. Success in meeting this cost was “particularly sensitive” to the cost of the hydrogen-oxygen tanks and an acceptable recoverable and refurbishment cost of the solid-fueled rocket boosters. Space tug development was “of key importance to gaining full utility of the space shuttle.” Development of a low-cost space shuttle system was essential “if the nation is to realize the full benefits of near space in . . . scientific exploration, practical application, and national security.” The Skylab program was within costs projected by NASA for FY 1973. Development schedules were being met “with some problems being encountered in procuring and integrating experiments.” NASA was recommended to consider the possibility of flying Skylab in the 19741976 period and also possible Skylab revisits after the first three manned missions. (Text)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
The Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics published Research and Development Collaboration with the U.S.S.R. and Japan. The report summarized discussions with Soviet and Japanese officials during the Subcommittee’s July visit to the U.S.S.R—U.S. Aeronautical Technology Symposium and Display in Moscow and a subsequent visit to Tokyo. The Subcommittee had found that “although military and space parity had been achieved with the United States, the U.S.S.R. is far behind in virtually all consumer products. There are also glaring weaknesses in certain areas of high technology.” Soviet leaders had accepted the fact that, “if their plans for the massive expansion and improvement of their commercial air transportation system are to succeed within the proposed time frame, assistance will be required from abroad where superior technology exists. We believe the U.S. aerospace industry is the best, though not the only, source for such high technology products, and evidently the responsible Soviet officials think so, too.” As one of the world’s most highly developed technological countries, Japan had “much to offer to any cooperative venture in science or space.” The Subcommittee urged the National Science Foundation to explore possible collaboration with the Japanese government in its Sunshine Project, a proposed large-scale effort to develop new energy sources. (Com Print)
Dr. Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on manned space systems in development, before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Dr. Culbertson said 986 payloads were projected for the 12-yr period beginning in 1980, with one third each for applications, science, and the Dept, of Defense. Duplication of the accomplishments expected from the space shuttle sortie (Spacelab) program would require automated spacecraft, sounding rockets, a manned space station, and a system for manned transport. The shuttle, with effective integration of payloads and the ability to service in-orbit spacecraft, offered a potential savings of $14 billion over expendable systems from 1980 to 1991. Studies had shown that 725 flights were required to fly the projected 986 payloads, an average of 60 flights a year. At a 10% rate of discount and a 10% rate of return, the space transportation system would break even if the shuttle were flown only 25 times a year. (Transcript) industry unwillingness to risk capital on advanced communications research and development. Private industry could meet short-term commercial needs but “continued NASA activity is essential to identify and meet long term national needs.” The investment level in advanced communications r&d would increase from $1.0 million in FY 1974 to $1.4 million in FY 1975. R&d included investigations into advanced antenna techniques to define radiation pattern contours to fit geographical boundaries and eliminate unwanted spillover; technology to open near-and far-infrared wavelengths for communications; new techniques in solid-state, high-power devices to replace traveling wave tubes; and use of millimeter-wave regions to expand the spectrum for satellite communications. The ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite scheduled for 1974 launch would conduct health and education telecommunications and radio beacon experiments and measure charged particles and magnetic fields over the U.S. for one year. The satellite would then be moved over India to beam educational TV to 4000 villages, ats-f (to he Ats 6 after launch) also would be used to extend coverage during the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission. Following completion of the Indian experiments, ats-f would he moved back over to the U.S. to continue experiments there. (Transcript)
Dr. Paul E. Hemke, a pioneer in aeronautical engineering, died at the age of 84. In 1910 he had assisted in designing one of the Nation’s first aircraft, which flew to a height of 0.6 m. Dr. Hemke, an analyst at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory 1924-1927, was responsible for establishing aeronautical engineering departments at Case Institute of Applied Science in 1931 and at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1936, where he headed the department until 1949. During World War II Dr. Hemke served on a Government team of scientists sent to Europe to persuade European scientists, especially rocket experts, to emigrate to the U.S. (W Star-News, 29 May 74)
President Nixon resigned as 37th President of the United States. Vice President Gerald R. Ford was sworn in as the Nation’s 38th President. President Nixon had been facing possible impeachment after two years of bitter public debate over his conduct following the 17 June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee headquarters at the Watergate compound in Washington, D.C., by agents of the Committee for the Reelection of the President. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 9 Aug 74, 1; Montgomery, NYT, 9 Aug 74, 13; PD, 12 Aug 74, 1014^1017)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology reported on prospects for Advanced Nuclear Research in the wake of the February 1972 termination of the nerva nuclear rocket program and the FY 1974 reductions in nuclear power and propulsion research brought by NASA budget cuts. Concerned lest the $1.5 billion invested in these programs since NASA took charge of them in 1958 be entirely lost, the Subcommittee had held hearings 7 Feb. 1974 to determine how to maintain a research capability and to ensure that results of the previous R&D would be used toward solving critical energy problems. The Subcommittee was “disappointed” that the AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office had been abolished. Witnesses from industry, NASA, and aec described work being done in thermionic technology, plasma-core reactor research, high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, and medium-power reactor systems. The Subcommittee concluded that, though funding in these fields was modest, “the potential benefits [were] enormous in scope and magnitude.” While the traditional R&D areas were becoming less well defined for the various agencies, the Subcommittee found the greater portion of the funds for the programs should go to aec rather than to NASA. The Subcommittee recommended: (1) NASA should continue, and expand as its budget permitted, its advanced nuclear research in potential energy applications. (2) NASA should continue complementary arrangements with other Federal agencies, especially aec. (3) The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy should evaluate the Subcommittee findings. (4) NASA and aec should jointly investigate and report how nuclear power and propulsion r&d had been used and how data was stored. And (5) NASA and AEC should expand industrial participation. (Com Print)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
Charles A. Lindbergh—the first man to fly solo nonstop from New York to Paris, in 1927—died of cancer on Maui, Hawaii, at the age of 72. He was buried three hours later in a simple funeral near the Kipahulu church on Maui. In Washington, President Ford said: “Nearly half a century has passed since his courageous solo flight . . . but the courage and daring of his feat will never be forgotten. For years to come, we will also remember the selfless, sincere man himself . .., one of America’s alltime heroes and a great pioneer of the air age that changed the world.” For the transatlantic flight, airmail pilot and barnstormer Lindbergh had helped design a Ryan monoplane, calculating every ounce. When the Spirit of St. Louis landed at Le Bourget airfield, Paris, at 10:22 pm 21 May 1927 after a 33-hr 29-min flight, Lindbergh was greeted by 25 000 wildly cheering persons. British, French, and Belgian governments awarded the flyer their highest decorations for valor. He received the first U.S. Distinguished Flying Cross and the Medal of Honor and was promoted from lieutenant to colonel in the Army Air Corps Reserve. Following goodwill flights throughout the U.S. and Latin America, sponsored by the Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics, Lindbergh served as adviser to Pan American World Airways and to the predecessor of Trans World Airlines, helping to lay out transatlantic, transcontinental, and Caribbean air routes for commercial aviation. He served as a member of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics 1931-1939, heading the special committee that recommended to Congress expansion of U.S. aircraft research facilities and establishment of what became the Ames and Lewis Research Centers. After the kidnaping and murder of his first son and the subsequent publicity, Lindbergh moved to Europe in 1935, where he studied the military forces of the European countries. His conclusion that the German Luftwaffe would be superior to the combined forces of the Allies, his acceptance of the Service Cross of the German Eagle from the German government, and his opposition to U.S. participation in World War II provoked the U.S. public to question his patriotism and he resigned his commission in the Army Air Corps. During the war he was a consultant to bomber aircraft manufacturers Ford Motor Co. and United Aircraft Corp. He traveled to the Pacific war area in 1944 to study the Navy’s Corsair F-4U under flying conditions and there, as a civilian, flew 50 missions against the Japanese. Following the war, his commission restored and promoted to the rank of brigadier general, Lindbergh was a technical consultant for Government and private industry in missile and space flight programs. As a consultant for Pan Am he worked on design specifications for the Boeing 747. Lindbergh devoted the later years of his life to writing and speaking on world conservation policies. (NYT, 27 Aug 74, 1; 18; Crawford, W Post, 27 Aug 74, C3; PD, 2 Sept 74, 1068-9; James, NYT, 22 May 27, 1; Affidavit Exec Apptmt, 6 Nov 31; letter, naca Chm Bush to Lindbergh, 7 Feb 40)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998 was reported to the Senate by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The Committee authorization of $3,267 billion was $8,145 million higher than that passed by the House 25 April. It was equal to 1% of the total FY 1975 Federal budget and was $0.5 billion below the constant-level NASA budget endorsed by Congress two years earlier. The Committee had added $16 million to NASA’s 4 Feb. budget request, to fund procurement and launch of a third Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-c) for continuity of remote-sensing data. The Committee also had added $6 million to support activities under way and the initiation and application of new ideas in energy and environmental areas. It refused to concur in $20 million added by the House to the space shuttle program. (SRpt 93-818)
Aircraft designer Clarence L. (Kelly) Johnson announced his retirement as Senior Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., effective in mid-January 1975. During his 43 yrs with Lockheed, Johnson had contributed to the design of some 40 aircraft—about half of them his original designs—including the P-38 “Lightning” fighter of World War II, the P-80 jet fighter, the Constellation series of airliners, the F-104 mach 2 fighter, the U—2 reconnaissance plane and its successor SR—71, and the C-130 transport. In 1964 President Johnson awarded Johnson the National Medal of Science, citing his achievements and products “as both incomparable and virtually incredible.” (Getler, W Post, 8 Nov 74, A12)
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings on early results from Skylab’s earth resources data. Perhaps the most interesting so far was the unconfirmed indication of mineral deposits near Ely, Nev. The Skylab earth resources experiment package had also identified several areas of citrus fruit fly infestation on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande, demonstrated the use of remote sensing for snow mapping, identified new urbanization patterns in Phoenix, Ariz., and inventoried vegetation patterns in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area photo and similar imagery for 12 other cities were being used by the Dept, of Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, astronaut on the 25 May-22 June 1973 mission to man the Orbital Workshop, testified that Skylab astronauts were healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their long flights. After initial decreased appetite, an astronaut had a feeling of well-being with normal thirst and appetite, although he had a continued feeling of fullness in the head and tended to assume a peculiar posture with neck extended and moving backwards and elbows, hips, and knees flexed at 20° to 30°. He tended to become sleepy and required frequent exercise to restore vigor and alertness. His voice had a peculiar nasal quality. After the third day he was virtually immune to motion sickness.. Without gravity, there was no automatic sensation of up and down and without vision he could quickly get lost. Dr. Harry C. Gatos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist and Skylab materials processing investigator, testified Skylab experiments had shown that segments of crystals partially regrown in space exhibited none of the inhomogeneities from dopants (electronically active chemical elements) that characterized earth-grown crystals and inhibited their efficiency. In addition to preparation of special materials for electronic and medical uses, materials processing studies in space would provide an understanding of the structures of materials and permit preparation of materials to perform closer to their theoretical limits. Crystal-growing technology was developing new means to create and store power and could, within five years, provide a practical economic basis for using solar power. (Transcript)
Congressmen and staff of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were briefed at Marshall Space Flight Center and Michoud Assembly Facility in preparation for hearings on NASA’s FY 1975 budget. Committee members were briefed on Skylab, space shuttle, tug, Spacelab, concept verification test, and use of space transportation systems at MSFC. On 2 Feb. they were briefed on the space shuttle external tank at Michoud. {Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 2)
9 May: NASA announced the appointment of John F. Yardley as Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Yardley—who had been Vice President and General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Eastern Div. since 1972—would replace Dale D. Myers, who had returned to private industry. At McDonnell Douglas, Yardley had served as project engineer for Mercury spacecraft design 1958—1960, Launch Operations Manager for Mercury and Gemini Spacecraft 1960-1964, Gemini Technical Director 1964-1967, and as Corporate-wide General Manager for the Skylab project, (nasa Ann, 9 May 74)
Research into automotive propulsion systems was reviewed by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Environmental Protection Agency officials in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. H.R. 10392 had been introduced 19 Sept. 1973 to authorize nasa research toward development of economical, energy-conserving systems with clean emissions and improved performance. Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified 4 Feb. that Lewis Research Center was testing epa’s experimental engine, under a June 1973 agreement with epa on work toward a low-pollution gas-turbine-powered vehicle. Upgraded engine work would be completed by mid-1975 and vehicle performance evaluation before the end of CY 1975. First results of Jet Propulsion Laboratory investigations of hydrogen injection into fuel to improve efficiency and reduce pollution in conventional automobile engines promised achievement of 1977 Federal emission standards with 25% improvement in fuel economy. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin testified that, in addition to the gas turbine engine, a broader, longer range, advanced technology program was under way, with 13 industry contracts for such improvements as a low-emission combustor, higher-temperature heat exchangers, lower-cost turbine discs, turbine wheel cooling, and low-cost fuel controls. Dr. William H. Pickering, Jpl Director, reported a test automobile using bottled gas to inject hydrogen into the fuel had already met the carbon monoxide emission standard and had almost met the nitrogen oxide standard, although the hydrocarbon emissions remained a problem. With engine modifications to produce hydrogen from gasoline, instead of using bottled gas, performance per gallon of fuel was expected to improve 25% over the conventional engine. (Transcript) 4- 8 February: The first meeting of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Assembly of Parties was held in Washington, D.C. Seventy-two of the eighty-four member governments were represented. Raymond J. Waldmann (U.S.) was elected Chairman and Dr. Osama Anani (Jordan) was elected Deputy Chairman. Elected as Vice-chairmen were Ambassador Alejandro Orfila (Argentina), Ambassador Adolfo Alessandrini (Italy), Ambassador Leonard 0. Kibinge (Kenya), and Ambassador Motoo Ogiso (Japan). The Assembly of Parties found that the proposed U.S. Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) and maritime satellite system would not interfere with the intelsat system, goes was technically compatible with the use of the radio-frequency spectrum and orbital space by the existing or planned satellites. The maritime satellite system would not prejudice direct satellite telecommunication links. The Assembly refused a United Nations request for free use of INTELSAT satellites, although a priority access arrangement, for periods not exceeding 90 days during an emergency, would be worked out. (intelsat Release 74-12). 5- 22 February: Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, passed within 5800 km of Venus—within 15 km of the planned aim point—at 1:01 pm edt 5 Feb. The encounter sequence was accomplished according to plan and data were transmitted over the 45 million km between the earth and Venus at a rate of 117.6 kilobits per sec. Excellent ultraviolet cloud-structure pictures and new data on particle environment and mass, density, and shape of the planet were returned. Because Mariner 10 approached Venus on the dark side, the TV sequence was not begun until shortly before the encounter, at 12:21 pm edt. The spacecraft flew behind Venus at 1:07 pm edt for 20 min; TV signals were stored on tape and recovered without difficulty after Mariner 10 emerged from the occultation zone. During occultation, the spacecraft’s radio antenna was aimed toward the edge of the planet so that the radio signals were bent around Venus by the extremely dense atmosphere and sent on to the earth. All science instruments functioned normally except the scanning electrostatic analyzer. The TV sequence was completed 13 Feb. after some 4165 pictures were returned to the earth. During the flyby, the 503-kg spacecraft used the gravitational field of Venus to slow its speed and direct the flight path toward a 29 March encounter with Mercury. By 22 Feb. Mariner 10—its speed increasing as it came nearer the sun—was traveling 3 million km per day toward the planet. Preliminary science results were presented at a press briefing 7 Feb. at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Herbert S. Bridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, said the solar wind was interacting with the ionosphere of Venus, producing a magnetic tail that could be detected as a modified plasma flow as far out from the planet as 500 Venus radii. Dr. James A. Dunne, Mariner project scientist, said the magnetic field doubled just before radio occultation but that no evidence of an intrinsic planetary magnetic field was found. Preliminary radio science results indicated that Venus was very round, 100 times less oblate than the earth, and confirmed that Venus had a dayside ionosphere. The mass of the planet was slightly less than that derived from previous data. Hydrogen was a major element of the Venus cloud deck, possibly present in droplets of sulfuric acid as well as water vapor. Manner 10 found no evidence of deuterium on the planet, indicating that the hydrogen had originated from the solar wind. Helium, carbon, and atomic oxygen were found in the atmosphere, with possible traces of argon and neon. Outer atmosphere temperature of 590 K (600°F) was suggested. TV data indicated a uniform main cloud deck with three or four layers and a stratified haze layer. TV pictures in uv showed a classical “Y” feature that originated in the equatorial region and spiraled toward the pole. Clear circulation patterns could be seen at the poles, caused by rising gas transporting excess solar heat from the equatorial zone by convection. The atmosphere was smooth, with no swirling storms, (nasa mor, 11 March 74; Briefing transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 5 Feb. 74, 18; 6 Feb. 74, 1; Miles, LA Times, 6 Feb 74)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
nasa’s 16th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented nasa’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Robert L. Krieger, Director, Wallops Flight Center; Norman Pozinsky, Hq. Director, Network Development and Engineering; Martin L. Raines, Johnson Space Center Director of Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance; Lee R. Sherer, Director, Flight Research Center; and John M. Thole, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Jack M. Campbell, President of the Federation of Rocky Mountain States and former Governor of New Mexico; Harry Dornbrand, Executive Vice President, Fairchild Space and Electronics Co.; and Jesse L. Greenstein, California Institute of Technology astrophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to 12 teams at Centers and Headquarters, the Exceptional Service Medal to 51 persons, and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 16. (Program; NASA Activities, 15 Nov 74,20)
Chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and members of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics received an annual program review at Kennedy Space Center, preliminary to FY 1975 congressional space budget hearings. The Subcommittee was briefed on preparations for the space shuttle, manpower, and plans for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Center personnel would be' further reduced in the next five months, with the closeout of the Skylab program. Runway construction was to begin in the spring for the shuttle, (ksc Release 18—74)
NASA officials testified on the proposal to lease a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System and on the closing of Plum Brook Station, during FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley said NASA recommended lease instead of Government ownership and operation for four reasons. First, contracting for services would be as cost-effective as a conventional network of ground stations. Second, expenditures would be deferred to years when resulting savings could be realized. Funding required to procure a NASA-owned TDRSS would reduce the resources that could be applied to important mainline programs. Third, industrial technology was ready to provide the needed services. Fourth, the proposed arrangement was consistent with long-standing policies and practice of the Government to rely on industry for communications services. Acting Associate Administrator Edwin C. Kilgore of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology testified that Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station, which was to be closed by June 1974 because of FY 1974 Civil Service work force cuts, would keep its Space Power Facility on standby. The Air Force, Navy, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and other agencies were considering using the facility—the world’s largest space environment facility, which included a unique solar simulation system. Also, NASA’s cooperative program with the National Science Foundation to study wind-driven energy devices was based at Plum Brook. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin reported that reduction-in-force notices had been sent to 177 Civil Service employees 11 March, following 180 in the past year, out of LeRc’s 400 separations. Dr. Kilgore said 50 engineers and technicians would be retained for the Space Power Facility at Plum Brook, which once employed 600 workers. (Transcript)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue briefed members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the Skylab program: Carr said that, in space, material samples such as paper, teflon, nylon, and neoprene-covered nylon were self-extinguishing when ignited, because of a lack of convection. Polyurethane, however, burned “like something soaked in gasoline. ... I am very certain that we will never ever see polyurethane foam in a spacecraft.” Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had hindered previous Skylab crews in their ability to walk and run upon return to earth had been solved by a very crude treadmill device used to simulate walking and running. “We worked at it every day, and the condition we came back in was good testimony to the utility of that device.” Pogue narrated a dramatic presentation of slides taken from the Skylab Workshop—of mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded by the clearcutting of timber, cities obscured By smog, and rivers and lakes muddied by pollution and silt. He said that the astronauts had been constantly amazed how clearly such effects could be seen from their perch in space. “It has an emotional feedback.” Carr said that it had become “very, very clear . . . that we don’t have a whole lot of places to live comfortably on this Earth and we must take care of it.” Dr. Gibson said that the crew would like to see future missions make more use of man’s capability to use his own judgment in data collection. “We would like to see instruments with high-data capability which could be pointed and selectively operated.” Carr said that, “if you are going to use man in space, he is going to be happy if he can use his own judgment and ... is productive. If he is nothing but a switch twiddler working against the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going to have psychological problems.” (Transcript)
The House passed the NASA authorization bill, H.R. 13998, by a vote of 341 to 37. The total authorization was $3,259 billion, $6 million over the $3,253 billion suggested by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 10 April and $12 million above the Administration request of $3,247 billion. On the floor, the House had approved an additional $3.9 million for research in coal extraction, coal energy conversion, and mine safety. An additional $2 million was authorized for research in hydrogen production and use. (CR, 25 April 74, H3201-31)
A golden age of planetary exploration was a realistic possibility, Science quoted Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, as saying in an interview. Dr. Fletcher believed space science was likely to be a major thrust of the space program in the 1980s, although NASA’s budget was vulnerable to cuts in the present political climate. He ruled out manned programs other than the space shuttle, but NASA would not become an all-purpose technology development agency for energy, ground transportation, and similar nonspace systems. Applications and materials processing would be important. Dr. Fletcher believed NASA’s program was acceptable to Congress and to the White House and that its future problem would not be wholesale cancellation of the space program but surviving annual budget cuts. Increased competition for money and staff attention in congressional space-related committees could aggravate NASA’s budgetary problems, according to Science. Observers had predicted that Congress would be faced with a choice between the shuttle and continuation of the space science and applications program. The decision could rest on the support of the shuttle program by organized labor, as it had in a 1972 Senate attempt to kill the shuttle. Some scientists had suggested that a $l-billion NASA budget cut would be better for science than a $100-million cut because the former would entail canceling the shuttle, in theory freeing money for space science. Dr. Fletcher had maintained, however, that a balance between programs would be kept. (Hammond, Science, 13 Dec 74, 1011-3) .
Aleksander Y. Bereznyak, Soviet pioneer in jet aircraft development, died in Moscow at the age of 61. Bereznyak, one of a group of design engineers who worked on rocket and jet engines during World War II, had helped design a rocket-powered aircraft flight-tested in May 1942. (.NYT, 14 Aug 74,26)
Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science Vincent L. Johnson testified during FY 1975 NASA authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that the Thor-Delta launch vehicle improvement program begun in 1971 was nearing completion. The most modern Thor-Delta configuration, the 2914, was expected to fly for the first time during the April launch of Westar-A. Final decision for the launch was pending recommendation of the Failure Review Board set up at Goddard Space Flight Center to investigate the 2nd-stage failure of a Thor-Delta during the 18 Jan. Skynet IIA launch. NASA believed that, with the 2914 Delta, the present family of vehicles could launch any mission, but RCA Corp. had determined that a 30% to 35% increase in the 2914 Thor-Delta capability would permit a 24-channel, rather than the usual 12-channel, satellite to be launched into synchronous orbit, rca and McDonnell Douglas Corp. had agreed to share the cost of the uprating and McDonnell Douglas would reimburse NASA for technical direction. NASA had not agreed to make the new 3914 Thor-Delta a part of its launch family but probably would do so following successful proof flight. The first flight was scheduled for 1975. (Transcript)
The House of Representatives by a 253-to-2 vote passed H.R. 11864, the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974. The bill would authorize $50 million over five years for the early commercial demonstration of solar heating technology by NASA and the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, in cooperation with the National Bureau of Standards, the National Science Foundation, the General Services Administration, and other Federal agencies, and early development and commercial demonstration of technology for combined solar heating and cooling. H.R. 11864 was the clean bill that resulted from the 19 Dec. 1973 recommendation -of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy to revise, amend, and combine H.R. 10952, introduced 16 Oct. 1973, and 18 similar bills. The bill was sent to the Senate. (CR, 13 Feb 74, H774; Background <& Legis Hist, Com Print, Feb 74)
General Aviation Programs, forwarded to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by the Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reported on an oversight review based on hearings 14 and 15 May and a visit to general-aviation manufacturers in Kansas 31 May and 1 June. Noting that general aviation made up about 97% of the civil aircraft fleet, flew 79% of the hours and 71% of the miles, and carried up to one third of all intercity passengers—the Subcommittee recommended: continued close NASA-industry cooperation, NASA assistance to Federal agencies to ensure realistic regulations, individual attention to special general-aviation needs, NASA noise and emission research, concerted industry effort to use new technology, NASA effort to increase public visibility of its program, NASA-industry measures toward better understanding of respective roles in research and development, and an annual General Aviation Manufacturers Assn, evaluation of the NASA program. (Com Print)
Dr. Yannevar Bush, who directed the development of the atomic bomb and mobilized U.S. scientific and technical resources during World War II, died in Belmont, Mass., at the age of 84 following a cerebral hemorrhage. Dr. Bush was Dean of Massachusetts Institute of Technology during the 1930s, when he developed the Bush differential analyzer, which led to development of the modern computer. He had been President of Carnegie Institution in Washington 1938-1955 and while there had served as Science Adviser to President Roosevelt. In 1938 he was elected Vice Chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and was naca Chairman 1939-1941. President Roosevelt appointed him Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in 1940 and Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in 1941. In that capacity, Dr. Bush organized an unprecedented team of engineers, scientists, industrialists, and military men and oversaw the development of the atomic bomb, radar, proximity fuse, rocketry, and problems of technical warfare. (Washington, W Post, 30 June 74, B8; nae Release, 19 April 66; 24th, 25th, 27th Ann Rpt of the NACA, 1938,1939,1941) 28 fune—1 July: NASA and the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory, in participation with more than 100 U.S. and foreign experimenters, launched 54 sounding rockets from Wallops Flight Center as part of the Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (Project Aladdin, ’74) program. In addition to the 54 rockets launched during a 24-hr period beginning at 1:00 pm edt 29 June, a pre-ALADDiN chemical experiment was launched aboard a Nike-Iroquois 28 June and four post-ALADDiN meteorological rockets were launched 1 July. Chemical releases made yellow to yellowish green fluorescent aurora-like vapor trails visible over the East Coast. The program was studying dynamic and structural conditions of the atmosphere 48-137 km above the earth. Using small meteorological probes, chemical releases, falling spheres, and more sophisticated spectrometer payloads, the rockets tracked and measured winds, wind shears, temperature and diffusion parameters, upper-atmosphere patterns and dynamics, and structure and composition. Data received from the rockets would be compared with data obtained by Explorer 51 (launched 15 Dec. 1973). The data would be used for predicting communications problems and satellite orbits as well as for weather forecasting and pollution studies, (wfc Releases 74-4, 74-5; afsc Release oip 065.74; AP, W Post, 30 June 74, B3)
Gen. Carl A. Spaatz, first Air Force Chief of Staff, died in Washington, D.C., of congestive heart failure at the age of 83. Gen. Spaatz had been one of the first 25 Americans to earn “wings” as the Army’s First Aero Squadron in 1916. In 1929 Gen. Spaatz, with Gen. Ira S. Eaker, set a refueling endurance flight record by staying aloft 151 hrs over Los Angeles. For this feat he received the Distinguished Flying Cross. During World War II Gen. Spaatz commanded the largest armada of aircraft and airmen ever assembled under the control of a single commander. President Truman appointed him Chief of Staff when the Air Force became a separate branch of the military service in 1947. After his retirement in 1948 he served as chairman of the Civil Air Patrol. (Johnston, NYT, 15 July 74,1)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, said data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) had demonstrated savings in land use planning and regulation of 10 to 100 times conventional costs in both dollars and personnel. Every cloud-free photo taken by the satellite had been sold to the general public at least once. One photo of an Alaskan naval petroleum reserve showed a striking alignment of lakes indicating that the deposits might extend the known petroleum area. Dr. Warren A. Hovis, gsfc scientist, testified that the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm) satellite to be launched in 1977 would use a thermal mapper, with a resolution of 0.5 km in optimum orbit, to determine maximum daily temperature variations and thermal inertia of surface material, identify mineral resources, map natural and man-made thermal effluent, and investigate geothermal source location by remote sensing. . Data from the seasat-a satellite to be launched in 1978-^-or from one of its follow-on systems—-would provide optimum, minimum-time ship routing around storms and away from adverse wind, waves, currents, and ice conditions, Dr. John R. Apel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist, testified 6 March. The savings from a one-day decrease in transatlantic crossing time could amount to millions of dollars each year for shipping interests. (Transcript)
Elmer S. “Todd” Groo had been appointed Associate Administrator for Center Operations at nasa Hq., effective 4 Sept., NASA announced. Groo, the first to hold the position created in the reorganization announced 5 March, would be responsible for agency-wide planning and direction of institutional resources and operational activities at NASA field installations. Groo had retired in 1973 from ibm World Trade Corp., where he had served as vice president since 1959. (nasa Release 72—221; msfc Release 74-146)
The House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Transportation approved a Federal Aviation Administration budget request of -63 million to begin the Aeronautical Satellite (Aerosat) system. The two-satellite system, to be built in cooperation with the European Space Research Organization and Canada, would provide over-the-ocean communications for aircraft. In Subcommittee hearings faa Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield said recent changes in the program had eliminated airline opposition. The changes would limit the size and cost of the program, preclude the imposition of user charges on aircraft operators for recovery of r&d costs, eliminate any commitment for a follow-on operational system, include a very-high-frequency capability for evaluation against L-band, and limit the number of earth terminals. Signing of a- Memorandum of Understanding by the participants was pending Senate approval of the faa budget request. (Subcom Staff Off, interview; Av Wk, 8 April 74,21; SBD, 3 April 74,190)
NASA FY 1975 authorization bill H.R. 13998, a clean bill introduced 4 April to replace H.R. 12689, was reported out of the House Committee oh Science and Astronautics. The revised bill would authorize $3,253 billion in FY 1975 funding, an increase of $6 million over the original request. Authorizations for research and development increased $11 million to $2,357 billion, and construction of facilities decreased $5 million, to $146.5 million. Funding for research and program management remained the same. Iiicluded in the k&d increases was a $2Q-million addition, to a total $112.3 million, for the space shuttle main engine, which had encountered technical problems during early development. The increase was proposed to add confidence in meeting schedules and hold total program costs at the current projection. A $4.3-million increase, to $170.7 million, was added for aeronautical research and technology. A $1.8-million increase brought the total for space and nuclear research and technology to $76.6 million. Manned space flight operations funding was decreased $15 million, to $308.3 million, including a $5-million decrease (to $109.6 million) for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and a $10-million decrease (to $165.2 million) in development, test, and mission operations. Changes in facility construction authorizations included an increase of $4 million, to $10.04 million for construction of the infrared telescope facility in Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The Committee also requested that NASA make a scientific and technological inventory of its capability to contribute to such critical national needs as energy, transportation, and environmental control. NASA was to report to the Committee by 1 Aug. (H Rpt 93-983)
Francis C. Schwenk, Director of the Research Div. in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified on four NASA projects in hearings on space nuclear propulsion and power before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Early research had shown that high-temperature thermionic converters combined with a compact nuclear reactor could provide an efficient power plant for advanced planetary missions. NASA technology would now focus on thermionic energy conversion for achieving highly efficient operation at lower temperatures. During the Apollo and Pioneer programs, NASA had proved the advantages of a small (40- to 70-w) radioisotope-thermoelectric-generator power system, which had operated at 6% efficiency at a cost of $20 million per kilowatt. NASA was developing technology for a 0.5- to 2.0-kw gas-turbine conversion system (Bray-ton energy conversion system) to achieve efficiencies of 25% and reduce costs to one fourth. Gaseous-core nuclear rocket research had led to plasma-core reactors as advanced energy sources for terrestrial as well as space propulsion uses; use of uranium hexafluoride as plasma fuel was expected to achieve efficiencies of more than 50%. Lewis Research Center research into superconducting magnets and plasma confinement and heating in advanced steady-state schemes was expected to show within a year whether a superconductive magnetic apparatus (summa) could produce fusionlike plasmas as predicted. (Text)
The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee continued hearings on S. 2350 and S. 3484, bills to develop an operational Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 6, 8, 9 Aug.]. Frank G. Zarb, Office of Management and Budget Associate Director for Material Resources, Energy and Science, warned against immediate development of an operational erts system, citing budgeting restraints and marginal value of current erts data. Since an advanced satellite offering higher spatial resolution would increase the usefulness of erts data, Zarb contended that the third satellite, erts-c, should be experimental. His view was supported by S. Benedict Levin, Executive Vice President of Earth Satellite Corp., and by John V. Granger, Acting Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs for the State Dept. (Transcript)
Comsat General Corp. announced the award of a cohtract to ScientificAtlanta, Inc., for 100 shipboard antennas and associated terminal equipment as part of the maritime communications satellite (Marisat) system to provide improved communications to commercial 'ships at sea. The contract was expected to exceed $2 million and included options to purchase up to 300 additional terminals, (comsat Gen Corp Release 74r-31) 6, 11 June: Hearings on converting solar energy into electricity by photovoltaic devices were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy as part of a continuing series of hearings on solar energy. John V. Goldsmith, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist, said the total annual U.S. production of photovoltaic solar cells was 50 to 75 kw, mostly for spacecraft systems. In space, solarcell systems were without parallel but large-scale applications on the earth could not be achieved until systems could be produced in adequate volume at commercially competitive prices. Goldsmith recommended a large-scale photovoltaic technology development program and said that a terrestrial photovoltaic system, with advantages of an inexhaustible energy source and minimal environmental impact, could be reduced in cost from its current $30 per watt to an economically feasible $0.50 per watt by 1985 but would require Federal funding of more than $250 million. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs, said NASA was continuing investigations of orbiting satellite power stations. A microwave energy project was studying problems of processing large amounts of power. However, an orbiting power station would weigh 11 million kg and require a second-generation shuttle in addition to a nuclear-powered shuttle to put it into synchronous orbit. (Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers testified on the manned space program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight during FY 1975 authorization hearings. Myers said NASA’s ability to hold close to the original cost target for the space shuttle in spite of schedule adjustments in the last two years was “due to bringing on our contractors below our cost estimates” and the ability 6f the management structure to remain dynamic and react to changes and “surprise problems.” He was confident that the average-cost-per-flight commitment of $10.5 million in 1971 dollars would be maintained. However, resolution of the protested selection of Thiokol Corp. for the solid-fueled rocket motor contract was necessary before work on the motor could begin; “a timely start of this . . . activity is very important to orderly progress in the shuttle development schedule.” In the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the astp spacecraft was to be delivered to Kennedy Space Center in the fall, joint docking system qualification testing and preflight docking system compatibility tests were to be completed during the winter, experiment hardware was to be qualified by early spring, and flight readiness activities were to be conmleted by spring, leading to the July launch. NASA had allocated $13 million for experiments for astp. More than 140 proposals from the scientific community had been evaluated by eminent scientists and medical doctors. The final, “first-rate” experiment package had been given final approval by the Administrator. Following astp, two Saturn Vs, two Saturn IBs, one complete and one partially complete command and service module, the unused Skylab backup Workshop cluster, and one astp docking module and system would remain unused. Acquisition cost of the hardware was $870 million. With the conclusion of the programs, the hardware would be stored. Total storage costs per year would be $100 000. After FY 1975, disposition of the hardware would have to be considered. (Transcript)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, a leading U.S. atomic scientist, died at the age of 72 in Boulder, Colo., of complications from heart disease. In 1940 Dr. Condon had become a member of the National Defense Research Council and, in 1941, a member of the Roosevelt Committee on Uranium Research. During the World War II he played an important role in the development of the atomic bomb. In 1945 Dr. Condon had been appointed Director of the National Bureau of Standards but resigned in 1951 because of House Un-American Activities Committee investigations as a “weak” security link. In 1952 he appeared before the Committee and denied charges under oath. From 1945 to 1951 Dr. Condon had been a member of the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics. In the 1950s he developed a missile nosecone—later used by U.S. astronauts—that could withstand the high temperatures of reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. In 1954 he returned to teaching and, while on the Univ. of Colorado faculty, he undertook an Air Force study to investigate sightings of unidentified flying objects. (Weil, W Post, 27 March 74, C4; Slusser, W Star-News, 27 March 74, B5; Who’s Who; House Un-Am Activities Com Special Subcom Rpt)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs George W. Cherry testified in hearings on technology for subsonic aircraft before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. NASA aeronautical programs were structured to provide the airframe industry and its airline customers an efficient and environmentally benign technology base for a new-generation subsonic aircraft. The supercritical aerodynamics program included studies to improve structural efficiency without increasing drag, thrust, or fuel consumption. F-8 and F-lll aircraft flight tests with the supercritical wing had shown that using supercritical aerodynamics on passenger transports would increase profits 2.5% over those of conventional aircraft, or $78 million a year, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. Advanced transport technology studies showed that aircraft extensively employing composite materials would show a yearly profit of 2.7%, or $100 million, on a fleet of 280 two-hundred-passenger aircraft. NASA propulsion technology had initiated an advanced multistage axial-flow experimental compressor weighing 60% less than conventional compressors. This, with technology advances in other components, could reduce gross aircraft weights and fuel consumption 10%. (Transcript) ■
Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, nasa Chief of Solar Physics, testified during NASA FY 1975 authorization hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight that Skylab data had changed the understanding of the solar wind. Scientists had thought the solar wind reached the earth because of an expansion of the sun’s corona, but Skylab data indicated the sun’s magnetic fields confined the corona material and pulled it inward. The corona expanded and escaped in a significant amount only through coronal holes in the magnetic field. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Life Sciences, testified that the Skylab 2 and Skylab 3 crews (launched 25 May and 28 July 1973) had experienced similar reductions in their blood cell mass, with a red blood cell reduction. However, after the 59-day Skylab 3 mission the compensating response of the blood-forming elements was faster, returning the mass almost to the pr'eflight level within two weeks after splashdown—rather than the six weeks required after the 28-day Sky-lab 2 mission. The Skylab 4 crew (which splashed down Feb. 8 after 16 Nov. 1973 launch) showed much less red blood cell loss and a much faster return to preflight levels after the 84-day mission, indicating adaptive changes to the space environment. The space life sciences program sought to understand the mechanisms of adaptive changes and would “undoubtedly assist our understanding of basic body physiology of man here on earth.” Capt. Chester M. Lee, Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Program Director, said that during Skylah missions the orbital altitude and the limited number of ground stations had permitted communications coverage only 38% of the time. The lower orbital altitude for ASTP would reduce communications coverage to 17%. To alleviate the problem, the Apollo command module was being modified for communications via the ATS—F Applications Technology Satellite, scheduled for 1974 launch. Communications woxdd move from a manned spacecraft through an unmanned communications satellite to the ground for the first time. Coverage would be increased to 50%. The present configuration of the communications network would furnish minimum real-time data to meet experimental requirements. (Transcript)
Nelson A. Rockefeller was sworn in as Vice President of the United States after the House confirmed his nomination. The Senate had confirmed the nomination 10 Dec. (CR, 10 Dec 74, D1343; 19 Dec 74, D1413, D1416)
David Baker’s annual review of the NASA budget in Spaceflight concluded that the FY 1975 NASA budget marked “a significant turning point,” because the cuts were not as drastic as they had been in recent years, and, most important, there was a major increase for new programs—from $10.5 million in 1974 to $37.7 million. This led Baker to label “a trifle premature” his prediction of a year earlier that NASA might be relegated indefinitely to the role of serving “as a launch vehicle for satellites and space probes of other agencies, organizations, and nations.” (SF, Oct 74, 362-5) November 1974
Former Mercury astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American to orbit the earth, was elected U.S. Senator from Ohio by a wide margin over his Republican opponent, Ralph J. Perk. Glenn had withdrawn from a 1964 senatorial bid after a fall affected his inner ear. In 1970 he lost the Democratic primary to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who in turn lost the general election to Robert Taft, Jr. Metzenbaum, appointed to fill the vacated seat of William B. Saxhe in September 1973, lost to Glenn in the 1974 Democratic primary. (Farrell, NYT, 6 Nov 74, 37)
Siegbert B. Poritzky, Special Assistant for Systems and Research for the Air Transport Association, presented U.S. scheduled airlines’ views on nasa’s role and responsibility to the aircraft industry, before a House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on HUD-Space-Science-Veterans hearing on FY 1975 appropriations. Poritzky said it was NASA’s responsibility to build a technology base for aeronautics through innovative independent research in addition to undertaking directed research in response to specific problems. Also vitally important was NASA’s responsiveness to the needs of other agencies. Airlines recommended a $24.5-million increase in funding for NASA’s aeronautical programs— for propulsion environment-impact minimization, aircraft operations, alternative fuels, wake-vortex minimization, and noise research. James J. Hartford, Executive Secretary of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, testified that some cuts in the NASA budget were “penny wise and pound foolish.” Additional but “relatively modest” funding would prevent the High Energy Astronomical Observatory (heao) program—which was to investigate the scientifically exciting black holes in space—from “limping along.” Scientists had been skeptical of the usefulness of the space shuttle to science, but the Skylab Apollo Telescope Mount discoveries had so far exceeded expectations that astronomers “could hardly wait” for the Large Space Telescope, planned for launch on the shuttle. “That project unified the space science community” as “nothing ever did in the past.” Other “logical follow-ons” to the approved program were urged: Mariner Jupiter-Uranus 1979 mission, Jupiter orbiter, Venus atmospheric probe, and a follow-on to the Viking Mars 1975 with a rover capability. Hartford also suggested that NASA and other Government agencies were not doing enough work in space applications. Cuts in NASA’s communications satellite research and development program had been based on the incorrect assumption that private industry could take on full comsat r&d with no further Government stimulus. Early commercial exploitation of communications R&D had been rapid only because Government research had reduced risks to an acceptable level. Competition was now coming from Canadian, Japanese, and European organizations with “a lot of government backing” who had developed a technical capability approaching that of the U.S. and were willing to take high risks. (Transcript)
President Ford nominated Nelson A. Rockefeller, former Governor of New York, as 41st Vice President of the United States. {PD, 26 Aug 74,1050-1; 1063,1064)
The House agreed to H. Res. 988, the Committee Reform Amendments of 1974, by a 359-to-7 vote, reorganizing House committee jurisdictions and procedures. The name of the Committee on Science and Astronautics was changed to Committee on Science and Technology effective 3 Jan. 1975, and the Committee’s jurisdiction was broadened to include all research and development in non-nuclear energy, environment, weather, and aviation, with special oversight over all nonmilitary Federal r&d. Legislative responsibility for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration would be shared with the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. Responsibility for Federal Aviation Administration civil aviation R&D programs would be added to that for NASA’s aeronautical R&D. Major emphasis on the civilian national space program would continue. (CR, 8 Oct 74, D1210-11, H10146-69; 17 Feb 75, 534-5; House Com Staff interview, 24 March 76)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology, reporting on almost a year’s investigation of NASA’s tracking and data acquisition program, said the program was effective and efficient and that planned consolidation was progressing well. The consolidation, to be completed by 1976 with a reduction of stations from 25 to 15, would combine the Manned Space Flight Network and the Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network into one Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn). The Subcommittee recommended that the FY 1976 NASA Authorization request include a detailed analysis of the need for an additional subnet of three 64-m antennas for the Deep Space Network and report on the status of relations and agreements with the U.S.S.R. The Subcommittee warned that NASA’s T&DA capabilities were not designed for the workload that future operational systems would require; solutions should be studied by the President’s Science Adviser. NASA was asked to furnish an analysis of lease versus purchase of satellites for the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) in its FY 1975 authorization request. (Com Print)
Kennedy Space Center awarded two contract extensions. A one-year $13257 787 cost-plus-award fee extension was awarded to Federal Electric Corp.- for support services, including launch instrumentation and communications support, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The new award brought the total contract amount to $144 962 628. Bendix Corp. Launch Support Div. was awarded a $20 640 874, 16-mo extension to continue launch support services at ksc, including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39. The extension brought the total contract amount to $261 498 038. (ksc Releases 93-74 ; 94-74) 11,12,13, 18 June: Hearings on H.R. 10392, a bill authorizing NASA to conduct research on ground propulsion systems, were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Rep. Charles A. Vanik (D-Ohio) said that he was becoming impatient waiting “for an energy efficient* American automobile which can meet our pollution standards.” It was “time we truly involved NASA—on a massive scale—in solving our earth-bound problems.” Carl E. Nash of the Public Interest Research Group suggested that serious consideration be given the Dept, of Transportation or the Environmental Protection Agency, rather than NASA, when giving authority for ground propulsion research and development, because these agencies had had more experience in the field. Sydney L. Terry, Vice President for Public Responsibility and Consumer Affairs at Chrysler Corp., said many had questioned whether the Federal Government had a legitimate role in automotive propulsion technology, but Chrysler would “welcome NASA’s interest in the automobile with enthusiasm and hope.” NASA’s skill and experience in long-range basic research and in the fields of thermodynamics, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, and aerodynamics could contribute substantially to the development of efficient transportation. The way to proceed was by a “thoughtful division of research and development work between Government and industry.” (Transcript)
The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
Alexander P. Vinogradov, leading geochemist of the U.S.S.R. and vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, had died at Moscow at the age of 80, according to Tass, the Soviet news agency. Vinogradov had identified 40 chemical elements in earth’s soil zones and had developed a new field of investigation called cosmochemistry—the chemical analysis of lunar and Venus composition. He had remained active as the head of Moscow’s Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical Chemistry. (Tass, in FBIS, 17 Nov 75; NYT, 19 Nov 75, 38; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 112)
NASA marked the 60th anniversary of the first meeting of NASA’s predecessor institution, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) Established by a law signed by President Woodrow Wilson 3 March 1915, NACA had 12 presidentially appointed members from the military and scientific communities “to supervise and direct the scientific study of the problems of flight, with a view to their practical solution” and “to direct and conduct research and experiments in aeronautics.” During its nearly half-century of operation, NACA was responsible for the technical proficiency of U.S. aviation. Early NACA wind-tunnel research yielded the unique NACA cowling and wing shapes that would dominate aeronautics into the 1940s. NACA’s fundamental research and its direct application to industrial, military, and civil aviation helped create the world’s greatest commercial air transportation network before World War II and the world’s strongest air forces during that conflict. In 1947, it was the NACA-Air Force X—1 aircraft that broke the sound barrier. The agency had remained small in size and budget through 1939 when 523 persons worked with $4.5 million in funds. By the mid-1940s the staff had grown to 6800 and its budget to an annual $40 million. In 1958 the National Space Act dissolved NACA, transferring its 8000 workers and “all functions, powers, duties and obligations” to the new National Aeronautics and Space Administration. (NASA Release 75—86; Anderson, Orders of Magnitude, 1—3)
Dr. Walter C. Williams’ appointment as NASA Chief Engineer became effective. In his new position, Dr. Williams, who had been vice president and general manager of the Aerospace Corp. Vehicle Systems Div., would be responsible for reviewing the technical excellence of all NASA programs and for assuring their development on a sound engineering basis with proper programmatic controls. From 1940 to 1958 Dr. Williams had been employed by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and, after 1958, by NASA. His previous positions included chief of the High-Speed Flight Station, Associate Director of Manned Space Center, Associate Director of Mercury’s Space Task Group at Langley Research Center, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Flight Operations at NASA Headquarters. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Appointment of Dr. S. Ichtiaque RasooL special assistant to the NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, to be the Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science became effective. In that position Dr. Rasool would be primary adviser to Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science. He would also serve as chairman of the Space Science Steering Committee, responsible for drawing skills and resources of the nation’s scientific community into NASA programs. Dr. Rasool had joined NASA in January 1965 as senior research scientist at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies; in 1971 he was named Deputy Director for Planetary Programs, serving until 1974 when he became special assistant to the Deputy Associate Administrator. (NASA anno, 22 Aug 75) 3 August—6 November: Ariel 5, a U.S.-U.K. cooperative satellite launched 15 Oct. 1974 to study galactic and extragalactic x-rays, detected weak cosmic x-ray emissions from the constellation Orion on 3 Aug. The emissions, subsequently confirmed by NASA’s Explorer 53 (SAS 3 Small Astronomy Satellite launched 7 May 1975), steadily increased in intensity until they were five times greater than any observed to date. New York Times reporter Walter Sullivan quoted Dr. Terry Matilsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, as saying that when the emissions were first observed “we couldn’t believe it.” Sas 3—operated by Goddard Space Flight Center—was able to pinpoint the location of the emissions to within 1 or 2 arc-min. With this clue scientists hoped to explain the phenomenon using ground-based optical and radio telescopes. Observatories around the world had been alerted and were trying to pinpoint the source. The Philadelphia Inquirer reported MIT’s Dr. Saul A. Rappaport as speculating that the emissions probably had been caused by masses of material falling from a large star into an extremely dense neutron star or black hole. The falling matter would heat up enough to emit bursts of x-rays and visible light. Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, reported 6 Nov. to the House Committee on Science and Technology’s Subcommittee on Science and Applications that the Explorer 53 observations had identified the optical counterpart of the x-ray emissions as a faint, otherwise normal-looking star that had brightened 100 times over previous observations. Dr. Hinners repeated Dr. Rappaport’s theory and told the subcommittee that, because a similar brightening of this star had been observed in 1917, it was being classified as a recurrent nova. (1977 NASA authorization hearing transcripts, vol 1, part 1; Sullivan, NYT, 17 Aug 75, 21; AP, P Inq, 31 Aug 75)
President Ford transmitted to both Houses of Congress proposed legislation to create, within the Executive Office of the President, an Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by a director who would also serve as presidential science and technology advisor. In his letters of transmittal to Speaker of the House of Representatives Carl Albert and President of the Senate Vice President Nelson A. Rockefeller, President Ford said that the new director would “identify new opportunities for using science and technology to improve our understanding of national problems and to contribute to their solution. He will also chair the Federal Council on Science and Technology, and I expect him to provide advice on the scientific and technological considerations in Federal policies, programs, and budgets.” The President said that the director and deputy director would be presidential appointees. The office would draw extensively on the nation’s scientific and engineering community for advice and assistance, and the director and staff would also call upon Federal agencies for assistance in carrying out their responsibilities. {PD, 16 June 75, 610)
The; House of Representatives, by a vote of 318 to 72, passed H.R. 4700, the bill authorizing NASA $3 585 873 000 in funds for FY1976 and $922 450 000 for the transition period 1 July through 30 Sept. 1976. The bill was passed as reported out of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics 14 March, (CR, 9 April 75, H2549—75)
Space programs that create new commercial activity, new wealth, and new jobs were essential to the growth of both the U.S. and Europe, Sen. Frank E. Moss (D—Utah) told the Assembly of Western European Union. Reviewing policies that had governed agreements on space with Western Europe, Moss warned that continued cooperation in space would hinge on Europe’s paying its full share of the expenses. Concentration on programs with immediate application to earth problems should not mean abandonment of space science, or loss of “the vision and imagination that have been so important to our achievements to date,” the senator said. (CR, 10 Dec 75, S 21650; SBD, 5 Dec 75, 185)
Westar I, first U.S. domestic commercial communications satellite (launched by NASA for Western Union Telegraph Co. 13 April 1974), had transmitted its first live sports event—the Milwaukee Brewers vs. Texas Rangers baseball game—within the 48 contiguous states, WU announced. WU Vice President Dow C. Pruitt noted that the low-cost transmission reflected “the power of technology to change basic living patterns.” (Westar News, 11 Aug 75)
Dale D. Myers, president of Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aircraft Operations, announced appointment of Bastian Hello as president of Rockwell’s B —1 Bomber Div. Hello, who had been vice president of the division since 1973, was succeeding Robert E. Greer, who was retiring. Before joining the B—1 Div., Hello was vice president and general manager of Rockwell’s Space Div.’s Apollo launch operations organization at Kennedy Space Center. (RI Release LA—2)
“Clear and immediate benefits to society” that NASA could produce would justify a 25% increase in its budget, said Rep. Don Fuqua (D—Fla.), chairman of the House subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, urging the space agency to come up with plans for such a program. Noting that the Administration had been considering across-the-board cuts in the Federal budget, Rep. Fuqua said the President and the Office of Management and Budget should reconsider the NASA cuts, as returns from the space program should give it higher priority than nonproducing areas of the budget. The subcommittee’s three-volume report, “Future Space Programs,” called for new space systems for educational and medical services, and for new earth-survey satellites to provide maritime, agricultural, geological, and demographic data. The report stressed that the agency should offer both short-term and long-term plans. The latter should include plans for lunar bases, orbital colonies, extraterrestrial communications, planetary and stellar exploration, satellite solar power, and disposal of nuclear waste. Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.) of the House Committee on Science and Technology endorsed the subcommittee report, which he said contained “sensible recommendations,” noting particularly the concept of space-based generation of electrical power. Growth of the nation, said Teague, “is fundamentally dependent upon our continuing its number one ranking in science and technology.” (IFPost, 6 Nov 75, A10; NYT, 6 Nov 75, 51; SBD, 6 Nov 75, 28-30)
At least five of NASA’s 25 000 employees had made use in past years of hunting facilities owned by Rockwell International, and the agency and Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had begun investigating the matter. The investigation had not been confined to entertainment at the Rockwell facility in Md., but included “receipt of other gratuities such as Redskin (football) tickets and use of hospitality suites,” the senator said. Rockwell had been prime contractor for the $6.4-billion Space Shuttle program that accounted for more than a third of NASA’s budget. Sen. Proxmire, vice chairman of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, had directed the committee staff to assist NASA in determining the full extent of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA contractors.” NASA had placed five inspectors on the case. (NYT, 19 Nov 75, 1)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
Does not include a supplemental request for pay increases introduced as H.R. 13172 and signed into P.L. 94—303 on 1 June 1976. Transitional Period NASA Budget Authorization Congressional Adjustments Program Budget House Senate Conference Conference Request Changes Changes Changes Recommendation Research & Development 730.6 -30.0 -26.0 -30.0 700.6 Research & Program 213.8 0 0 0 213.8 Construction of Facilities Totals 14.5 -6.5 -3.0 -3.7 10.8 958.9 -36.5 -29.0 -33.7 925.2
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics favorably reported out H.R. 4700 authorizing FY 1976 appropriations for NASA. Changes recommended by the Committee would increase the total NASA authorization by $46.9 million, to $3,586 billion. [See also 3 Feb.] Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Research and Development Space Shuttle 0 Space Flight Operations -4.0 Advanced Missions + 1.5 Physics and Astronomy + 1.0 Lunar and Planetary -1.0 Launch Vehicle Procure- 0 Space Applications + 6.5 Aeronautical Research and 0 Space and Nuclear Research +2.0 and Technology Energy Technology Applications 0 Tracking and Data Acquisition —2.2 Technology Utilization +2.0 R&D Totals +5.8 Research and Program Management Basic submission* 0 R&PM Totals* 0 Construction of Facilities Modification of 11- by 11-ft 0 transonic wind tunnel at ARC Modification of 40- by 80-ft +12.5 subsonic wind tunnel at ARC Addition to lunar sample —2.5 curatorial facility at JSC Addition for composite model 0 and metal finishing shops at LaRC Construction of transonic re- +27.5 search tunnel at LaRC 1 206.0 Accepted as presented. 203.1 To decrease development, test, and mission-operation activities. 3.0 To increase studies of large space structures, manned orbital systems concepts, and in-orbit maintenance. 156.8 To increase stratospheric research. 258.9 To decrease funding for the Lunar Research Program. 166.9 Accepted as presented. 181.5 To increase emphasis on weather and climate research, earth resources surveys, advanced communications research, data-management techniques, and Space Shuttle payload definition and early flight tests. 175.4 Accepted as presented. 76.9 To accelerate high pressure hydrogen propulsion systems tests and high temperature composites research. 5.9 Accepted as presented. 240.8 To decrease operations and advanced missions activity. 9.0 To accelerate effort of NASA TU teams to work with the public and . increase space benefits analysis 2 684.2 776.0 Accepted as presented. 2.7 Accepted as presented. 12.5 To repower tunnel. Not in original 0 Deleted from funds. 1.9 Accepted as presented. 27.5 Construction of high Reynolds number transonic wind tunnel. Not in original request. Recommended Changes in the FY 1976 NASA Authorization by the House Committee (continued) Difference Recommended Purpose for Program from Submission Authorization Recommended (millions) (millions) Change Construction of Facilities: (cont.t Space Shuttle facilities -0.9 46.3 Deferment of modifications of two hypergolic checkout and refurbishment facilities and construction of facilities to house microwave scanning beam landing system. Rehabilitation of facilities 0 16.0 Accepted as presented. Minor construction of new facilities or additions to old 0 5.0 Accepted as presented. Facility planning and design + 4.5 13.8 For planning and design work assoeiated with construction and modification of two wind tunnels mentioned above. C of F Totals + 41.1 125.7 Grand Totals9 + 43.7 3 585.9
NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
LaRC announced that James S. Martin, Jr., manager of the Viking project, would resign in December to become vice president for advanced programs at Martin Marietta Aerospace. Martin, who came to LaRC in 1964, had managed the Viking project since 1968, directing work at JPL, at Martin Marietta’s facility in Denver, and at universities and subcontractor plants throughout the U.S. Martin Marietta had been prime contractor for the Viking project. LaRC said that G. Calvin Broome, Viking mission director, would become Viking project manager 15 Nov., directing the 18-mo extended mission from the control center at JPL in Pasadena, Calif. (NASA special anno., 5 Nov 76; LaRC Release 76-37; ATT, 6 Nov 76, 9)
Two “pilots of note”—Gen. James M. Doolittle and Neil A. Armstrong— had announced plans to establish a Charles A. Lindbergh Memorial Fund to support the work of young scientists, explorers, and conservationists, the New York Times reported. Gen. Doolittle, leader of the first World War II air raid on Tokyo, and astronaut Armstrong, first man to walk on the moon, would head a drive to raise $5 million for the fund by 20 May 1977, the fiftieth anniversary of Lindbergh’s takeoff on the first solo nonstop flight across the Atlantic Ocean. Income from the endowment, expected to be about $400 000 a yr, would be distributed to Lindbergh Fellows who “combine qualities that made [Lindbergh] a unique human being,” said Doolittle at a press conference. He told reporters Lindbergh “would have been happier with a living memorial than one out of bronze and stone.” Lindbergh, who died in 1974 at the age of 72, had continued in aviation as a test pilot and airline executive but had branched out into medical technology research and wildlife conservation in his later years, the NYT said. The fund’s sponsoring committee included representatives of the Explorers Club and the World Wildlife Fund, as well as other areas of interest to Lindbergh: aerospace, ecology, exploration, and science and engineering. Announcement of selections for fellowships would be made yearly on 21 May, anniversary of Lindbergh’s arrival in Paris after his 33-hr flight in Spirit of St. Louis. (NYT, 20 Oct 76, 22)
The U.S. Senate by unanimous vote of 88 ratified the multination convention on registration of objects launched into outer space. All 37 countries now members of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space—which drafted the convention—were expected to ratify it; France and Bulgaria had already ratified, and 24 nations including the USSR had signed it. Registration would be with the secretary general of the UN, reporting was mandatory, and the information to be provided “as soon as practicable” included the name of the launching state (or states), appropriate designator of the space object (or its registration number), date and territory or location of the launch, basic orbital parameters (apogee, perigee, orbital period, inclination), and general functions of the space object. The convention embraced objects launched into earth orbit or into space transit—lunar or deep-space probes—but did not require reporting on objects in brief transit through outer space, such as sounding rockets or ballistic-missile test vehicles. The convention would supersede the voluntary system that had been in operation since 1962; the U.S. State Department had told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that, although nearly all countries launching objects into outer space had respected the voluntary system, there had never been agreement on the kinds of information to be supplied and the information conveyed to the secretary general had never been uniform. The committee’s only question regarding cooperation was the People’s Republic of China, which had not reported on its outer space launchings; Senator Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) had asked Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger to find out if mainland China would register under the new convention. NASA had told the committee that the U.S. would not incur substantial costs from the convention’s requirement that participating states with space tracking facilities help in identifying a space object, when requested by another participant on the grounds that the object to be identified was “hazardous or deleterious.” NASA was already tracking nearly 5000 space objects, some as small as a dinner plate, and knew which nation owned most of them. (NASA Ofc Legis. Affairs, report for 21 June 76; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 63)
As he assumed the presidency of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. William D. McElroy (chancellor of the Univ. of Calif, in San Diego, and former director of the National Science Foundation) said he planned to reorganize the AAAS journal Science, involve the association more deeply in government and industry activity, and quadruple the membership. Dr. McElroy, called the “leading world authority on the biochemistry of firefly light,” said he hoped to stop the publication of pure research papers in Science, as more specialized scientific journals could do this more efficiently, and to promote a free flow of ideas between the universities and the industrial community by Four of the comsats in NASA's 1976 launch schedule: A, Comsat General’s Marisat, launched 19 Feb.; B, NATO in—A, launched 22 Apr.; C, Comsat General’s Comstar 1A, launched 13 May; D, Indonesia's Palapa, launched 8 July. including more articles of interest to users in industry and engineering, and paying more attention to science issues in government policy. He referred to the “unfortunate separation” between industry and university after World War II when science gained new nonindustrial financial support; by increasing the circulation of Science magazine, he would expand the AAAS membership, as the magazine is available only to members. (NYT, 2 Jan 76, 10) 5 January-4 February: Permission to fly the British- and French-built Concorde supersonic transport into the U.S. was the subject of a hearing called by Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, Jr., in Washington to help him decide the matter within 30 days. Basic arguments pro and con were not new, observers agreed, as they had all been thrashed out in a bitter 1971 congressional fight that halted U.S. efforts to build an SST after about $1 billion had been spent on the project. The case against the Concorde had been that it was too noisy and that its emissions polluted the atmosphere and depleted the stratospheric ozone shield. Spokesmen for the Concorde cited its benefits in speed of travel and technical achievement. At the hearing, representatives of the Va. state government called for approval of Concorde landings at Dulles, in view of the airport’s significance as Virginia’s international gateway; these advocates found themselves opposed to the views of the local Va. jurisdictions which did not want the SST landing there. Gov. Hugh Carey of N.Y. opposed the Concorde’s coming into JFK Airport because of the noise. On 6 Jan. the Environmental Protection Agency reversed its previous stand, calling for a total ban on commercial operations in the U.S. of the British-French SST. On 13 Jan., the Aerospace Industries Assn.—U.S. manufacturers of aerospace vehicles and components— submitted a letter deploring the cancellation of the U.S. program and supporting Concorde’s application to operate. On 29 Jan., the Am. Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, claiming to represent 22 000 engineers and scientists, called for a limited-operations trial period to collect data as the basis for a final decision on giving Concorde access to U.S. airports. The Concorde had begun regular passenger service 21 Jan. between Paris and Rio de Janeiro, and between London and Bahrain, as the climax of 14 yr of technical cooperation between Britain and France and a joint investment of more than $3 billion. DOT Secy. Coleman announced 4 Feb. that he had granted the Concorde “limited scheduled commercial flights” into the U.S. for a period not to exceed 16 mo under precise limitations. British Airways and Air France could send up to 2 flights per day into JFK and Dulles airports, but the permission could be revoked upon 4 mo notice or immediately in case of emergency. The limitations included prohibitions on landing or takeoff in the U.S. before 7 am or after 10 pm local time, and on flying at supersonic speed over the U.S. or any of its territories. In his 61-page decision with 36 pages of appendix, Coleman said the 16-mo period should be long enough to demonstrate the validity of his judgment. Upon hearing of the secretary’s decision, 2 members of the Senate Commerce Committee were narrowly defeated in an attempt to ban the Concorde from landing in the U.S. by attaching such a ban to a bill authorizing funds for airport development. The Concorde’s only supersonic competitor was the USSR’s Tupolev-144, in service since 26 Dec. 1975 within the Soviet Union as a freight plane. (NYT, 5 Jan 76, 1; Av Wk, 5 Jan 76, 26; W Star, 6 Jan 76, A-3; W Post, 6 Jan 76, A—1; AIA Aerospace News Release 76-1; text, AIAA letter to DOT, 29 Jan 76; NYT, 21 Jan 76, 16-17; WStar, 21 Jan 76, A-3; B Sun, 28 Jan 76, A-6; NYT, 1 Feb 76, 3-1; DOT Release 09-76, 4 Feb. 76; NYT, 5 Feb 76, 1, 16, 32M; W Post, 5 Feb 76, A-l, A-18; B Sun, 5 Feb 76, A14)
Rockwell International—prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle—announced that it had purchased more than $18 million of goods and services from minority businesses throughout the U.S. in 1976, a 58% increase over 1975. Rockwell had been cited by the Black Businessmen’s Assn, of Los Angeles for its participation in “Black Economic Development,” and by the Natl. Assn, of Black Manufacturers for its contributions to industry development. Kenneth B. Gay, Rockwell vice president for purchasing, said that “qualified minority businesses in the more technical areas” had been hard to find in the past, but there were “many highly skilled, competent small companies competing aggressively for our business” at present. The more than 500 minority firms supplying Rockwell received about $5 million for machining and specialty fabrication; more than $2 million for metal structures; another $2 million each for raw materials and supplies and for technical services; and more than $ 1 million each for electrical equipment and for maintenance and repair services. (Rockwell Release R-46)
Arnold Palmer, piloting the Learjet “200 Yankee” named in honor of the U.S. Bicentennial, landed at Arapahoe County airport near Denver after a record-setting flight around the world that took 57 hr 25 min 42 sec and covered 37 000 km. Palmer’s flight was 28 hr 43 min 19 sec faster than the longstanding record set by Arthur Godfrey and Dick Merrill in 1966. Accompanied by the official observer and timer for the National Aeronautic Assn., Robert J. Serling, and by copilots James E. Bir and L.L. Purkey, Palmer averaged better than 770 kph on the 2.5-day flight that made 9 stops in 7 countries. In meeting officials at each of the stops, Palmer presented Bicentennial flags and bronze replicas of the Declaration of Independence; at Wake Is., he left a silver plaque commemorating the U.S. Marine Corps defense of the island in World War II. In addition to the speed-around-the-world record, NAA planned to claim for the Palmer flight 18 additional records for speed over recognized course: e.g., Boston to Paris, Paris to Tehran, etc. Since he took up flying in the 1950s, champion golfer Palmer had logged about 4500 hr as a pilot. (NAA News, July 76, 1)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
NASA announced the appointment of Harold E. Pryor as Deputy Administrative Assistant for Technology Utilization in the NASA Hq Office of Industry Affairs. Pryor had been with NASA since 1964, serving as director of the management systems office, the staff operations division in the Office of Procurement, and the NASA/DOD Contract Administration Services Office in the Defense Supply Agency Hq. He was also executive assistant to the Director, Manned Space Flight Management Operations, until July 1973, when he became director of the Scientific and Technical Information Office. Pryor earned bachelor’s degrees in naval science and tactics and in aeronautical engineering; he served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. He would succeed Clare F. Farley, recently retired from NASA. (NASA anno. 27 July 76)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
President Ford named Shuttle Orbiter 101 the Enterprise, over the objections of NASA officials who preferred the name Constitution and had planned the Orbiter rollout ceremonies for 17 Sept., Constitution Day. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had paid a 45-min visit to the White House to brief the President on the Shuttle program and to discuss the naming. The name Enterprise, illustrious in U.S. naval history, had been given to the first nuclear-powered carrier, to a World War II carrier, and to an American sloop in the Revolutionary War. The name Constitution had met with objections that the Shuttle was considered an international effort in which several countries would participate. Aviation Week magazine commented on the “power of an aroused involved public—especially in an election year” in getting nearly 100 000 fans of the TV series Star Trek to sign letters and petitions asking the White House to have the first Orbiter named Enterprise (after the space ship in the series) rather than Constitution, the name favored by NASA officials. Av Wk said the officials were concerned about commercialization of the name Enterprise in association with the TV show. The Washington Star in an editorial said it was “pathetic” that the public desire for drama in outer space had not been killed by the mundane discoveries on Mars, Venus, and the moon, and predicted that “nothing exciting will happen in the real-life Enterprise,” even though the naming incident confirmed a public desire “to associate space with adventure and suspense.” (WPost, 9 Sept 76, E-9, A-2; WStar, 19 Sept 76, E-l; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 26; 27 Sept 76, 11; Marshall Star, 15 Sept 76, 1)
In a special message to Congress, President Ford requested an increase in federal spending to $24.7 billion for scientific research and development in the energy, defense, and space programs. Ford said his request for the 1977 fiscal year, an 11% increase over 1976 estimates, included $2.5 billion for basic research. The budget asked $2.6 billion for energy R&I), a 35% increase over 1976, including funds for nuclear power, development of solar and geothermal energy, and fusion power; major increases were for energy conservation and for research on fossil fuels to improve direct combustion of coal for production of oil and gas. The President also asked congressional conferees to act quickly on bills to establish the Office of Science and Technology. (W Star, 22 Mar 76, 7)
Grover Loening, pioneer aeronautical inventor and first person to receive an M.A. degree in aeronautics from an American university, died at the age of 87 at his home in Fla. after a long illness. In 1913, after working for an aeroplane builder in N.Y., Loening became assistant to Orville Wright and manager of the Wright brothers’ factory in Dayton, 0. In 1914 he was appointed chief aeronautical engineer of the Army Signal Corps aviation section. As vice president of Sturtevant Aeroplane Co., he pioneered the first U.S. steel-frame airplane in 1915; later he formed his own company and developed the M8 2-seat Pursuit monoplane using rigid strut bracing, which he patented. After World War I, Loening produced the Flying Yacht which established world records and won him the Collier Trophy in 1921; his next success was the Loening Amphibian, with the first practical retractable carriage. A member of the Aviation Hall of Fame, Loening was one of the first directors of Pan American Airways and a member of the Smithsonian Institution board for about 20 yr. Awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit and nearly every U.S. aviation medal, he had been selected 3 wk ago to receive the Smithsonian’s Langley gold medal for aerodromics. (WStar, 3 Mar 76, B-5) During February: Water hyacinths thought to be environmentally affected by the location of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, proved to have unexpected benefits for space-age processes and byproducts, when NASA scientists monitoring the effects of wastes discharged into nearby streams found that the water plants had a peculiar ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals, and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants, while they continued to produce massive amounts of plant material. For a year, biochemists at NSTL had worked with the plants as a filtration system for purifying polluted waters, as a source of biogas for fuel, as a protein and mineral additive to cattle feed, and as a soil fertilizer and conditioner. The vascular plants could absorb and metabolize large quantities of nutrients and pollutants from domestic sewage waste waters. An installation of the size needed to meet pollution standards at the nearby community of Orange Grove would have cost about $500 000; stocking the sewage lagoon with enough water hyacinths to purify up to a half million gallons of sewage outflow daily cost only a few thousand dollars. Plants taken from sewage lagoons had been dried and ground into feeding rations for beef cattle, producing a meal rich in minerals and protein, and added to corn silage fed to a herd of steers at the nearby agricultural experiment farm operated by Miss. State Univ. A 4-mo study resulted in weight gain comparable to that on a diet fortified with cottonseed or soybean meal. The high cost of fuel for drying the plants after harvesting led to construction of a prototype solar dryer at NSTL that was designed to dry 18 tons of wet material each 36 hr; the dryer might prove a solution for agricultural problems other than drying of grains and forage. Another use of the plants was as a source of methane gas and fertilizer, using an anaerobic fermentation process with a yield of nearly 57 000 cu.m. (2 million cu. ft.) of gas from an acre of water hyacinths. A state like La., with more than a million acres of unwanted water hyacinths, might produce more than enough methane gas to fuel 2 million homes in the New Orleans region annually. Another study showed a remarkable ability of the plants to filter out “heavy” metals (cadmium, mercury, nickel, lead, silver) and other toxic organic substances common in industrial waste waters. Although plants harvested from these sites could not be used for animal feed or fertilizer, they could be used to produce methane gas; researchers found that biogas generated from plants containing trace metals yielded a higher percentage of methane than plants free from metals. Spinoff projects resulting from worldwide interest in the NASA findings included a survey by NASA investigators of water hyacinths blocking up the White Nile, requested by the Sudanese government; a plan to use hyacinth plantings as a detection system for assessing heavy-metal pollution in waters near thermonuclear installations; and use of the plants in a system to recover millions of tons of gold “tailings” left over from mining and present in streams near disused mines in the western U.S. (NASA Release 76-36)
Louis Morton, one of the foremost U.S. military historians and chairman of NASA’S historical advisory committee from 1970 to 1973, died at the age of 63 in Burlington, Vt., after surgery. A member of the National Archives advisory council since 1968, he had worked strongly for separation of the National Archives and Records Service from the General Services Administration, and had advocated a coordinating office for the federal government’s entire historical program with a chief government historian. Based at Dartmouth College, where since 1960 he had been teacher, writer, and administrator, Morton was active in national organizations related to history and had served on history and biography juries for the Pulitzer prize. He had been with the Army’s office of military history from 1946 to 1959, serving as historian, then as deputy chief and chief of the Pacific branch; he was editor of an 11-vol. history of the U.S. Army in the Pacific during World War II, and general editor of the 17-vol. “Wars and Military Institutions of the U.S.” (W Post, 15 Feb 76, B 12)
The General Services Administration goofed in agreeing to an exchange of California property with Rockwell Inti. Corp., said Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Government Operations. GSA agreed 3 yr ago to accept a $ 19.5-million piece of property on the former Rockwell AFB at Canoga Park, Calif., in exchange for a surplus $ 16-million building. No other agency had been found willing to occupy the Rockwell AFB property, and the corporation had claimed $1.8 million worth of special installations at the former base. Rep. Rrooks urged GSA to fight the corporation’s attempt to get more out of the trade. (C Trib, 14 Sept 76, 4-7)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
President Ford signed legislation reestablishing the post of White House science adviser, a job abolished by President Nixon 3 yr previously. The signing took place in the White House rose garden, at a ceremony attended by leading scientists. President Ford had asked for legislation to set up the position and the White House Office of Science and Technology on the recommendation of Vice President Rockefeller and at the urging of major scientific groups; the job had previously existed under executive order. Originally established by President Roosevelt during World War II, the position lapsed until 1957 when President Eisenhower reactivated it after the launch of Sputnik. President Ford was expected to make a early choice of science adviser, who would direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy and would also be a member of the Domestic Council and adviser to the National Security Council. (W Post, 12 May 76, A-21)
The Federal Aviation Administration would use 15 new twin-jet Sabreliners to do a nationwide airways navigation-system checking job that formerly took about 50 older aircraft to do, according to a report by Rockwell International Corp., makers of the Sabreliner. The old Civil Aeronautics Administration (predecessor to FAA) in 1932 had hired 2 pilots in singleengine planes to inspect beacon markers—then the only night-navigation aids for air travel—as well as to check safety at emergency landing fields. The report reviewed the advent of radio-range transmitters, omnidirectional signals, and instrument-landing systems, for which the FAA operated a Flight Inspection National Field Office based in Oklahoma City with field offices in the continental U.S., the North Atlantic, and the Caribbean. Until recently, safety checks had been the job of a fleet of military-surplus C-47s (commercially called DC-3s) known in World War II as Gooney Birds. These became unsatisfactory with the advent of the jet age, and Sabreliners were added to the fleet in 1968. FAA officials noted that the new twin-jet could cruise at 435 knots, compared to 150 knots for the DC-3s scheduled for retirement in June 1976. (Skyline, Spring 76, 34)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
NASA announced that Dr. Bruce T. Lundin would retire as director of Lewis Research Center Aug. 26 after 34yr with NASA and its predecessor, NACA. LeRC deputy director Dr. Bernard Lubarsky would be acting director until a successor was named. In 1943, Dr. Lundin had begun working at the NACA Lewis Research Center on improvement of World War II aircraft engines. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. Lundin became assistant director of LeRC; in 1961 he became associate director for development, working on space propulsion and power generation. In May 1968 he was deputy associate administrator at NASA Hq, then acting associate administrator for advanced research and technology. He became director of LeRC as of Nov. 1, 1969, and had led the center’s research on solving the nation’s energy problems. He had not announced his future plans. (NASA Release 77-167; NASA anno Aug 9/77)
Global communications systems used by the Dept, of Defense were inadequate, inefficient, and incapable of surviving nuclear attack, according to the investigation subcommittee of the House Committee on Armed Services. A United Press report carried in the W Star quoted subcommittee criticism of the Pentagon’s top-secret command post which, “while located in the basement of the Pentagon, [showed] little possibility that the National Military Command Center would survive a nuclear attack directed against it.” The report cited “dismay over the department’s inability to deploy a satellite communications system after 16 years of effort,” “security deficiencies” in the computer software of the worldwide Military Command and Control System, weaknesses in the Tri-Service Tactical Communications program, and “urgent need for early deployment of improved voice security equipment throughout the military services.” The report commended the use of airborne command posts such as the converted Boeing 747 “doomsday plane” that had taken President Carter to Georgia the previous wk. (W Star, Feb 19/77, A-3)
Langley Research Center announced that Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who had been director of the center 1968-1975 and was now a vice president of Owens-Illinois, Inc., would speak at the center colo-quium Nov. 14 on recent developments in solar energy. Dr. Cortright, in charge of overall technical direction at the large multinational corporation now interested in uses of solar energy, would discuss technical, economic, and legislative aspects of the newly developing industry that would depend for wide application upon being price-competitive with other energy sources in spite of being inexhaustible and nonpolluting. The next few years would see its first domestic applications in areas such as space heating and air conditioning. (LaRC Release 77-54)
NASA Hq announced appointment of R.D. Ginter as assistant administrator for energy programs, effective Jan. 2. Ginter had been acting in that position since Sept. 1975, following the departure of astronaut (now U.S. Senator) Harrison H. Schmitt (R-NM). Ginter had joined NASA in 1960 after 8yr as a missile project officer with the U.S. Navy and served in a variety of positions, including chief of the Scout launch vehicle program, director of the Technology Applications Division, and director of the Energy Systems Division. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1966 for his work as program manager for the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle. (NASA Release 77-9)
NASA reported that its announcement on selection of Shuttle astronauts, set for December, would not be forthcoming until January. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, agency administrator, had met Dec. 12 with officials of the selection program but, because of current NASA budget activity, had not reviewed the data presented. On Dec. 16 Dr. Frosch had notified JSC director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, who had supervised the selection program, that the review would proceed after the end of the year. (NASA Release 77-254)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA budget in nearly lOyr, including new starts on three major programs. In conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested by NASA to begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed with the Senate on $17.7 million for the project, which NASA said was enough to start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large orbiting telescope, a frequently delayed major scientific project, and $26.6 million for Landsat-D, fourth of a series of earth monitoring satellites. The newspaper said the only real disagreement was over the Jupiter mission, which Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to kill [see June 10] because of its eventual cost, estimated to reach $435 million by the time it was scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had finally accepted the Senate’s figure. Planned to take advantage of a favorable alignment of the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the planet’s atmosphere. During its 20mo in orbit, the mission would also view Jupiter’s moons at close range. [Today, July 21/77, 20A)
Nature magazine reported that the NASA budget had met unexpected opposition in Congress, endangering 2 major scientific missions: the large space telescope, long regarded by space scientists as NASA’s top-priority project, and the Jupiter orbiter probe planned as a twin launch in 1982 of craft to orbit the planet and send probes into its atmosphere. Lobbying by NASA and the scientific community might rescue the projects, but loss of either would be a serious blow to the agency’s program. Nature said this yr’s efforts would be crucial because space science money had been squeezed out of NASA’s budget for 4yr to pay for the Space Shuttle, and further delay would probably kill future chances for approval of these missions. (Nature, May 19/77, 196)
The Carter administration would not request government funds to develop a supersonic airliner, OMB Director Bert Lance assured Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis). The Chicago Tribune story noted that Prox-mire, who had worked to defeat the U.S. supersonic transport program in 1972, was concerned because the House Committee on Science had asked NASA to do a feasibility study on advanced supersonic aircraft. (C Trib, Apr 6/77, 1-5)
The new administration of President Jimmy Carter was reevaluating the NASA budget submitted by President Ford, and would study the possibility of increases, however marginal, in that budget, Defense/Space Daily reported. NASA’s energy program, budgeted at $4.5 million in FY 1958 ($1 million to study satellite solar power and $3.5 million for energy technology that could be transferred to ERDA), would probably be recommended for increase within the next few weeks, the report said. (D/SD, Feb 2/77, 185)
H. Julian Allen, originator of the concept of bluntness as an aerodynamic technique for reducing heating of spacecraft reentering earth’s atmosphere, died of a heart attack at Stanford Univ. hospital at the age of 66. A major figure in modern aerospace technology, Allen’s work had made possible the safe return to earth of U.S. astronauts and had revolutionized the design of ballistic missiles. After earning bachelor’s and engineering degrees from Stanford, Allen in 1936 had joined the Natl. Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) at its Langley laboratory in Hampton, Va., and had returned to Calif, in 1941 when the Ames installation came into being. He had worked there ever since, serving as ARC director from 1965 to 1969. His scientific contributions included a general theory of subsonic airfoils which led to use of low-drag airfoils in World War II on aircraft such as the Mustang fighter. He led in developing high-speed wind tunnels at ARC, now recognized as primary national resources for advancing aircraft design and national defense. He had received national and international honors, including NASA’s distinguished service medal and medal for exceptional scientific achievement. He was a fellow of many societies, including the Royal Aeronautical Society of London. (ARC Release 77-06)
The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. Ilyushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World War II to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or cause of death. Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931 devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design was the II-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level. The II-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to New York in July 1968. Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die: A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 supersonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K. Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the 11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A. Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY Times, Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
French and West German space officials had told a House committee that increasing costs would limit use of the U.S. Space Shuttle and the European Spacelab, Av Wk reported. A NASA official had admitted that Spacelab could have been built less expensively under a single nation’s management, but denied that Space Shuttle operational costs had increased prohibitively. Wolfgang Finke, director of West Germany’s Dept, of Space and Transportation, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that not only had the price of conventional launches increased steadily, but also “the new space transportation system will not revolutionize the cost of space transportation. On the contrary, the estimates for the fare of a Shuttle roundtrip and the fringe costs going with it went up considerably, putting a real brake on our more ambitious plans to utilize the new system.” As for Spacelab, Finke said the results of a West German materials-processing experiment would need a series of experiments for confirmation, with a cost level “well above the range of traditional materials research costs.” Hubert Curien, president of the French space agency, said that “anticipated cost of Spacelab experiments now reaches such heights that their funding raises very serious problems for national budgets and constitutes a very severe limitation.” Finke noted in conclusion that administrative costs of international cooperation had increased costs of the overall project. A NASA official agreed that if Spacelab had been built in the U.S. under one management, total cost would have been less. (Av-Wk, May 22/78, 28)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
DOD’s top command, control, and communications official, Dr. Gerald Dinneen, had characterized the use of satellite-borne lasers to communicate with submarines as costly and inefficient, Aerospace Daily reported. In testimony before the House Committee on Armed Services, Dinneen had said such a scheme would require “a number of satellites.” Spreading out a laser beam would lose energy, so the beam would have to be relatively narrow to maintain contact with an antenna on the surface of the water. This would require either a large number of satellites, or scanning the beam around the surface of the water to communicate with other submarines. Dinneen had downplayed the idea of piggybacking blue-green laser kits on satellites (suggested as a possibility by 1981 or 1982) because very few satellites, communications or navigation, had excess capacity: “If you are going to put something on,” he added, “you have to take off something else.” (A/D, Aug 31/78, 276) During August: The USAF reported that NavStar 2, within seconds of reaching orbit after its May 13 launch, had been tracked by one of SAM-SO’s stations. “About one hour after launch we made initial contact with the satellite,” said 2nd Lt. Joe Fury, satellite operations controller. “Controllers then tested the satellite’s systems to assure their operation before beginning other on-orbit checks to make the spacecraft function.” In its initial 6-hr orbit, the NavStar had “talked” with ground controllers around the world, each of whom fine-tuned the satellite as it passed overhead. Two days after launch NavStar 2’s internal rocket motor, activated by a command from a satellite controller, had shifted it from an egg-shaped orbit into a circular 12-hr orbit; as it arrived there, the NavStar was spun up to 89rpm to stabilize it. For 1.5da, controllers sent computer-coded signals to gradually slow the spin rate to zero. After stabilization, controllers had deployed the two folded solar-array panels and began to warm up the navigation payload to receive computer data transmitted to the satellite, giving it the intelligence it needed to carry out its military mission. Three wk after launch, controllers had positioned NavStar 2 in a 10 900-nautical-mi drift orbit, slowly moving it toward the final position most suitable for the NavStar program. By the mid-1980s the NavStar system of 24 satellites would give users highly accurate data on position, velocity, and time in all weather, anywhere in the world. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 78, 3)
NASA announced it had awarded TRW Defense and Space Systems Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., a contract for the materials processing in space (Spacelab) program at an estimated cost of approximately $9.7 million. TRW would be prime contractor for various aspects of the Materials Processing in Space (MPS)-program, the contract to cover the initial phase of the MPS Spacelab-payloads project expected to begin in September 1978 and continue through 1981. TRW would develop (and support the operation of) specialized and general purpose payload systems that would accommodate a variety of different materials processing experiments during recurring earth orbit missions of the Space Shuttle. NASA had selected the first series of experiments from among proposals by scientists from the U.S. and numerous foreign countries. Objectives of the MPS program were to study new or improved processes and to identify candidate products of initial commercial interest: electronic materials, metals, glasses, and certain chemicals produced by processes such as crystal growth, solidification, and containerless processing. MSFC would manage operational aspects of the program. (NASA Release 78-103; ARC Astrogram, July 27/78, 3)
NASA announced plans to launch on Feb. 9, 1978, the first spacecraft in a new worldwide military communications system. DOD’s Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) satellites would provide vital communications for the Navy, Air Force, DOD, and the Presidential Command Network [see Jan. 20]. The spacecraft would go into synchronous-transfer orbit on an Atlas Centaur from ETR’s launch complex 36. FltSatCom, a highly versatile military-communications system built by TRW Defense and Space Systems, would offer 23 operating channels: the Navy would use 1 fleet-broadcast and 9 fleet-relay channels for communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, and ground stations, ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore. The system could offer reliable secure communications between naval units, even relatively small vessels equipped with inexpensive antennas and simple equipment, anywhere in the world except in extreme polar regions. The Air Force would use 12 narrowband channels as a part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AfSatCom) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) units and other arms of the Air Force; DOD had reserved 1 channel. The Naval Electronic Systems Command would manage the FltSatCom program. The spacecraft would consist of two major hexagonal elements (a payload module and a spacecraft module), with the majority of electronic equipment mounted on 12 panels enclosing the payload and spacecraft modules. The payload module would contain UHF and X-band communications equipment, and antennas—the UHF-transmit antenna, built of ribs and mesh to open like an umbrella; and the receive antenna, a separate deployable helix. The spacecraft module would contain earth sensors, an apogee kick motor, attitude and velocity control, telemetry tracking and command, electrical-power distribution, and a solar array folded around the spacecraft module until reaching final position in orbit, to be deployed by spring-loaded hinges. The 1875kg (41321b) spacecraft weighed about 390kg (8601b), more than any satellite previously launched into synchronous orbit on an Atlas Centaur, NASA’s standard launch vehicle for intermediate-weight payloads. (NASA Release 78-17; MOR M-491-202-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb 3/78)
INTELSAT announced it had elected Canadian Marcel Perras chairman of its board of governors and Randolph Payne of Australia vice chairman. Perras, vice president of Teleglobe Canada, had been a member of the INTELSAT board since 1975. Payne, director of marketing for the Overseas Telecommunications Commission of Australia, had represented Australia on the INTELSAT board at various times since its formation in 1973. The board had also reappointed C. J. Steffen of Switzerland and N. Tuckwell of Australia as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on planning; and O. Schmeller of the FRG and K. Nosaka of Japan as chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the advisory committee on technical matters. (INTELSAT Release 78-17-1)
NASA announced it had presented Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, with NASA’s distinguished public service medal on Oct. 3 in an outdoor ceremony at NASA Hq. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch lauded Teague’s efforts on behalf of NASA, noting Teague’s “unswerving faith in the value and virtue of a dynamic and imaginative space program—a faith which he has conveyed to all the elements of the government, industry, and university team on which all progress in space depends.” Teague had announced he would retire from Congress after more than 30 yr of service in the House of Representatives. (NASA Release 78-150; NASA anno Oct 3/78)
General Electric Co. and Comsat General had presented to the convention of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association divergent views on whether DOD should have its own satellite communications systems or should lease service from other organizations, AvWk reported. Lee Farnham, vice president of General Electric, said his company, as a hardware manufacturer, would evaluate a number of considerations before entering into any lease arrangement. Joseph O’Conner, vice president for finance and administration of Comsat General, said his firm, as a telecommunications common carrier, had been structured to establish system and lease communications services. At the insistence of Congress, the Navy had issued an RFP for a Leasat system based on a leasing arrangement. Comsat General might submit two bids, one for a dedicated Navy system and one for a system to serve merchant shipping as well as the Navy. GE’s Farnham said a manufacturer would have to consider (in addition to matters such as user requirements and hardware complexity) three factors in making a bid decision: financing, corporate impingement (corporate credit rating), and length of the lease. (AvWk, June 26/78, 23)
NASA announced that Kenneth Chapman, associate administrator for external relations since Jan. 1978, had resigned from NASA to join Vought Aircraft Co., Dallas, Tex., as vice president for market research and analysis. Chapman had assumed his NASA position in Jan. 1978. Before joining NASA, Chapman had been director of nuclear material safety and safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He was a retired Air Force major general. (NASA Release 78-78; NASA anno May 18/78)
The Marshall Star reported that Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA associate administrator for space science, had praised the performance of Heao 1 in a report to the subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Dr. Hinners noted that, before launch of Heao I, scientists knew of about 300 X-ray sources in the sky; Heao I was discovering about 3 new X-ray sources every day [see Oct. 9]. Another major result from Heao 1 was its observation of a hot plasma, apparently about a half billion degrees, extending beyond earth’s galaxy and possibly through the entire universe. A plasma of this temperature and density distributed uniformly throughout the universe would constitute about half the mass required to close the universe. “This concept is of such major importance for cosmologists that new Heao 1 data are being analyzed as they come from the spacecraft,” Hinners said. He also noted that Heao 1 data indicated a new black-hole candidate in the constellation Ara. Scientific results such as these had been “so significant that we made a decision to extend the operation of Heao I through March 1979,” Hinners concluded. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 4)
Transportation USA, in a story on 75 years of powered flight, quoted the Dec. 17, 1903, telegram from Orville and Wilbur Wright to their father in Dayton, O.: “Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. Success four flights Thursday morning. All against 21 mile wind. Started from level with engine power alone. Average speed through air 31 miles. Longest 59 seconds. Inform press. Home for Christmas.” Newspapers had not been impressed; not even the Dayton Journal had mentioned the achievement. Ridiculed by the press and snubbed by their government, the two brothers had taken their craft to Paris and London; when stories of their successes and honors reached the U.S., the two were finally prevailed upon to come home. Aviation had then become big business. The value of airline property and equipment, not counting general aviation, had reached $125 million at the end of World War II; by the end of 1955, the investment had multiplied tenfold to $1.4 billion. By 1965 it had reached $5 billion, and in 1977 $17 billion. In 1977 U.S. airlines carried 242 million passengers, and general aviation another 100 million. The FAA predicted that in 1987 U.S. airlines would carry upwards of 500 million passengers annually, and that privately owned aircraft would carry 200 million. The future might see aircraft using energy other than petroleum; of particular interest was hydrogen, having pound for pound 3 times the energy output. If storage were not a problem, hydrogen might make an excellent aviation fuel. The article concluded: “We’ve come an unbelievably long way in the past 75 years — from a fragile craft airborne for 59 seconds to walks on the moon. No telling where our lust for flight may take us in the next 75 years. The sky’s no longer the limit.” (Trsp USA, Summer 78, 3)
The W. Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee had cut NASA’s budget, endangering 3 of the agency’s most ambitious plans for the next 5yr: to search for life beyond earth, to keep the Skylab space station from falling back to earth, and to fly a rare joint mission with West Germany around the north and south poles of the sun. The subcommittee had cut $1.4 million from NASA’s request for $2 million to begin a program called SETI (search for extraterrestrial intelligence), in effect killing the program. A NASA official said the funds would not be enough “to start design work on the antennas we were going to use to listen for extraterrestrial signals.” The subcommittee also denied NASA $20.5 million to use for Space Shuttle astronauts to fire the abandoned Skylab space station into a higher and safer orbit. NASA considered the most critical cut to be $5 million from the $13 million sought to start in 1983 the solar-polar orbiter mission that would have used two spacecraft, one built by the U.S. and the other by West Germany. The West Germans had warned that any U.S. delay meant that Germany would drop out of the mission. (IVPost, May 5/78, A13)
Av Wk reported that the House of Representatives had authorized a $4,415 billion NASA budget that included $4 million for an option to PAGE lOpi INTENTIONALLY BLANK purchase a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter, which President Carter had tried to defer. The House had not changed the authorization bill submitted by its committee on science and technology. House members had defeated an amendment by Rep. Ted Weiss (D-N.Y.) to delete funds for advanced supersonic-transport research, but had passed an amendment requiring the NASA administrator to report to Congress by Dec. 31, 1979, regarding NASA policy on conflicts of interest, standards of conduct, and financial disclosure. The House version of the NASA budget had represented a $43.7 million increase over the Carter budget. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had approved a $4,388 billion NASA FY79 authorization that included $4 million for the fifth orbiter and an additional $7 million for manned-flight advance planning. Former Apollo astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had helped convince the committee that NASA needed the $7 million increase to maintain a viable advance-planning program for manned spaceflight. Total Senate Commerce Committee authorization was $17 million higher than NASA’s original $4,371 billion request to Congress. (AvWk, May 1/78, 22)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
NASA announced personnel changes at Hq. —Herbert Rowe, acting deputy associate administrator for external relations, would leave to become vice president of the Electronic Industries Association. Rowe had joined NASA in 1975. —NASA had appointed Frank Penaranda director of the institutional Operations Division, Office of Management Operations, effective immediately. He would be responsible for managing the agency’s R&PM budget and institutional management system, including program support negotiations between centers and program offices, coordinating agencywide civil service and contractor manpower planning, and overseeing the center’s aircraft operations. —NASA had appointed C. Ronald Hovell director of the Resource Management/Administration Office, Office of Space Transportation Systems. He would be responsible for budget and control support of each STS program directorate having responsibility for STS funds. —Effective Jan. 1, Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool had become chief scientist in the Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Rasool had maintained an active relationship with academic, industrial, and government organizations working on development and use of scientific and technological instrumentation, theory, and techniques for study earth and its nearby space environment. (NASA anno Jan 11, 16, 20, 30/78)
AvWk reported that NASA had been struggling with institutional and funding arrangements for launching a Hughes-built corn-sat, Syncom-4, without giving Hughes the unfair advantage of a free Space Shuttle launch. The problem required prompt attention, because NASA had to make decisions within a few weeks if Syncom-4 was to fly on an early Shuttle mission. Hughes had designed and offered Syncom-4 specifically to fit the Space Shuttle payload-bay design, since NASA had wanted to deploy a test spacecraft on a Shuttle orbital mission. Under the Hughes proposal, the spacecraft would have no significant communications capability, and NASA would launch the unit free of charge; however, the satellite-user community (the state of California, Agency for International Development, and the Interior Dept.) had asked that the spacecraft include some communications capability instead of merely verifying a design. NASA had to decide who would pay for the added capability and whether Hughes would have an unfair advantage. Without a decision, NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch said the whole exercise could revert to the original concept, with no significant communications channeled through the satellite. NASA might decide to run an open competition for systems to demonstrate Shuttle-launched communications spacecraft in the same manner as Syncom-4. However, Frosch was concerned that in an open competition Hughes could be “competed out of it in a way that is not quite proper,” since the Syncom-4 concept had been a Hughes innovation. “As it has developed,” Frosch explained to a House appropriations subcommittee hearing, “it is not completely clear that there is a proper solution to this dilemma.” (4v-Wk, Feb 20/78, 60)
NASA announced it would award Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) its Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 3 during a 20th anniversary observance. Chairman Teague, who headed the House Committee on Science and Technology, had announced he would retire from Congress after 2 decades of service. NASA had declared his unswerving support of the agency and the U.S. space program an inspiration to all NASA employees. (NASA anno Sept 28/78)
The Natl. Science Foundation reported that the 1979 federal budget presented in Jan. 1978 reflected greater austerity in R&D programs than during the previous 3yr, in which rate of R&D growth had exceeded the rate of inflation. R&D programs funded were those that met direct federal needs, general social and economic needs, or the need to accelerate private R&D efforts because of overriding national interest. The FY79 budget contained a rise for defense and space R&D programs of about 8% each, with only a 3% rise for all other R&D. This would reverse a 13-yr trend in which federal R&D support had shifted steadily toward civilian programs. The 1979 change had resulted not only from increases in defense/space support at rates at least equal to anticipated inflation, but also from expected real-dollar declines in support of civilian R&D areas of health, energy, and environment. Federal R&D obligations rose 6% to an estimated $28.0 billion in the FY79 budget, an all-time high in current dollars, but inflation would mean a drop from the 1978 total figure in constant dollars. Later congressional actions had raised the level approximately 9% above that of 1978, and action on supplemental requests might add another 2 or 3 percentage points. Defense and space programs had accounted for more than 80% of the current dollar rise in R&D support in 1979. Funding for each of these was expected to increase by about 8% in 1979, whereas all civilian functions taken together would increase by only 3%. The defense/space share of the federal total in 1979 would be an estimated 62%, more than the 1978 share but still considerably lower than the 77% share in 1969. (Analysis of Fed R&D Funding by Function, Dec 78, vii)
Harold Berger of the Natl. Bureau of Standards would give the colloquium lecture Dec. 11 on “Nondestructive Testing—Its Growing Importance for the 1980s,” Langley Research Center announced. The aero. space and nuclear industries, which required unusually high reliability and quality in products and operations, had used nondestructive testing extensively since World War II. Berger would describe the early use of NDT, including radiographic, ultrasonic, magnetic, penetrant, and eddy-current techniques. Although early NDT had increased safety and extended product life, it had the potential for significantly improving industrial productivity and conserving energy and materials. NDT was now facing growing problems such as an aging fleet of military airplanes; demand for a deem environment with NDT implications for nuclear plants, pipelines, and offshore facilities; and needs associated with product liability. These challenges had stimulated new developments; as an example, Berger would discuss radiography, including real-time methods, image enhancement, and unusual radiation techniques using neutrons and protons. (LaRC Release 78-83)
A House subcommittee on space science and applications would hold panel discussions later in June on opportunities for international cooperation in space, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology announced. Moderated by Dr. Jerry Grey of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the discussions would follow subcommittee hearings scheduled May 16, 17, and 18 on international space programs. Panelists reviewing the hearings would make recommendations on international cooperation for publication with the hearings. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla), subcommittee chairman, said he favored use of the space environment “not only for our own nation but for the benefit of all mankind. All reasonable efforts should be made in the international community to assure that worldwide understanding and mutual commitments are developed to provide sound basis for these future efforts.” (U.S. House Committee on Sci and Tech Release, June 7/78)
NASA announced it had appointed Frank Simokaitis (Maj. Gen., USAF, Ret.) director of its DOD affairs division, Hq Office of External Relations. During World War II, Gen. Simokaitis had been an instructor pilot and bomber pilot in the European theater. Later he had held a series of special investigative, legal, planning, administrative, and staff posts, including executive assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force from 1969 to 1973. Until his retirement, Gen. Simokaitis had been commandant of the USAF Inst, of Technology at Wright Patterson AFB and commandant of the Defense Institute of Security Assistance Management. He had received LL.B. and J.D. degrees from St. Louis Univ. and was a member of the bar of the State of Missouri, admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Court of Claims. (NASA Release 78-139)
In its report on U.S. R&D spending for 1979, the National Science Foundation pointed out that doubling of the nation’s R&D expenditures since 1969 had been almost entirely attributable to inflation. However, the overall U.S. R&D effort had experienced real growth every year since 1975, mainly from increased emphasis on finding alternative energy sources; it had not provided major stimulus to economic growth or productivity in the short term. The federal government, currently supporting more than half the nation’s R&D effort, had over the last decade emphasized civilian programs rather than defense and space. Largest federal R&D spending increases for 1978 and 1979 were expected in the energy and health areas. During the 1970s, the U.S. had allocated proportionately less of the national R&D effort to basic research. Factors influencing this trend included the federal government’s deemphasizing basic research in defense and space programs during the early to mid-1970s; the industrial sector’s seeking quicker payoffs from R&D efforts aimed at a specific product or process, as opposed to projects with no specific commercial application; and universities’ increased emphasis on applied research over basic research since 1970. (NSF Highlights, May 1/78, 1)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, sent committee members a report prepared by staff of a review of cost, performance, and schedule aspects of the Space Shuttle program, based on NASA’s request for a $220-million addition to the FY80 budget request. The staff director wrote that recommendations in the report would, if implemented, improve budget requirement estimating, program cost, and schedule control, as well as NASA communications with the committee. (Text, oversight rept Aug 79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
The House Committee on Science and Technology announced that it would hold a joint hearing July 19-20 with the House Select Committee on Aging on space technology applications for the elderly and handicapped, to mark the 10th anniversary of the first Moon walk. Committee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said that the hearings would emphasize the importance of space program spinoffs in solving problems here on Earth. NASA would release a report “Technologies for the Handicapped and Aged” on innovations such as a lunar-gravity simulator to speed rehabilitation therapy; a voice-controlled vehicle for paraplegics that could pick up packages, open doors, and handle eating utensils; a human-tissue stimulator to reduce chronic pain; healthmonitoring systems; and fabrics to prevent bedsores. (H Rept Release 96-60)
Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that his space science subcommittee would hold hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo., on the consolidated storm information system, a joint NASA-NOAA program. The committee heard about the project in July 1979 when it was merely a concept; “it will be a pleasure to see it coming to fruition.” When fully operational, the system would give a forecaster real-time atmospheric data such as temperature, air pressure, and wind forces, from around the globe, a substantial improvement on current systems requiring several hours to obtain the data. It would combine communications links with data sources, such as environmental satellites and atmosphere soundings, into a single computer system. (H Comm Sci Release 96-235)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs. Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would retire from federal service February 29. He joined the Gemini program in 1963 after two years at International Telephone and Telegraph’s (ITT) federal Laboratories as director of space systems, having also worked for the U.S. Navy and for NACA. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal for his work as mission director for 7 of 10 Gemini missions. From July 1967 to December 1968 he directed Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 4 and won NASA’s distinguished service medal for the success of Apollo 8, first manned flight around the moon. He directed the Skylab program from December 1968 to July 1974, and with the three Skylab crews received the Collier Trophy in 1973. He would become a vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation. (NASA anno, Feb 22/80; NASA Release 80-27)
NASA announced award by LeRC of parallel 1-year $1 million contracts to TRW’s Defense and Space Systems Group and to Hughes Aircraft Company for designing an advanced commercial communications satellite system. Operating in a high-frequency 30- to 20-GHz band not used in the United States commercially, the system would help handle: the increased communications expected in the next 20 years which would saturate existing domestic communications satellite capacity. The new system, a network of ground stations using two shuttle-launched spacecraft, would lower costs of services such as videoconferencing, teletext, and electronic mail delivery. (NASA Release 80-84)
The Washington Post reported the death of Walter R. Dornberger, 84, who as a German general had supervised Wernher von Braun’s work on the V2 rocket during World War II. Cause of death June 26 was not given in either the Washington Post or Aviation Week & Space Technology. Dornberger was visiting in West Germany. He had come to the United States in 1947 after two years in a British prisoner-of-war camp; like more than 100 other German-born rocket scientists who worked for the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, he became a U.S. citizen. He also worked for Bell Aerosystems Company, where he was a vice president. A volunteer in the imperial German army of World War I, Dornberger was a career soldier to the end of the second war. In 1932 he was given charge of a group of scientists working on rocket concepts and moved to Peenemunde in 1937. When the first test of the V2 October 3, 1942, was successful, Dornberger asked von Braun: “Do you realize what we accomplished today?” Von Braun said “Yes, today the spaceship was born.” In 1958, nearly three years before President Kennedy voiced the goal of landing a man on the Moon by 1970, Dornberger predicted that man would be on the moon in 10 years: “whether he is Russian or American depends on how much money Congress is willing to spend,” he said. (W Post, July 2/80, B-6; AvWK, July 7/80, 25)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that on June 11-12 its subcommittee on space science and applications would hold hearings on the Space Industrialization Act of 1980 (H.R. 7412) for private commercialization of space. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), committee and subcommittee chairman, said that the bill he sponsored would create a space industrialization corporation to develop new products, services, and industries using space technology and the properties of the space environment. NASA would continue to advance national capabilities in space, Fuqua said, but the corporation would be responsible for encouraging private development. (Committee Release 96-196)
MSFC reported signing a $2,271,391 contract with a small business, OAO Corporation of Beltsville, Md., for design, assembly, delivery, test, and checkout within 18 months of a database management system to handle an “immense volume” of instrument data transmitted at “extremely high rates” by spacecraft during missions between 1985 and 1995. The system would accept data at rates tip to 50 million bits per second (44,650 pages of computer printout per minute). “Firsts” to be included in the system would be a data bus of fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of lasers to transmit and receive data at the high rates required. (MSFC Release 80-141) During October: NASA appointed Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, head of MIT’s aeronautics and astronautics department, as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology as of June 1, 1981. Replacing Dr. James J. Kramer who retired in October 1979, he would be responsible for aeronautics, space and energy research, and technology programs. Dr. Walter B. Olstad would act as associate administrator in the interim. (NASA Release 80-156) —JSC announced that Dr. Edward G. Gibson, scientist-astronaut, would leave October 31 to become advanced systems manager for TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. The science pilot on the record 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-1974, he had left NASA in 1974 to work for Aerospace Corporation and for ERNO but had rejoined the agency in March 1977. (JSC Release 80-057) —C.A. Syvertson, ARC director, named Angelo Guastaferro of the Headquarters Office of Space Science as his deputy, replacing A. Thomas Young, recently named director of GSFC. John Boyd, associate deputy director, would remain acting deputy director for six months. (ARC anno Oct 31/80; NASA Release 80-165) —The NAA newsletter reported that Maurice Bellonte, copilot of the first east-to-west transatlantic nonstop flight in 1930, was guest of honor at the National Air and Space Museum on the 50th anniversary of his flight from Le Bourget airfield near Paris to Curtiss Field, NY. In 1929 Bellonte and his copilot Dieudonne Coste had set a world record for longest nonstop flight, 4,788 miles from Paris to Manchuria in 51 hours, 39 minutes. The Atlantic crossing had taken 37 hours, 18 minutes. (NAA nsltr Sept-Oct 80, 2) —The New York Times reported that after long service in orbit and “a galaxy of discoveries” the astrophysics observatories Copernicus and Galileo were nearing the end of their useful lives. Copernicus (Oao 3, launched in August 1972 and named to honor the 500th birthday of the Polish astronomer) carried the first UV telescope above Earth’s atmosphere and made precise measurements of the amount of deuterium in the universe. Galileo (Heao 2, launched in November 1978) carried the only imaging X-ray telescope ever orbited and mapped X-ray emissions from every known quasar. (NY Times, Oct 31/80, A-19) —INTELSAT announced that its Italian signatory member, Telespazio, had set up an award of U.S.$10,000 for contributions to the field of satellite communications. Established on the 10th anniversary of the death of Dr. Piero Fanti, first general manager of Telespazio, the award would go every two years to a researcher or student in an INTELSAT member country who made a contribution of significant value to the field. (INTELSAT Release 80-22-1)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the flight of Salyut 6, with Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin aboard for 12 weeks. The crew spent the first week of July unloading cargo ship Progress 10, which linked with the Salyut July 1. Unloading was completed, and the orbiting station was refueled by July 15. Experiments with Isparitel apparatus were performed, using a powerful beam of electrons to plate metal and glass surfaces with precious metals and alloys of aluminum and copper. Properties of plating done in weightlessness differed from those under Earth conditions, Tass noted. First tests of the apparatus were made last year when Lyakhov and Ryumin brought back 24 titanium plates with metal covering from Soyuz 32; the current tests should produce about 200 specimens covered with films of varied thicknesses. Progress 10 separated from the Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 complex at 1:21 Moscow time July 18 after a 17-day stay, during which its engine was used to adjust the station’s orbit. On July 19 the cargo ship engines were switched on by ground command; it reentered over the Pacific and “ceased to exist.” Soyuz 37, launched at midnight July 23 Moscow time, carried the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, and veteran cosmonaut Col. Viktor Gorbatko as the sixth Intercosmos crew to visit with Popov and Ryumin, fourth main crew on Salyut 6. At the launch, Boris Petrov, vice president of the Soviet academy of sciences, noted that “although space school in Vietnamese science was established later than in other Soviet countries,” experiments in space medicine and technology and i n mapping of land and ocean surfaces had been prepared for the Soviet-Vietnamese expedition. Soyuz 37 docked with Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 at 2302 Moscow time July 24; on July 25, the visitors began a study of head blood circulation during adaptation to weightlessness, with Pham Tuan as first subject. The visitors returned in Soyuz 36 at 1815 hours July 31 to the preset area; near Dzhezkazgan. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 4-31/80)
ComSatCorp announced the formation of a new organization, ComSatCorp World Systems Division, to handle all matters of global telecommunications through the INTELSAT system and global maritime services through the INMARSAT system. John L. McLucas, most recently ComSatCorp vice president for international communications and technical services, would head the new division. Joseph V. Charyk, president and chief executive of ComSatCorp, said that the change responded to FCC concern expressed in a study of ComSatCorp organization, as it would let FCC regulate rates and costs within an organization segment. (ComSatCorp Release 80-34)
ComSatCorp announced appointment of Dr. Delbert D. Smith, vice president for corporate affairs, to a three-year term on the board of the International Institute of Communications (IIC) at the latter’s annual conference. Smith led a conference discussion of satellite communications for social and developmental purposes. The IIC, based in London, was set up to further international cooperation in the field of communications; it put out research and policy studies of the impact of media on society and analyzed the implications of communications technology, seeking to eliminate barriers to the free flow of communications. (ComSatCorp Release 80-33)
NASA announced that Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had signed a memorandum of understanding with Dr. David H. Jacobson, vice president of South Africa’s council for scientific and industrial research, for establishment of a Landsat ground station near Johannesburg. The pact would let the South African council, an early user of Landsat data, operate a ground station at Hartebeesthoek and receive, process, and disseminate data. The council would pay for a ground station and attending costs, plus an annual access fee of $200,000 after the first six months of data receipt, and would have to make Landsat data available on a nondiscriminatory basis. Landsat users in southern Africa would have access to regular coverage of the region, as a contribution to development efforts of southern African nations. Nine Landsat stations were operating outside the United States, two in Canada and one each in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. The People’s Republic of China and Thailand were buying ground-station equipment, and other ground stations were being planned. (NASA Release 80-147)
The Washington Post reported that Summa Corporation, holding company for the late billionaire Howard Hughes’s estate, would “immediately” disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s 140-ton flying boat, since a last-minute public appeal for $750,000 to preserve it had failed. The Port of Long Beach, Calif., had wanted the 220-foot boat, 80-feet high with a 320-foot wingspan, to display with another transportation mammoth, the ocean liner Queen Mary. Designed to be a World War II troop carrier, the eight-engine Spruce Goose (actually made mostly of birch) had flown only once in 1947. Parts of it would go to nine museums, including the Smithsonian. (W Post, May 23/80, F3)
The NAA newsletter paid tribute to former Senator A.S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), who died February 13 at the age of 77. Known as “Mr. Aviation” during his 30-year tenure in Congress, he was president of NAA 1970-1972. Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 1955 Federal Airport Act promoting civil aviation, which led to establishment of the FAA. He received in 1961 the Wright Brothers; memorial trophy for service to aviation, and the first Collier award for distinguished congressional service. (NAA newsletter Mar-Apr 80, 4)
Forthright criticism of Carter-administration space policy came from Rocco A. Petrone, former director of MSFC, and Dr. Thomas A. Paine, who was NASA administrator during the early manned lunar landing years, the Huntsville Times reported. The two testified July 23 before the House Committee on Science and Technology’s subcommittee on space science and applications. Committee chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and ranking minority member Larry Winn (R-Kans.) both expressed support of the NASA veterans; Winn remarked that it was :“like old timers’ day up here.” Under Carter, Paine said, the U.S. had “lost both our senses of direction and our resolution.. .Ringing rhetoric proclaiming U.S. leadership in space is no substitute for plans and programs. In my view it is self-delusive to give lip service to leadership while avoiding initiative and commitment.” Petrone said the usual pause for evaluation after a large program like the lunar mission “is now becoming dangerously close to a condition of stall and possible loss of minimum momentum needed” for complex space programs. He expressed concern over “technological timidity in a nation that has been built over the years on technological strength.” (Htsvl Tms, July 24/80, 6) July 25:A rescue training exercise at KSC was about to begin: a mock-up of the Space Shuttle was set down in a pond, and the rescue team was ready to practice its procedures in case the Shuttle overshot the runway upon its return to launch site and landed in the drink. Then, Fat Albert rose from the pond and lumbered up to Sun himself about 10 feet from the mock-up. The test was halted until wildlife officers arrived on the scene. Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until (so it is said) he ate an employee’s tennis shoe right off his foot. The wildlife officers who lassoed and carried away the alligator weighed him (1,00 pounds) and measured him (13 feet, 9 inches). With Fat Albert gone, the maneuver continued: the rescue team dropped from a helicopter into the pond and rescued two dummy astronauts from the mock-up. (JSC Roundup, July 25/80, 1) July 28.-NASA reported on a solar-flare “first” resulting from coordination of data from the Solar Max spacecraft and from a network of sophisticated ground observatories participating in the International Solar Maximum Year. On the basis of worldwide predictions, instruments on the Solar Max and at observatories in 18 nations had focused on an active region of the Sun June 24. On June 28-29, that region produced two major flares, captured by all seven spacecraft instruments (first all-instrument simultaneous measurement of the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). The observation was also the first in which scientists traced material ejected from a flare into the solar atmosphere. (NASA Release 80-120)
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, appeared before the House Committee on Science and Technology to present the agency’s budget request for 1981. After reviewing events of last year, Frosch said NASA would need by July 1 the extra $300 million requested as a supplement to stay within Shuttle cost estimates and maintain development and production schedules. Problem areas had been the Shuttle engines and the thermal protection system (TPS); recent tests had given NASA “increased confidence” in the main engines, but Frosch said that he was “not completely satisfied” with the tiles and their attachment to the Shuttle surface. He said the tiles might not be installed and fully tested before the end of summer, so that the first launch might not come until the end of 1980. The original date of launch was March 1979, and the last previous prediction was June of 1980. Frosch said he expected the first flight “between November and the end of March 1981. A year from now might be a more realistic date.” (Text, Jan 29/80; NY Times, Jan 30/80, A-17)
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially. Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. {AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
INTELSAT announced election of Irving Goldstein, previously vice chairman of its board of directors, to be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne of Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in the organization, had been working with the board since its formation in 1973. He was vice president and general manager for international communications of ComSatCorp, responsible for activities including planning, installation, and operation of ground stations using the INTELSAT system. (INTELSAT Release 80-10-1)
The House Committee on Science and Technology said that its subcommittees on space science and applications and on natural resources and environment would hold hearings June 24-25 on administration plans to develop a Landsat remote-sensing system with private-sector participation. (House anno 96-204)
President Reagan announced the nomination of business executive James Montgomery Beggs as administrator and Dr. Hans Mark as deputy administrator of NASA. If confirmed, Beggs (who was executive vice president and a director of General Dynamics Corporation, which he had joined in January 1974), would be the sixth person to head the civilian space agency, succeeding Dr. Robert A. Frosch. Beggs had been associate administrator in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) at NASA in 1968-69, leaving to become undersecretary at the Department of Transportation (DOT). Mark, who became secretary of the Air Force in July 1979 the being undersecretary since 1977, was formerly director of NASA’s ARC. (NASA Release 81-51; MSFC Release 81-50; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A-12; W Post, Apr 25/81 A-4)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
George Bush, U.S. vice president, unveiled at KSC the flight version of Spacelab, a reusable scientific-research facility designed to fly on the Shuttle. At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the Spacelab “an extraordinary engineering achievement. . .the largest cooperative space project ever.” Noting that more than 2,000 persons, from 50 European firms and 10 member nations, helped to build it, he added: “If today can be considered Spacelab’s birthday, then there are a great many proud parents celebrating... Let us continue to be partners,” he concluded, “and let me take this opportunity to assure you that we intend to continue our international cooperative programs, just as President Reagan recently reconfirmed the commitment of the United States to a vigorous space program.” The joint venture of NASA and ESA was a cylindrical module built to fit into the Shuttle cargo bay, where both astronaut mission specialists and civilian scientists (payload specialists) would work in a shirtsleeve environment, with a series of unpressurized pallets to support experiments requiring direct exposure, to space. The first Spacelab flight, planned for a seven-day Shuttle mission in September 1983, would carry out some 70 investigations in 5 different disciplines. About 50 firms in ESA’s participating nations had supplied parts to ERNO, prime contractor in Bremen, West Germany, for assembly and integration. The program, which cost ESA about $1 billion, would provide NASA, at no charge, with one engineering model and one complete flight version of Spacelab with associated ground-support equipment and some computer software. NASA was buying, for about $300 million, a second flight-model Spacelab to be delivered in mid-1982. MSFC would manage the first mission with ESA and had been in charge of U.S. development of flight-hardware items, such as the transfer tunnel and other operating equipment. MSFC would manage the second and third (NASA-only) missions alone. (Ofc of VP anno, Feb 5/82; NASA Release 82-14; MSFC Release 82-15; ESA Info 6, Feb 2/82, Feb 3/82)
Charles (Pete) Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now a vice president for marketing at McDonnell Douglas, said that pieces of Skylab that crashed in 1979 over western Australia after five years in orbit would go on sale, with proceeds to NASA, for the support of Viking I, the Mars lander still sending messages from the surface of that planet. The Skylab pieces fitted into colorful posters were expected to raise from $150,000 to $500,000. Conrad had been a member of the Apollo 12 mission that landed on the Moon as well as commander of the Skylab mission in 1973. (W Post, Nov 12/82, A-10)
Presidential Science Adviser Dr. George A. Keyworth announced the names of 13 U.S. scientists and engineers to a White House Science Council. Chairman of the council was Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president, Bell Laboratories; vice chairman was Edward Frieman, vice president, Science Applications Inc. Other members were Harold M. Agnew, president, General Atomic Company; John Bardeen, emeritus professor, engineering and physics, University of Illinois; D. Allan Bromley, professor of physics, Yale University (chairman, American Association for the Advancement of Science); George A. Cowan, senior fellow, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory; Edward E. David, president, Exxon Research and Engineering (former science adviser to President Nixon); Donald S. Frederickson, resident fellow, National Academy of Sciences (former director, National Institutes of Health—NIH); Paul E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); Robert O.. Hunter, president, Western Research Company; Arthur K. Kerman, director, MIT Center for Theoretical Physics; David Packard, chairman, Hewlett Packard; Edward Teller, Hoover Institute, Stanford University. Lt. Col. Thomas H. Johnson, special assistant to Keyworth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would study issues with “significant technical components”; it was not meant to be demographically representative of U.S. science but rather would consist of “people with first-rate technical credentials and excellent judgment.” The New York Times noted that in an interview last summer Keyworth said that “good judgment is hard to find” among scientists because “our profession is one of the few where arrogance has been condoned if not nurtured.” A presidential science advisory committee formed in 1957 was abolished in 1977 by President Nixon, angry when some of its members took public stands against his policies. The new council, known by its initials WHSC (whisk), was meant to be more modest, the New York Times said. It would have its first meeting in March. (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; NY Times, Feb 18/82, A-12)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination. The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1) During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000,	and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers. In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
A report from the House Appropriations Committee said that the Space Telescope, called by NASA Administrator James M. Beggs “the most important scientific instrument” ever to be flown, would cost $200 million more and reach orbit a year later than expected because of difficulties in development. The report blamed delays and cost overruns on NASA for understaffing the program by 50% in its early development, and on Perkin-Elmer Corporation, one of two major contractors, for failing to “properly plan for a project of the technical and manufacturing difficulty of the Space Telescope.” Besides the glitches in tracking and alignment devices, possibly unremovable dust on the primary telescope mirror after 15 months in a Perkin-Elmer “clean room” had lowered its reflecting power by 20 to 30%. (IT Post, Mar 28/83, A-8)
The NY Times said that“computer enthusiasts” had invaded NASA’s electronic mail system, left cartoon images and “Kilroy was here” messages for agency employees, and played pranks on others. A NASA official said that the intruders had destroyed some information but had not “significantly disrupted” the electronic mail service. NASA first noticed the intrusions in mid-July, and they continued into mid-September. Besides reading unclassified NASA messages, the intruders had destroyed some messages and created personal passwords and new files for themselves and their computer friends. Some NASA employees who used Telemail had been inconvenienced, but the system had never been halted. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said that it was investigating a number of youths in connection with the intrusions. To make Telemail easy to use, NASA had told employees to use their first initial and last names as part of an entry code; employee names were available from agency telephone directories sold by the Government Printing Office (GPO). The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) told a House subcommittee that it was trying to increase security for federal computers, and an FBI official asked Congress for a law prohibiting unauthorized entry into a computer. Without such a law, federal authorities were treating the cases as wire fraud, like use of telephone lines to obtain service without paying. (NY Times, Oct 19/83, A-16) Another report said that the FBI had seized computers and other equipment from 15 computer enthusiasts around the United States, mostly teenagers. The bureau said that there was “extensive” penetration into commercial and DOD computers and that intruders had tampered with the files of some corporations. (NY Times, Oct 17/83, A-12) During October: Kurt Debus, who helped develop Germany’s World War II V-2 rocket and worked on the Redstone ballistic missile for the U.S. Army in the 1950s, died after a heart attack at his home near Cocoa, Fla., at the age of 74. He had joined Wernher von Braun’s rocket team on the Baltic coast during the war and came to the United States afterwards. Von Braun said of him: “We develop the rockets and it’s up to Debus to see they do what they’re supposed to do.” In 1952, Debus became director of what would later be NASA’s Kennedy Space Center; his last official act before retirement was to break ground for a KSC landing strip for Shuttles returning from orbit. (W Post, Oct 11/83, B-6)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) —A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14) During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface. The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of objects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data. IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169) —Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114) —Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30) —Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that M. Bignier, ESA director of space transportation systems, and Ing. Heise, executive vice president and president of the Space Systems Group of Messerschmidt/Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno, signed a contract for the development of the European Retrievable Carrier, EURECA, a payload carrier intended for use on the U.S. Space Shuttle. MBB/Erno would serve as EURECA prime contractor with support from some 24 European industrial firms. The approximately $95 million contract called for delivery of the EURECA flight unit to NASA by the end of 1987 for launch from the Space Shuttle in March 1988 and recovery, by the Space Shuttle, six months later. The first EURECA payload, developed by European national institutes and space agencies, would consist primarily of experiments in the microgravity sciences (life and material sciences) and a limited number of experiments in space science and technology. Work on the payload would proceed in parallel with the development of the carrier, and plans called for delivery of all payload elements to MBB/Erno by spring 1987 for integration onboard EURECA before shipment to the U.S. The EURECA payload carrier incorporated the more attractive features of Spacelab and in addition provided for relatively long duration flights (up to eight months), higher power and mass capability for the payload, and lower costs compared with Spacelab and many conventional satellites because the system occupied only about 2.5 m of the Space Shuttle orbiter cargo bay. ESA also envisioned EURECA's eventual use in association with the proposed U.S. space station, with the EURECA operating either in a free-flying mode (co-orbiting with the space station or in polar orbit) or as a man-tended, semipermanent payload carrier with modified docking facilities. (ESA release July 1/85)
The Senate Appropriations Committee cut the Air Force FY 86 request for development of the advanced tactical fighter (ATF) by $103 million to $140 million and recommended that a unit cost cap be put on the program, Defense Daily reported. The House Appropriations Committee earlier approved $170 million for ATF. Acting on the recommendation of its defense subcommittee, the Senate committee allocated $100 million for the joint advanced fighter engine development program, $13 million for avionics development, and $27 million for continuation of the competitive air vehicle demonstration and validation "for not less than three contractors." Although the committee endorsed the ATF development program "as a long-term counter to Soviet tactical air improvements," it said it "is concerned that the current program does not provide sufficient time to absorb all of the technology" to be incorporated in the aircraft and that the program "entails unacceptable risks." And the committee pointed out that "these advanced technologies would be very expensive to obtain." The Air Force estimated R&D costs for the ATF at $11.8 billion in FY 85 dollars and, after considering a figure up to $40 million, assumed the purchase price would be $35 million in FY 85 dollars. However, the committee pointed out that the Air Force "has not identified how it will reduce ATF costs without deleting technical features previously identified as aircraft requirements." Therefore, the committee directed the Air Force to submit an annual report on the future likely cost of ATF, beginning with the FY 87 budget. It recommended that "a 20% limit be placed on the ATF program unit flyaway costs" above F—15 costs and that this limit be made the baseline of the ATF development program. The ATF would include sustained supersonic dash, internal weapons carriage, blended aerodynamic design including low observable (stealth) technology, and higher thrust (32,000 lb.) engines. It would also have short takeoff and landing (STOL) capabilities, high transonic and supersonic maneuverability, an expanded flight envelope, and improved survivability. (D/D, Nov 7/85, 33)
A Federal grand jury today indicted General Dynamics Corp., three of its current executives, and its former executive vice president, James Beggs, currently Administrator of NASA, for allegedly seeking to defraud the Defense Department in connection with producing two prototypes of the DIVAD, an anti-aircraft gun for the Army, Time magazine reported. The seven-count, 33-page indictment stated that between January 1978 and August 1981, while General Dynamics was working on a $41 million program to build the prototypes, it made false statements to the government and was guilty of fraud. The indictment charged the company with illegally billing $7.5 million of its expenses to other government accounts, of which $3.2 million was paid. Along with Beggs, the indictment also named Ralph Hawes, division general manager; David McPherson, program director; and James Hansen, assistant director. Beggs, who took a leave of absence from NASA, denied the charge, saying, "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing ... I do not intend to leave, and this is not the first step to a resignation." A General Dynamics spokesman said, "The issue is a highly sophisticated regulatory and accounting matter, which should be resolved in a civil forum, not in a criminal case." (Time, Dec 16/85, 46) The Navy anticipated a series of NROSS satellites with enough launches to keep an operating satellite in orbit unless sensor or other changes made faster launches desirable. NROSS-1's expected lifetime would be three years; an NROSS-2 would depend on needed oceanographic data. The system would help battle group commanders predict ocean conditions for antisubmarine warfare operations, force placement, and plan use of advanced weapon systems. {A/D, Jan 10/85, 50)
President Reagan's FY 86 budget for NASA sought $7.9 billion-just under what it would take to sustain the agency's programs at current levels, the Washington Post reported. At a press conference [see NASA/ Budget, Feb. 4], NASA Administrator James Beggs had acknowledged the $230-million budget request for the space station was $50 million less than the agency had sought to keep the project on schedule. (W Post, Feb 6/85, A17)
NASA cleared today the Space Shuttle's main engines for launch, making possible an August 24 launch of Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Laboratory tests and a thorough examination of one of Challenger's engines, which prematurely shut down shortly after a July 29 launch, showed that it was not damaged during launch and that a pair of heat sensors, which mistakenly indicated the engine had overheated, caused the shutdown. NASA had fitted Discovery with new heat sensors that engineers believed were vastly superior to the ones that failed on Challenger. Dominick Sanchini, executive vice president of Rocketdyne, which built the hydrogen-fueled engines, said, "Our analysis has verified what we felt right along was the probable failure mechanism. We're convinced that the sensors we have now have resolved the problem we saw on the last flight." (W Post, Aug 15/85, A8)
A U.S. House Appropriations subcommittee approved a resolution to release $1.5 billion frozen in Congress the previous year for an additional 21 MX missiles, the Washington Post reported. The vote, expected in the defense subcommittee that had supported the MX in the past, was only the first in a series of votes required before funds could be released. But missile opponents acknowledged that the vote was indicative of the uphill battle they faced in trying to defeat the MX in the midst of renewed arms control talks with the Soviets. The Reagan Administration had lobbied hard for the previous two weeks to win release of the funds, contending that continued funding of the MX was crucial to the arms control talks that had opened in Geneva. MX missile supporters on the subcommittee argued that the administration should not be denied a weapon that could be a "bargaining chip" in the arms talks. On the other hand, opponents characterized the missile as "the glass jaw in our strategic forces" and "totally irrelevant" to the arms talks. The resolution would next come before the full committee, which had backed it in the past. Observers agreed the real fight over the missile would occur on the Senate and House floors. Under a complicated arrangement worked out the previous year, representatives of the Republican-controlled Senate and the Democratic-control led House had agreed that the MX legislation would be sent to the floor of both chambers regardless of what action was taken at the committee level. (W Post, Mar 13/85, A4)
Arthur Smith, 74, retired chairman of United Technologies Corp. and the originator of the concept for water injection in piston engines that made major contributions to the performance of World War II combat planes, died August 6 after a long illness, the Washington Times reported. Smith retired as chairman of United Technologies—then known as United Aircraft—in 1973. He had assumed the post 15 months earlier after serving as executive vice president, president, and chairman of the executive committee. In 1935, after two years in the automotive industry, Smith joined Pratt & Whitney as an experimental test engineer. As a project engineer, he and a coworker invented and patented a system for water injection to control detonation and increase horsepower in aircraft piston engines. The 1938 invention increased the speed of U.S. fighter planes used during World War II by 40 mph. In 1949 he became chief engineer at Pratt & Whitney and helped develop the J57, which powered the F-100 fighter, the first production aircraft to exceed the speed of sound in level flight. Smith became president of the company in 1967. {W Times, Aug 8/85, 7B)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
The Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President, reported that the President's proposed FY 86 budget requested $60 billion for research and development (R&D), of which $40 billion would support non-DOD projects and nearly $8 billion, basic research. Although obligations for non-DOD R&D would decrease slightly from 1985 to 1986, reflecting determination to reduce the federal deficit, obligations for basic research in the physical sciences and engineering would increase by 7%, and those for all basic research would increase 1%. Actual outlays during 1986 would grow by 5%, permitting some modest real growth. In testimony before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, Dr. G.A. Keyworth, Science Advisor to the President, said he strongly supported the necessity of slowing the growth of science and technology funding in the short term, but wouldn't hide his concern over the vitality of U.S. science over the long run. "Our real challenges will come in fiscal years 1987 and 1988, when we simply will have to find ways to ensure our ability to pursue—and pursue vigorously—new avenues of research. . . . We have to be prepared to make hard choices to fund new starts for high-priority research facilities under whatever fiscal scenario we face in coming years. What will be at stake will be the scientific leadership that we can't afford to compromise." (Office of Science and Technology Policy release Feb 4/85; U.S. House Comm, on Science and Technology testimony, Feb 5/85) During February. In its Federal Scientific and Technical Workers: Numbers and Characteristics, 1973 and 1983, the National Science Foundation reported that the federal government was the largest single employer of scientific and technical personnel in the U.S. Government employment of scientists grew by 20% between 1973 and 1983, from 74,000 to 89,000, although such employment declined during that period at NASA and the Department of Defense. The variation by government agency in the proportion of scientists, engineers, and computer (SEC) specialists with at least a bachelor's degree was not great, ranging from 95% at the Department of Transportation (DOT) to 99% at NASA. The proportion of NASA SEC personnel with advanced degrees increased from 29% to 36% between 1973 and 83, reflecting the higher separation rates of bachelor's degree holders and those without degrees during the long-term cutbacks in SEC employees at NASA. The number of SEC staff at NASA declined 8% between 1973 and 83. The decline of 1,800 electronics technicians during the period reflected primarily a fall in total white-collar employment levels of 10% at DOT and NASA; DOT's electronics technicians went from 8,800 to 7,800, NASA's from 900 to 600. (NSF 85-312 [final report], Feb 85)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
European Space Agency (ESA), Japanese, and Canadian officials the previous week expressed concern about NASA's expectations of how the costs of operating the proposed space station should be shared, as fears increased that the U.S. Congress or the Office of Management and Budget might slip the planned 1993 operational date for the $10 to $13 billion facility, Aviation Week reported. The officials were meeting with NASA managers to lay the groundwork for critical space station decisions due by December that would determine what type of contribution they would make to the basic $8 billion U.S. investment. The international space officials were unanimous in their view that the non-U.S. contribution to the station's operational costs should be largely amortized through open access and use of their respective portions of the station system—not through funding transferred to the U.S. As the discussions progressed, the possibility of a space station schedule delay to help cut the U.S. budget deficit in FY 87 became a growing factor. Sen. Slade Gorton (R-Wash.), chairman of the Senate science subcommittee, and Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, both influential space supporters, were cautioning that congressional action on the FY 87 NASA budget could trim space station funding and delay the project's 1993 planned operational date by a year or more. Fuqua told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable, a group formed to foster space commercialization, that a slip now, while undesirable and likely to drive up costs later, could be absorbed by the program more easily than one later when the hardware phase was underway. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 18)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
The Indian Department of Space announced today the selection of two Indian astronaut candidates, one of whom would fly aboard the Space Shuttle carrying India's INSAT-1C satellite, FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English reported. The candidates were N.C. Bhatt of the Indian Space Research Organization, Bangalore, and P. Radhakrishmam of Vikram Sarabhai Space Center, Trivandrum. The chairman of India's Space Commission, Professor U. R. Rao, said the commission would select one of them to fly on the mission scheduled for July 1986. (FBIS Delhi Domestic Service in English, Nov 8/85) "There has to be a difference between some senator or Arab prince and the qualified scientists who fly aboard the shuttle," said Ulf Merbold, crew interface coordinator for the D-1 mission. "We demand that the science astronaut concept be developed so that these proficient crew members can be designated for such a flight," said Hans-Ulrich Steimle, Spacelab D-1 mission manager at the German aerospace research establishment. "Instead, NASA now has become involved in running a travel office for visiting dignitaries, and this is counterproductive when you want to perform a serious science mission." German officials said they might raise the issue again when planning was finalized for a follow-on Spacelab D-2 mission targeted for 1988. (AvWk, Nov 11/85, 24)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
The U.S. House Science and Technology Committee approved President Reagan's request for a $7.9 billion NASA budget for FY 86, the Washington Post reported, but allocated the funds differently than he had requested. By a 32-to-9 vote, the panel decided to retain a subcommittee's recommendation to shift $45 million to spare parts procurement for the Space Shuttle in order to keep the Space Shuttle assembly line open and thus increase chances for a fifth orbiter. The administration requested $2.1 billion in FY 86 for 14 Space Shuttle flights and delivery of the fourth orbiter, Atlantis; it sought no funds for a fifth orbiter. (W Post, Apr 1/85, A9)
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
The Australian minister of defense, Mr. Beazley, confirmed that Australia would help test a new U.S. satellite system called "Teal Ruby" that was associated with the space defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English reported. Mr. Beazley stressed, however, that Australia's involvement was not directly related to SDI and would end the following year. He said the U.S. would use Australian defense vessels and aircraft to test the satellite system using infrared rays and that the project had some benefits for Australia over the long term because of that country's surveillance problems. He pointed out that infrared sensing was a good way to maintain surveillance of countries with electronic warfare systems. However, the Australian Democrats's spokesman, Senator Mason, condemned the decision, saying the research was an essential part of the SDI system and that the Australian government was guilty of hyprocrisy in agreeing to participate in the testing. (FBIS, Melbourne Overseas Service in English, May 10/85)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA announced that June Gibbs Brown, appointed NASA's inspector general June 1981 by President Reagan, would leave March 10 to become vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer of System Development Corp. Prior to her NASA service, Brown served as inspector general for the Department of Interior and worked for the Bureau of Land Management, Bureau of Reclamation, and had been director of the audit division of the U.S. Navy Finance Center. Brown held bachelor and master degrees in business administration and a Juris Doctor from the University of Denver School of Law. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/85)
NASA Administrator James Beggs confirmed this week that NASA cancelled a mission to send an unmanned spacecraft to comet Wild 2, citing budgetary constraints, the Washington Post reported. "However, the comet rendezvous proposal is a very promising candidate for a new start" in FY 88, Beggs said. NASA had expected the mission from FY 87 to 1992 to cost $400 million, which was within the budgetary limits NASA established in 1981 for new planetary missions. The NASA budget the Reagan Administration was drafting eliminated the mission. Delaying a decision on a comet rendezvous by even one year meant the spacecraft could not fly to Wild 2, the favorite candidate of space scientists because it was a bright, fresh comet. Discovered in 1978, the comet would make its third and fourth appearances in 1990 and 1996. In order to rendezvous with the comet when it passed near the earth, NASA in 1986 would have to begin work on the mission to have the spacecraft ready by 1991 for launch from the Space Shuttle. The announcement followed NASA decisions in 1980 and 1981 not to attempt a mission to fly by Halley's Comet. "Once again, the United States is passing up an opportunity to initiate the exploration of the comets, which contain the most unblemished record of the origins of our solar system," the Postquoted Dr. Laurel Wilkening, dean of the graduate school at the University of Arizona and vice chairman of President Reagan's Commission on Space. "The decision is a major setback for the U.S. planetary exploration program," he concluded. Space scientists were also upset because NASA's science advisory groups recommended that a comet rendezvous be the next new misson in planetary exploration [see Astronomy, Oct. 8], Scientists pushed for a mission to Wild 2 because the spacecraft could travel with the comet for 850 days, observing it before its long dust tail formed and obscured the comet's nucleus or damaged the spacecraft. It would have been NASA's most ambitious mission to explore the solar system. The next comet that NASA could approach would be Tempel 2, which would pass by earth in 1998. Such a mission, also costing $400 million, required a NASA decision by the middle of 1986. (W Post, Oct 17/85, A21)
NASA's Thomas DeCair, associate administrator for external relations, announced today the appointment of Shirley Green as NASA's director of public affairs. She replaced Frank Johnson Jr., who was appointed assistant associate administrator for external relations (special projects). In her new position, Green would be responsible for planning and directing all NASA activities that provided information to and responded to inquiries from the public and the media. Green came to NASA with 20 years' experience in communications and management. Since 1981, as deputy and acting press secretary to the Vice President of the United States, she was responsible for planning and coordinating media activities for the Vice President on matters of domestic policy, including the task forces on regulatory relief and drug interdiction. She had accompanied the Vice President to 61 foreign countries, coordinating all media activities. Green was a former chairman of public affairs for the Texas Federation of Republican Women, press assistant to Congressman Bob Price, and a recipient of the Ten Outstanding Republican Women award in Texas. She received a bachelor of business administration degree in 1956 from the University of Texas. (NASA Release 85-168)
By voice vote the U.S. Senate approved a FY 86 NASA authorization of $7.6 billion, an increase of $142 million above the 1985 NASA appropriation and the House-approved authorization, the Washington Post reported. The increase would mainly cover the cost of restoring the Reagan Administration's proposed 5% pay cut for federal employees and provide additional funds for booster rockets. The Senate spending ceiling was $234 million below the Administration's request. The Senate and House authorization bills were substantially different. The Senate approved cuts in specific programs, while the House simply approved an across-the-board freeze for the entire NASA budget. (W Post, July 1/85, A13) Data Tracking and Relay Systems
Under-Secretary of the U.S. Air Force E. C. Aldridge, Jr. announced in an internal information memorandum that the policy of the U.S. Air Force was to "ensure that the unique capabilities that can be derived from the presence of military man in space shall be utilized to the extent feasible and practical to enhance existing and future missions in the interest of national security objectives." The memorandum implied that U.S. Air Force would be committed to working with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in its most recent manned space undertaking to deploy in orbit a manned, permanent orbiting space station in the early 1990s. Memorandum for the Vice Chief of Staff, USAF from Under-Secretary E. C. Aldridge, Jr., August 1, 1985. August 2Ch Honeywell's Military Avionics Division would soon begin for the McDonnell Aircraft Co. full-scale development, costing about $500 million, of a tactical electronic warfare intermediate support system (TISS) for the F-15 Eagle aircraft program, Defense Daily reported. The award to Honeywell was part of a larger contract the U.S. Air Force recently awarded to McDonnell to upgrade the F—15 tactical warfare system (TEWS). The Honeywell TISS would test the F-15's electronic warfare system to minimize downtime, reduce maintenance costs, and improve overall missile effectiveness. Stanley Moeschi, Honeywell vice president, noted that, "This contract demonstrates the maturity of Honeywell's automatic test technology and a substantial advancement in state-of-the-art digital and radio frequency electronic warfare testing." (D/D, Aug 20/85, 1)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, during a press conference, reported that President Reagan had requested a NASA budget of just under $7.9 billion, reflecting the President's determination to continue America's space leadership and to achieve the goal of a permanently manned space station. The budget covered some unforeseen items not addressed by 1985 budgetplanning estimates, including the Congressionally mandated development of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), scheduled for launch in 1989, and acceleration of the advanced turboprop propulsion system for FY 87 flight testing. The budget contained four major appropriations requests: a total of $2.9 billion for R&D, which included funds for previously approved space science and applications programs, development of ACTS, initiation of the orbiting maneuvering vehicle program, and promotion of commercial use of space; $3.5 billion for space flight, control, and data communications to support Space Shuttle production, operations, and tracking and data acquisition (a decrease of $92 million from FY 85's budget plan); $149 million for facilities construction (down $1 million from FY 85); and $1.3 billion for research and program management. (NASA release Feb. 4/85; NASA press briefing, Feb. 4/ 85)
The U.S. House Appropriations Committee deleted $7.2 million in FY 86 funds requested by the Air Force to initiate a $350 million program to refurbish Titan II ICBMs for use as space boosters, Defense Daily reported. The committee warned that the Titan II launchers could "only have a further impact on the Shuttle and result in a less efficient use of Shuttle facilities" and pointed out that the Air Force had "not been able to demonstrate why the expensive Titan II refurbishment program is critical to the defense of the nation." The Committee also noted that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration dropped its plans to launch some payloads on the Titan II in favor of launching them on the Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Revenues Feb. 25 and Oct. 18], "bringing into question whether Titan II is cost-effective on a per launch basis," the committee said. It also cited classified reasons for its action. (D/D, Oct 29/85, 305)
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
Vice President George Bush, after meeting with French President Francois Mitterrand and other French leaders in Paris, said the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program and the European French-sponsored Eureka technology program were not incompatible, Defense Daily reported. Seeking to calm concerns that the Eureka program was in competition with SDI for scientific and technology talent, Bush said that after his talks with the French that "I more firmly believe . . . there is no incompatibility between Eureka. . .and SDI. . . "They understand our research program, which is strictly related to strategic defense, and I think we understand much more clearly their concept of collective research on broad technology as far as Europe is concerned," Bush commented. Technology ministers from 16 European countries had scheduled a meeting for July 17 in Paris to discuss projects and areas of cooperation in the Eureka program. Five areas of high technology were identified for joint programs: information technology, robotics, communications, bio-technology, and new materials. (D/D, July 8/85, 1)
In work done under a three-year grant in cooperation with Wichita State University (WSU) and aircraft and component manufacturers, Lewis Research Center (LeRC) developed the Electro-Impulse Deicing System (EIDI), which creates an electromechanical impluse at the leading edge of an aircraft's wing to produce a minute flexing of the metal skin that serves to shatter, debond, and remove ice buildup, the Lewis News reported. At a LeRC symposium, more than 100 representatives from various companies and other government agencies met to review the results of the cooperative program to develop a technology base for EIDI. Cessna Aircraft Co. planned to apply for Federal Aviation Administration certification for their model 206 aircraft with the EIDI system. Although several methods of deicing or anti-icing were available, all had undesirable energy requirements. The electro-magnetic impulse method, first suggested in 1937 by Rudolf Goldschmidt, a German national residing in London after World War II, offered a promising alternative. During the 1950s and 1960s, industry used electro-impulse methods for metals forming in various industrial processes. In the 1970s, the USSR pursued further research including some aircraft applications. However, for various reasons the development stopped short of full implementation; the system still lacked a well developed underlying technology and known design parameters. Early EIDI system research offered promise of ice removal with low energy requirements, minimal maintenance (no moving parts), greater reliability, and a weight and cost competitive with existing methods. In mid-1982, LeRC funded a six-month grant to WSU to work with two small plane makers and an aircraft electrical system manufacturer to do a feasibility study that resulted in a successful icing tunnel demonstration in October/November 1982. LeRC then organized a consortium of companies for full development of the method for the whole range of civil aircraft, each company agreeing to contribute some services or equipment to the project in return for eligibility to submit its own products for deicing design and tests by the EIDI method. Engine aircraft candidates for the EIDI system included commercial transport turbofans, business jet turbofans, commuter transport turboprops, and commercial transport propfans. (LeRC News, July 26/85, 2)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
Conrail, created by Congress from six bankrupt northeastern railroads, argued against a measure proposed by Senator John Danforth that would take $450 million from the Governmentowned railroad and transfer the funds to NASA. If passed, the plan would help compensate for the House and Senate Armed Services Committee's move to cut $566 million from the Air Force budget that was earmarked for NASA and military use of the Shuttle. (W Post, Jul 22/86)
Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a'I0*congressional investigation into whether NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had violated conflictofinterest rules when he awarded Morton Thiokol the Shuttle booster contract in 1973. Dr. Fletcher denied the charges, but said he would seriously consider removing himself from future booster rocket contract decisions. NY Times, Dec 19/86)
A House panel, the Science and Technology Committee's subcommittee on space science and applications, approved a $7.6 billion NASA budget request. The authorization bill still needed review by the full Committee before being sent to the House floor. No funds were allotted for a new Shuttle, but supporters in Congress hoped that NASA would request a supplemental $500 million as first payment for "Challenger II." The physics and astronomy portion of NASA's budget, including $27.9 million for the Hubble Space Telescope, had not yet been reviewed. (B Sun, Apr 18/86)
Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, an unsuccessful bidder on Shuttle boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stating that the multisegment booster that relied on oring seals were "burdened with design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable operation." According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then chairman of the committee that controlled NASA's budget came from Utah; and that then NASA Administrator Dr. James Fletcher was former president of the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, however, also pointed out that Thoikol needed minimal up front Government cash and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the early days of the program's budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86)
In a White House meeting President Ronald Reagan indicated that he would allow NASA to honor only some of its higher priority contracts for commercial and foreign satellite launches from the Space Shuttle. Regarding a new orbiter, Chief of Staff Donald Regan has reversed his stance and now favors the replacement. Regan changed his mind, he stated, because he believed that NASA would not just correct its major faults, but would bring the Shuttle up to date with current technology. In a related matter, the Senate agreed to reimburse NASA with $56.3 million for military launches, a move protested by Senator Sam Nunn, who claimed that the money would come at the expense of intelligence activities. (NY Times, Aug 8/86; W Post, Aug 8/86)
Representative Edward P. Bolland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee, advised NASA that it needed to make some difficult choices in its bigticket items. The Congressman specifically asked Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher how he would choose between a new Shuttle and the Space Station, to which he responded that the two projects were inseparable. Fletcher further pointed out that a fourth Shuttle was necessary because another accident would leave the Nation with only two, crippling the space program. The subcommittee, said Bolland, was most concerned about the cost of the Space Station. (B Sun, May
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher would likely seek to continue the $10 billion budget afforded to fiscal year 1987, a 40 percent increase from fiscal year 1986. Fletcher, according to NASA officials, planned to meet with President Ronald Reagan and argue that the Challenger accident was a result of years of underfunding. The increased funds could support the Civil Space Technology Initiative for promoting space research and technology; the Global Geoscience System, a solar terrestrial satellite new start; High Alpha, a military aeronautics research program; and the Xray Astrophysics Facility, advanced technology development. The increased NASA budget resulted from a $2.4 billion decrease in the Department of Defense budget. (AvWk, Nov
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
Space agency officials announced that it would cost $625 million to get the remaining Shuttle fleet off the ground. The money would go to salvage and investigation costs ($43 million), spare parts ($46 million), and corrective actions ($537 million). The corrective actions included redesign of the solidfuel rocket booster, changes in the main engine, and changes in steering, braking and other systems, but not escape options for the crew. The Senate Appropriations Committee trimmed the request to $526 million because, it was reasoned, the agency could not spend all of its money before the fiscal year ended on September 30. Other officials from NASA met with President Ronald Reagan to discuss the Nation's launch capability and requested $2.8 billion to replace the Challenger. The request, which was part of a $5 billion to $8 billion total that included expendable launch vehicles, violated the deficit reduction GrammRudman law. Chief of Staff Donald Reagan questioned the need for a new Shuttle that might be outdated within 10 years. President Reagan queried, "Should we be buying the technology of the '70s for use in the '90s?" In grappling with the NASA budget, the President considered a recommendation to bar all commercial and foreign launches from the Shuttle. (W Times, May 16/86; W Post, May 16/86; WSJ, May 16/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
A NASA report, titled "Space Science Operations Management Concepts Study," was submitted to the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. The report, prepared by a 60member study team of personnel from NASA Headquarters, field centers, other Federal agencies, and university officials, examined options for the management of Space Station science. (NASA Note to Editors, Oct 1/1987)
Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., said that engineers successfully testfired the company's redesigned Space Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in June 1988. (WSJ, Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
Dr. Leonard A. Fisk, Vice President for Research and Financial Affairs at the University of New Hampshire, was named NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, effective April 6, 1987. He replaced Dr. Burton I. Edelson. (NASA Release 8718)
Willis H. Shapley was selected for NASA's newly established position of Associate Deputy Administrator (Policy), effective March 9, 1987. Shapley held the third ranking position, created in response to the reorganization recommended by the NASA Management Study Group. Shapley began Government service in 1942 with the Bureau of the Budget, Executive Office of the President, where he specialized in research and development, national defense, and space programs. From 1965 to 1975, he was NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator. In July 1975 he was the senior NASA representative in the Soviet Union during the joint USUSSR ApolloSoyuz space mission. Shapley retired from NASA in 1975 to become a consultant to a number of private institutions and Government agencies, including NASA. (NASA Release 8724)
President Ronald Reagan's proposed fiscal year 1987 budget called for a 12.7 percent increase in NASA funding. The intent of the increase in the NASA budget was to resume the Space Shuttle flights, which had been suspended after the Challenger disaster. The President's budget also called for nearly $767 million for work on the crewtended Space Shuttle. No funds were included for the untended rockets program, despite recommendations by several expert panels that NASA was overdependent on the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, Jan 6/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts to lease a commercial crewtended space laboratory, citing several irregularities in NASA's handling of the procurement process and questioning the space agency's abrupt reversal of its prior opposition to the facility. The chairmen of the House appropriations subcommittee for NASA, Representative Edward Boland, and the Chairman of the House authorization subcommittee for NASA, Representative Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for the facility until these issues could be addressed. Several ranking members of the House and Senate had written NASA to complain that the Agency was moving ahead with a contract without congressional authorization. (H Post, Mar 24/88; AvWk, Mar 28/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly renamed John C. Stennis Space Centerformerly the National Space Technology Laboratoriesin Hancock County, Mississippi. The Center was named for Mississippi's retiring senator by an Executive order signed May 20, 1988, by President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 8893)
NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
President George Bush reestablished the National Space Council, an executive space policy advisory group to be chaired by the Vice President. The Space Council was originally created by President John F. Kennedy and disbanded in 1973 by President Richard Nixon. President Bush restored the Space Council as an official forum for setting longrange policy for United States civil, military, and commercial space efforts. (WH Release, Apr 20/89; UPI, May 12/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
Officials announced that an advisory committee created by Vice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was set up to examine how to manage future efforts in space. The committee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut, and several top industry executives, was to report to the National Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that he had urged the committee's creation because of problems with the Hubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (NY Times, Aug 3/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991 budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiative and cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. The measure was to go to a conference committee to iron out differences with the House appropriations bill before being sent to President George Bush. (WSJ Oct 4/90)
Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids that threaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Grey noted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year, that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a devastating effect. (P Inq, May 15/90; C Trib, May 17/90)
The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spending plan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's Space Station. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program has been increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them." W Post, Oct 17/90; AvWk, Oct 22/90)
The media reported that the House Appropriations Subcommittee, by a six to three vote, had agreed to cut all but $100 million of the projected $2 billion Space Station budget for the fiscal year beginning October 1991. The $100 million was to be used to close the project and study two alternative space science projects. (W Post, May 16/91; WSJ, May 16/91; W Times, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, wrote a guest column stressing the importance of the Space Station to manned flight and the opportunity it provided not only for space leadership but also for the development of weightless materials sciences and biotechnology. (Fla Today, Jul 16/91)
The media reported that on July 10 the Senate Appropriations subcommittee, despite the strong opposition of the scientific community, approved $2.02 billion--the full amount requested by the Bush administration- to continue the Space Station project for one more year. Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Senator Jake Garn, Republic of Utah, were key supporters of the Space Station funding.  The Space Station vote was at the cost of cuts and delays in separate satellite programs and unmanned space exploration. (W Post, Jul 11/91; WSJ, Jul 11/91; W Times, Jul 11/91; USA Today, Jul 11/91; LA Times, Jul 11/91; AP, Jul 11/91)
The media covered the House vote of 240 to 173 overturning the House Appropriations Committee action halting the Space Station program and authorizing $1.9 billion to keep the program going. The role of the White House in pressuring Congress to support the project was stressed. Several articles also commented that the action was a boon to aerospace firms. The importance of the United States maintaining its space leadership and having a permanent presence in space, despite the high costs entailed, also were emphasized. (P Inq, Jun 7/91; WSJ, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 7/91; B Sun, Jun 7/91; W Times, Jun 7/91; USA Today, Jun 7/91; LA Times, Jun 7/91; W Post, Jun 7/91; C Trin, Jun 7/91; AP, Jun 7/91; UPI, Jun 7/91; Htsvl Tms, Jun 7/91; NY Times, Jun 8/91; Birmingham News, Jun 10/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
A trade publication reported that NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly had asked Vice President Dan Quayle to signal strong support to Congress for the X-30 National Aerospace Plane (NASP) program. NASA feared a major cut in funding of the NASP would significantly delay the program. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
The Los Angeles Times described at some length the Yellow Creek Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be located on the Tombigbee Waterway of the Tennessee Valley Authority, in the home district of Jamie L. Whitten, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. The $3 million project was to introduce a solid rocket system that was mandated by Congress but which NASA's advisory panel said was not needed and might not be as reliable as existing systems. The unemployment rate in this district of northern Mississippi was more than 20 percent, and critics maintained this was the reason for the facility being constructed here. (LA Times, Nov 25/91)
The media reported that President Bush had informed two senators, Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, and Jake Garn, Republican of Utah, both on the Senate space subcommittee, and NASA Administrator Richard Truly that he would actively campaign to reverse the congressional panel's decision to scuttle the Space Station. (AP, May 23/91; B Sun, May 24/91; W Post, May 24/91)
President Bush barred the export to China of parts for a domestic communications satellite, known as Dong Fang Hong 3, citing concerns about possible proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Bush approved export of components for two Western projects, an Australian communications satellite and a Swedish weather satellite, to be launched from China, for which the United States was assured of strict safeguards. (W Post, May 1/91; NY Times, May 1/91)
AP reported that the Council of Engineers and Scientists Organization, whose member unions represent 80,000 scientists, engineers, technical, and professional staff sent a letter to each senator endorsing the Space Station. (AP, Jul 16/91)
NASA announced the signing of an agreement in Buenos Aires by Vice President Dan Quayle and Argentine President Carlos Menem on cooperation in the civil uses of space. A framework for future cooperative space projects between NASA and the newly created Argentine National Commission on Space Activities was established. NASA Release 91-126)
The media reported on hearings of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology regarding the U.S. weather satellite. The General Accounting Office (GAO) found that the program for a new satellite, GOES-Next, was more than three years behind schedule and costs more than doubled because of mismanagement by NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and poor workmanship by contractors. The GAO report considered the problem originated when NASA neglected to have a critical engineering review of the feasibility of the program's objectives at the beginning of the project. (UPI, Jul 25/91; AP, Jul 25/91;  NY Times, Jul 26/91)
A giant black granite "space mirror" at Cape Canaveral, Florida, honoring America's 15 fallen astronauts was prepared for dedication, five years after the Challenger disaster. The monument was dedicated by Vice President Dan Quayle on May 9, in the presence of relatives of the astronauts killed. (UPI, May 9/91; B Sun, May 10/91; P Inq, May 10/91; W Times, May 10/91;  USA Today, May 10/91; C Trin, May 10/91; AP, May 10/91; UPI, May 10/91; Newsweek, May 13/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
Sam F. Iacobellis, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Rockwell International Corporation, presented a check for $87,500 to the Challenger Center for Space Science Education to support a national educational teleconference to be aired in the fall of 1992 on Discovery Networks. (Business Wire, Dec 10/91; LA Times, Dec 12/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the White House's National Space Council, told NASA and congressional leaders that the National Research Council's criticism of the redesigned NASA Space Station was "not entirely appropriate." He endorsed the project as advancing US leadership in space. Quayle also alluded to the Mars mission saying "We will 'go-as-we-pay,' but we must go." The "pay as you go" terminology in connection with the Space Station project exasperated NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly. (NY Times, Mar 21/91; LA Times, Mar 21/91; AvWk, Mar 25/91)
The NASA Advisory Council of 25 leaders in industry, government, and academia sent a letter to Vice President Dan Quayle commending NASA Administrator Truly's quick action in implementing the Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program. (NASA Release N91-10)
James W. McCulla, Director of Media Services, NASA, replied to an op-ed article in the Washington Post by Jessica Mathews, vice president of World Resources Institute. Mathews maintained that there was no justification for the U.S. space exploration program now that the Cold War had ended. McCulla replied that learning more about the universe, Earth systems, and life beyond Earth were significant goals.(W Post, Jan 4/91; P Inq, Jan 4/91)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
The press reported on Bush administration efforts to save Space Station Freedom in the light of actions of the House Appropriations Committee as well as the protests of participating nations that were angered at Congressional action, such as Japan, Canada, and the European Space Agency. (B Sun, Jun 3/91; W Post, Jun 3/91)
A space journal reported that Vice President Dan Quayle had asked David Thompson, former NASA engineer and current chairman, president, and chief executive officer of Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, to take the post of NASA Deputy Administrator. Thompson was considering the matter. (SP News, Nov 18-24/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, announced the appointment of former NASA deputy director J.R. Thompson Jr. as executive vice president. He was to manage the new Orbital office in Huntsville, Alabama, near Marshall Space Flight Center. (AP, Nov 12/91; W Post, Nov 13/91; W Times, Nov 13/91; Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; (Northern Virginia) Journal, Nov 14/91)
A space policy analyst for a major aerospace company in California questioned the lack of activity concerning the Strategic Environmental Research Program (SERP). Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat from Georgia, sponsored the program in 1990 to bring vital data and skills from the Defense and Energy departments to bear on problems of environmental research and global warming. The proposal was to select some classified defense satellite data with potential usefulness in global change research, declassify them, and make them available to researchers in global warming. Congress authorized $200 million for SERP in the 1991 Defense Authorization Act, but nothing further was heard. (SP News, Mar 25/91)
A space publication printed an adapted version of Senator Dale Bumpers' (Democrat from Arkansas) speech when he introduced legislation in July to cut funding on the NASA Space Station drastically. He favored solving U.S. problems on the ground, not in space. The same issue carried remarks of Senator Jim Sasser (Democrat from Tennessee) that the Space Station was something the United States could not afford. Furthermore, the magazine carried an interview with Jim Beggs, chairman of Spacehab Inc. and former NASA administrator, concerning his organization's relationship to NASA. (SP News, Sep 9-15/91)
The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology approved a $14.27 billion space program for the next fiscal year, an increase of nearly 6 percent over 1991 but $488 million less than President Bush had requested. Included was $1.9 billion for the Space Station with $128.9 million to be added when the National Academy of Sciences comments on NASA's plans to reduce the size of the station. The committee specified that NASA spend $25 million of the Space Station money on developing a return emergency vehicle for Space Station astronauts. It also called for spending $30 million to develop advanced propulsion systems, including the first new Shuttle engine in more than 20 years. Closer scientific cooperation with the Soviet Union and continuation of the Landsat earth-monitoring program were also specified. (AP, Apr 24/91)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
An article in Congressional Quarterly described the careful trimming of various programs performed by Senator Barbara Mikulski in order to provide sufficient funds for the Space Station. (Congressional Quarterly, Jul 13/91)
The National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, developed a policy directive intended to strengthen the nation's commercial space industry. The policy creates guidelines requiring the government to act more like a private business in dealing with space-related enterprises. It calls for increased efforts to negotiate trade agreements to reduce or eliminate subsidies provided by foreign governments, including the Soviet Union, China, and Japan, to their commercial satellite-launching services. The policy would also encourage government agencies, particularly NASA and the Defense Department, to support space activity by entering into cooperative research and development efforts with private industry and assuming some of the financial risk; basing contracts with rocket and satellite makers on "performance standards" rather than complex military specifications; and taking into account the government's overhead and development costs in assessing bids by private firms. (P Inq, Feb 12/91; UPI, Feb 13/91)
An article in the Washington Post commented that the House Appropriations Committee's decision to delete funding for NASA's Space Station from the 1992 budget represented a setback for a number of defense and space-related contractor companies that were counting on the project. (W Post, Jun 6/91)
The media reported on Administration efforts to have the elimination of funding for the Space Station reversed in the House of Representatives. In this connection, the New York Times carried a major editorial urging that the Space Station not be funded. In response to that editorial, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly released a letter of support for the Space Station from Thomas Stafford, Chairman of the Synthesis Group, to Representative George Brown, Chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (USA Today, Jun 6/91; NY Times, Jun 6/91; NASA Release N91-42; WSJ, Jun 6/91; CSM, Jun 6/91; UPI, Jun 6/91)
President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle received the crew of the Columbia Shuttle and their spouses. (UPI, Jan 10/91)
The press reported the House Appropriations Committee action voting to kill NASA's Space Station and ignoring a White House veto threat in that regard. (W Post, Jun 4/91; B Sun, Jun 4/91; USA Today, Jun 4/91; W Times, Jun 4/91; P Inq, Jun 4/91; WSJ, Jun 4/91; AP, Jun 4/91; UPI, Jun 4/91; SP News, Jun 3-9/91; LA Times, Jun 4/91)
The press reported that the subcommittee on investigations and oversight of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology on August 1 examined NASA's functioning at a hearing entitled "NASA's Midlife Crisis." The chairman of the subcommittee, Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, cited the need for NASA to be a "prudent steward" and expressed a lack of confidence in NASA's ability to carry out its mission. Various industry representatives testified about NASA's operations and its contracting. NASA inspector general Bill D. Colvin said NASA had failed to keep a sharp eye on its programs, operations, and contractors, resulting in the waste of millions of dollars. (W Post, Aug 2/91; B Sun, Aug 2/91; LA Times, Aug 2/91; AP, Aug 2/91; AvWk, Aug 5/91)
Vice President Dan Quayle, speaking as chairman of the National Space Council, said the U.S. would not buy or build more Space Shuttle orbiters. It is to continue to use the four existing orbiters into the next century but planned to develop a new family of rockets to replace the current fleet of unmanned vehicles. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said he helped devise the policy's wording and was "totally in support" of it.(P Inq, Jul 25/91; W Post, Jul 25/91; B Sun, Jul 25/91; W Times, Jul 25/91; USA Today, Jul 25/91; WSJ, Jul 25/91; NY Times, Jul 25/91; Washington Technology, Jul 25/91; Htsvl Tms, Jul 26/91; Peninsula Times Tribune, Jul 30/91 quoting San Diego Tribune; B Sun, Jul 31/91)
The House of Representatives voted to authorize NASA to spend $14.9 billion in the next fiscal year, about $500 billion less than President Bush had requested. The approval included the full $2 billion Bush sought for Space Station Freedom. Concurrently, the House directed the National Academy of Sciences to study whether the goals of the Space Station could be achieved more cheaply by other means. (W Post, May 3/91; W Times, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
The press carried accounts of administration statements, led by Vice President Dan Quayle, vowing to fight to save the Space Station despite the Appropriations Subcommittee action. (P Inq, May 17/91; W Post, May 17/91; B Sun, May 17/91; AP, May 17/91; UPI, May 17/91)
President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
A House panel raised legal questions about the National Space Council's handling of a proposal to restructure space program management. Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, chairman of the House Science subcommittee on investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to president Bush that the council's official circulation of the proposal was in conflict with the 1958 Space Act. The proposal, prepared by the Livermore Laboratory's Lowell Wood, also violated the council's charter not to interfere with line management responsibility in NASA. (AvWk, March 9/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
President Bush held a scheduled meeting with NASA astronauts in the Oval Office, followed by an address to Young Astronauts Council in the Old Executive Office Building. (NASA Release 92-12)
NASA delivered a report to the U.S. Senate outlining a shift in emphasis towards smaller, lower cost and more frequent planetary missions. The Small Planetary Mission Plan, which was requested by the Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD and Independent Agencies chaired by Senator Barbara Mikulski, described two proposed missions that NASA had selected for preliminary studies leading to launches in 1996 and 1998. The two missions were the Mars Environmental Survey Pathfinder and the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NASA Release 92-63)
In a speech to the National Space Club, outgoing NASA chief Richard Truly, who resurrected the Shuttle Space program after the 1986 tragedy, said that the country's space program is in jeopardy and that "the cheap shots" coming from the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, "must end" if the White House and Congress want to maintain U.S. leadership in space. (USA Today, Feb 27/92; W Times, Feb 27/92; W Post, Feb 26/92; Fla Today, Feb 15/92; O Sen, Feb 14, 1992; Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 18/92; Defense News, Feb 17/92; B Sun, Feb 19/92; Space News, Feb 17/92; AP, Feb 19/92; NY Times, Feb 20/92)
TRW Inc. said it had named R. Gordon Williams to succeed Daniel S. Goldin, the new head of NASA, as vice president and general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group. Williams, 61, was formerly vice president and general manager of TRS's Federal Systems division, which manages TRW's major space systems and projects for NASA. (UPI, Apr 13/92)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
Representative Richard J. Durbin, Illinois Democrat, and Senator Dale Bumpers, Arkansas Democrat, released a GAP analysis that said the space agency was committing itself to more projects than it could expect the country to pay for. "In short, it is chasing too much programs for too few dollars." (W Times, Feb 28/92: AP, Feb 27/92)
It was reported that Vice President Dan Quayle's National Space Council had tightened its control over space activities by dividing NASA's responsibility for the U.S. moon-Mars project among several government agencies. Quayle released a directive, approved by the president, that assigns "major roles" to the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy while establishing NASA as the principal agency. (Mercury News, Mar 14/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
In a letter sent to the chairwoman of the subcommittee that funds NASA, Senator Howell T. Heflin said killing the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor would cost almost twice as much as building it. NASA and the White House had moved to cancel the $3 billion program, saying the cost of keeping it going wouldn't fit in NASA's tight budget request of $15 billion for fiscal year 1993. Using figures obtained from NASA and from the ASRM's contractors, Heflin calculated that killing the program would cost NASA $2.65 billion through the year 2000. By contrast, he said it would cost $1.29 billion to finish building the rocket, not including $510 million to buy the first six sets of motors. (Htsvl Times, Apr 7/92; Birmingham News, Apr 12/92)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
In an official statement, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly welcomed the nomination of Daniel S. Goldin to be next NASA Administrator. "I am pleased to learn that President Bush nominated Daniel S. Goldin as the next Administrator of NASA....I wish him every success as he comes to this elite organization," said Truly. (NASA Note 92-20)
As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland called for immediate congressional action to shift U.S. research and development from military hardware to products that would compete in the "environmental marketplace" of the future. NASA, she said, should develop "the second-generation Concorde...and leapfrog our competitors in a 21st century industry that will generate a $200 billion market of the future." (W Post, Apr 10/92)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
State Senator Gary K. Hart of California authored a bill which would require the Department of Commerce to create a special program for assisting commercial space ventures that originate in California. Under the proposal, the Commerce Department would boost California as the place to launch commercial space ventures. (LA Times, May 17/92)
A technical consultant to the House Committee on Space, Science and Technology, said that if the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane is built, it would be assembled in Palmdale, California. Scott Crossfield, a former test pilot, said President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the National Space Council were strong supporters of the X-30. Crossfield said it would cost an estimated $5 billion to $12 billion for the pair of X-30s. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 1/92)
According to reports, the Clinton Administration's new budget would cut funding for NASA's planned Space Station by 40 percent; the cuts were predicted to trigger another major restructuring of the project and more delays. Key Capitol aids said the House had approved $1.35 billion for the program in the next fiscal year, instead of the $2.25 billion NASA had requested, Clinton was reported to be troubled by the massive cost-overruns associated with the project. (W Post, Feb 12/97; AP, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93; UPI, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93)
In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)
White House officials said that President Clinton had decided to proceed with a slightly slimmed down version of the original Space Station Freedom design. The Space Station was expected to cost about $10.5 billion over five years. (RTw, June 16/93; NY Times, June 17/93; USA Today, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)
The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)
The Senate endorsed the Clinton Administration's plan to build the Space Station by refusing to cut funding for the 1994 program from $1,94 billion to $500 million.  The latter amount would have been used to shut down the program. (RTw, Sep 21/93; UPI, Sep 21/93; AP, June 22/93; LA Times, Sep 22/93; P Inq, Sep 22/93; NY Times, Sep 23/93)
Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, legendary Army aviator and World War II hero, died at the age of 96.  He was best known for leading "Doolittle's Raiders" in a daring bombing run on Tokyo and other Japanese cities in April 1942.  The raid brought the war home to Japan for the first time and lifted American morale when the country was still reeling from a string of Axis victories.  After the war, General Doolittle served as president of the Institute of Aeronautical Science and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the forerunner of NASA.  (B Sun, Oct 1/93; AP, Oct 1/93; W Post, Oct 2/93)
In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station.
Space News reported that European space officials were monitoring news about the fate of the United States Space Station under the Clinton Administration. The 13-nation European Space Agency (ESA) had agreed to spend about $2.8 billion on its Columbus Space Station program. The European program included a habitable laboratory that was to be attached to the Station and related ground equipment. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)
President Clinton signed legislation on August 2 authorizing $8 million for planning and design of a $162 million National Air and Space Museum building near Dulles International Airport. (AP, Aug 4/93)
As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use.
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)
The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)
Clinton Administration officials reported that the White House was completing plans to permit the export of U.S. rocket technology that had been restricted out of fear it would be used to develop ballistic missiles,  The proposal to allow the sale of space technology under strengthened safeguards was part of a review of export policy ordered by President Clinton. (LA Times, Aug 10/93)
The press reported that the House Appropriations Sub-Committee on Energy and Water had appropriated $629 million for the Superconducting Super Collider for fiscal year 1994. The Clinton Administration had requested $640 million for the Collider. (UPI, June 10/93)
The Clinton Administration decided to increase funding and continue work on the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider under construction in Texas, according to Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and other sources. Krueger said that Clinton's Office of Management and Budget had budgeted the project at $640 million for fiscal 1994, a 24 percent increase over the current year's spending levels. However, just before he left office last month, outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said that the 1994 funding level would have to be $1.2 billion to keep the project on schedule for completion by the end of the decade. (W Post, Feb 17/93)
The New York Times reported that a dispute had broken out in the Clinton Administration over Vice President Al Gore's attempts to convince President Clinton to fulfill a campaign pledge to reduce the threat of global warming. Gore urged
Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)
John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93)
President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)
NASA appeared to be receiving little attention from the Clinton Administration. Neither Administration representatives
The White House provided more details on President Clinton's plans to shift spending from defense to domestic "investment" priorities. The 1994 NASA budget request moved the agency away from big space flight projects involving humans toward development of new technologies with potential for practical use on the ground. The agency's total budget would go to $15.27 billion, an increase of almost $1 billion. Most of the increase would be spent on aeronautics and other technologies, for example, development of a fleet of high speed planes for public transport and high speed computing. (W Post, Apr 9/93)
Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."
NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)
The Clinton Administration announced that it had launched a complete review of U.S. policy toward cutting global-warming pollution, but had not yet abandoned the stance taken by the Bush Administration. (B Sun, Mar 16/93)
President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that, according to congressional aids, President Clinton had decided to push for construction of a sophisticated, orbiting space laboratory that would make use of much of the technology already developed for Space Station Freedom. The President appeared to hint at this decision in a June 15 press conference. (LA Times, June 16/93)
Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)
Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93)
Speaking on CNN's morning news show, Senator Jim Sasser, D-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, called the Superconducing Super Collider a $7 billion scientific pork barrel. He said he would propose cutting it out of the budget along with the Space Station. (AP, Feb 7/93)
Daniel J. Jones, 80, a senior aeronautical engineer who retired in 1973 after 20 years with the Army Material Command, died January 23 after a heart attack. He served in the Navy from 1941 to 1953, and had tours of duty with the naval Aviation Engineering Division in the South Pacific during World War II and with the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington during the Korean War. (W Post, Jan 26/93)
The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)
Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)
President Clinton dissolved the Cabinet-level National Space Council as part of staff cuts to reduce the budget. The duties of the space council were to come under the umbrella of a broader policy-making group called the Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by new presidential science adviser Jack Gibbons. (H Chronicle, Feb 10/93; Space News, Feb 15/93)
Senator James M. Jeffords and a group of House members last month introduced an amendment to the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 to prohibit the Department of Transportation from licensing a payload that would result in advertising from space.  The amendment was in response to a proposal by Space Marketing Inc. of Roswell, Georgia, to launch a mile-long inflatable billboard into space.  The company planned to stuff the billboard in a satellite; after the satellite reached orbit, it would open and the billboard would jump out like "a giant life raft."
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)
Executives from two major players in the aircraft industry, United Technologies Corporation and General Electric Company, said that job cuts and productivity improvement programs won't by themselves pull the industry out of its downturn. They were beginning to hint that they would like to team up with each other, perhaps through more joint research and development projects. Such hints might be merely a means of testing how far the Clinton administration would let them bend antitrust laws. However, even the suggestion of cooperation revealed the turmoil in the jet engine market, which was suffering because of slumping airline order and deep cuts in government spending on military aircraft. (WSJ, Jan 29/93)
Writing in USA Today, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, R-Texas, noted that research planned for the Space Station program would help women. Research already scheduled for the newly redesigned Space Station would address several women's diseases, from osteoporosis to ovarian and breast cancer to immune-system disorders.  (USA Today, Aug 12/93)
The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.
Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)
The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)
NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin volunteered to remain at NASA until the Clinton Administration appointed an replacement. He made the offer in a January 14 letter to the White House. Meanwhile he suspended an agency reorganization that he had just begun following months of review. White House officials have just begun to collect names of potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on Goldin's record, according to government officials (W Post, Jan 20/93; Space News, Jan 25-31)
Responding to Alan Shepherd's June 19 letter on the DC-X (Delta Clipper), Charles Conrad Jr., a former astronaut and staff vice president at McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, defended the concept behind the vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle.  He also noted that by the time the vehicle would be operational it would not be a Shuttle replacement but would provide an adjunct to the space lift capacity in the 20,000-pound-payload category.  Conrad noted that the experimental vehicle was designed to be reusable, like aircraft.  (W Post, Jul 19/93)
In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)
Defense Secretary Les Aspin announced that the Clinton Administration would continue work on anti-missile weapons but that Reagan's "Star Wars" program was being reduced to small-scale research and renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. In California alone, the cutback threatened more than $1 billion in annual contracts and thousands of jobs, according to economists in the area. (NY Times, May 14/93; LA Times, May 14/93)
The Washington Post reported that a White House official had indicated that President Clinton intended to retain NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, a Bush appointee. The White House apparently had decided that Goldin was just the type of hard-nosed administrator that NASA needed. (W Post, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93)
Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy advisory board released a report stating that "The U.S. government's organization of space activities is not appropriate for the post-Cold War era." The report noted that space bureaucracy must be simplified and centralized and that more technology must be shared between government and industry. It also called U.S. space launch capabilities inefficient and unsafe. (W Post, Jan 5/93; Space News, Jan 5/93)
NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)
Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The Los Angeles Times reported that congressional supporters of the proposed Space Station were warning that the project would face serious trouble if President Clinton supported a radical, low-cost design. Supporters of the Station made it clear that they supported the most elaborate and expensive of the three redesigns developed by NASA. This design, which would cost $13.3 billion over the next five years, would cut more than $4 billion from the cost of the Station, yet it would keep most of the Station's capabilities and make use of much of the work that NASA had done on the project over the last nine years. (LA Times, June 11/93)
Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)
A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton Administration to rethink its civilian space program, noting that the program had drifted without overall purpose since rivalry with the old Soviet Union had ceased to be a significant factor. The editorial urged the Administration to define what the United States should accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it. (CSM, May 18/93)
According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.
President Clinton declared his support for building a Space Station in partnership with the Russians and received support for the project from key figures in Congress during a White House meeting on November 29.  (W Post, Dec 1/93; RTw, Dec 1/97; AP, Dec 1/97; APn, Dec 1/93; NY Times, Dec 1/93; USA Today, Dec 1/93)
The head of the Japanese space agency's office of space utilization said that Japan was unhappy with cutbacks to the Space Station Freedom project. Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa may bring up the issue at a meeting with President Clinton, scheduled to be held in Washington this week. (LA Times, Apr 14/93)
The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)
Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)
The Senate approved legislation during the previous week requiring the Smithsonian Institution to build a proposed annex to the National Air and Space Museum near Dulles International Airport.  The bill already had passed the House, and President Clinton was expected to sign it. (W Post, Jul 26/93)
In a letter sent to the White House, five senators  pressed the Clinton Administration to maintain tight restrictions on the export of space-launch technology that could be used to develop ballistic missiles. The letter was signed by senators Cliaborne Pell, D-R.I; Jesse Helms, R- N.C.; Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M.; John Glenn, D-Ohio; and John McCain, R-Ariz. (LA Times, Aug 12/93)
President Clinton named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration. Mr. Hinson was founder of Midway Airlines. In his new job, Hinson would oversee the safety of the aviation industry and be responsible for initiating and enforcing safety regulations and operating the air traffic control system. (NY Times, May 14/93; USA Today, May 14/93)
According to Space News, in a March l0 letter to Vice President Gore, Senator Howell Heflin, D-Alabama, argued against canceling the Advanced Solid Rocket Mojtor program. Heflin said he opposed a proposal to close the rocket motor plant in Iuka, Miss; those opposing the closing hoped that the plant eventually would be used to build a hybrid rocket motor for a National Launch Center. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)
An editorial in the Baltimore Sun urged President Clinton to give a "strong go-ahead" to the building of Space Station Freedom. (B Sun, June 17/93)
Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)
Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)
NASA announced that high-speed information technologies it had developed could support physicians in remote locations on a new medical information superhighway by providing them instant access to information and treatment strategies for their patients. The new, integrated computing and telecommunications technologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, were scheduled to be demonstrated to members of Congress and the Clinton Administration on September 20 by the National Information Infrastructure Testbed, a non-profit consortium of corporations, universities, and government agencies. (NASA Release 94-156)
A feature article on NASA stated that cooperation with the Russians in space was an important foreign policy initiative of the Clinton Administration. In this connection, NASA was working hard at merging many of its programs with those of Russia, as NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin indicated in a recent interview. (NY Times, Jul 19/94)
The House by a 278 to 155 vote rejected the amendment that would have ended the Space Station program the next fiscal year and redirected $2.1 billion in proposed funding to other NASA programs. A key factor in building support was the Station's foreign policy significance as a result of bringing Russia in as a Station partner. Intense lobbying efforts by the Clinton administration also were a factor. (Reuters, Jun 29/94; AP, Jun 29/94; UP, Jun 29/94; WSJ, Jun 30/94; P Inq, Jun 30/94; W Post, Jun 30/94; USA Today, Jun 30/94; W Times, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 30/94; Fla Today, Jul 1/94; C Trib, Jul 5/94)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division, Seattle, Washington, for a contract to provide the Shuttle Upper Stage system with related integration and launch support services for the space-based Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). (NASA Release C94-q)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
Jack Anderson's column indicated that the ties of Isadore Hyde, convicted in 1993 of defrauding the federal government, to Senator Trent Lott, Democrat from Mississippi, were investigated by NASA officials among others. Hyde's company received a contract in 1984 to provide security services at the Stennis Space Center in Mississippi, and diverted more than $186,000 for personal use. Former Hyde employees alleged that Hyde used NASA resources to do political favors for Lott and put Lott's mother, who was 71 at the time, on the company's payroll. (W Post, Apr 25/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
NASA was expanding its efforts to make procurement information readily accessible on the Internet. In the procurement reform act signed by President Clinton the previous week, NASA was granted authority to test soliciting bids for mid-range procurement (from $25,000 to $500,000 annually) on the Internet. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
Senator Howell Heflin, Democrat from Alabama, told a space conference at Auburn University that he owed his life to the space program. He referred to angioplasty, a pacemaker, and a steel artery expansion device, all of which were based on space-related research. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and several Auburn graduate astronauts also took part in the program. (Htsvl Tms, Oct 28/94)
White House officials said President Clinton was scheduled to name a civilian panel of scientists to independently review human radiation test data in hundreds of thousands of documents uncovered by a government-wide search and to determine whether ethical standards had been violated. Energy Department spokesman Michael Gauldin said the panel members would consist of health physicists, experts on radiology, and specialists in medical ethics. He also said that an interagency "working group" formed to coordinate the search of records in eight agencies and departments was trying to define more clearly what experiments should be included. He predicted it would take "months, perhaps years" to find all the records and analyze them. (W Post, Jan 12/94)
NASA Chief Engineer Michael Griffin, Director of NASA's former Exploration Office, planned to resign to join Space Industries International, Inc., as Senior Vice President of Program Development. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
Former NASA astronaut and Space Shuttle commander Ronald J. Grabe assumed his new post as vice president of business development for the launch systems group of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC) in Sterling, Virginia. He explained that OSC's specialty was providing access to space for small satellites at reasonable cost. One of his priorities was to find new markets for OSC's Taurus and Pegasus rockets. OSC also was about to enter the communications field through its ORBCOMM satellite system. (W Post, May 23/94)
Vice President Al Gore made a brief fundraising stop in Huntsville, Alabama. He said that the International Space Station had tremendous foreign policy advantages for the United States as part of a new effort to create a partnership with Russia. Gore also cited Russia's decision to channel its resources into the Station rather than ballistic missile programs, for example. (Huntsville News, May 3/94; Htsvl Tms, May 3/94)
NASA announced a major milestone in the Space Station Program as of February 1, with the signing by NASA and contractor officials of documents ending the Freedom Work Package contracts. NASA had signed these agreements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. Instead, responsibility for design, development, and integration of work on the International Space Station program was being concentrated in a single contract with Boeing Defense and Space Systems Group, Seattle. (NASA Release 94-15)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the University of North Dakota's Center for Aerospace Sciences (CAS). Goldin visited at the invitation of Senator Byron Dorgan, a member of the Commerce Committee, which oversees NASA and its budget. Goldin was impressed with CAS's new technology and the educational services and programs it conducted for children and the public as well as college students. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)
Representative Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas and chairman of the Space Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, said he was not sure the President was doing enough to prevent defections among Space Station supporters. Representative George Brown, Democrat from California and chair of the parent committee, threatened to withdraw his support if the President could not get sufficient funds for other science projects. (H Chron, Apr 15/94; National Journal, Apr 23/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced the selection by the White House of Charles R. Chappell, Associate Director for Science at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, to serve a one-year assignment as Deputy Director of the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program. Chappell was to head NASA's participation in the GLOBE program and was to report directly to the NASA Administrator. Chappell was to be assigned to the White House and together with the GLOBE Director, Thomas Pyke Jr., was to work on the design and implementation of the GLOBE program for the Vice President. (NASA Release 94-92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the House Appropriations Subcommittee meeting to consider NASA's budget, that NASA needed $2.1 billion for the International Space Station and could not build the station for less. (AP, May 17/94)
NASA learned that instead of the anticipated $225 million cut in its Space Shuttle budget for 1995, Congress had cut an additional $141 million, for a total Shuttle budget cut of $366 million. President Clinton had signed the NASA 1995 spending bill, which allocated $3.18 billion for the Shuttle program out of a total NASA budget of $14.37 billion. The effects of the cuts on NASA operations remained to be determined. (Fla Today, Sep 30/94)
Dr. Thomas S. Burks, executive vice president for research and academic affairs, and veterinarian Dr. Bradford S. Goodwin, professor and executive director for laboratory animal medicine and care at the University of Texas Health Science Center, discussed the scientific necessity of raising genetically uniform rats and mice. They are used as subjects for research throughout the community. NASA used four dozen aboard the Shuttle Discovery. (H Chron, Jan 20/94)
The Clinton Administration authorized NASA to be an advocate for satellites in the evolving National Information Infrastructure/Global Information Infrastructure (NII/GII), the so-called information superhighway. The Administration wanted to ensure that industry--satellite builders and operators and telecommunications users--was intimately involved in formulating satellites' role in the NII/GII. Industry in turn wanted NASA to provide research and development on "pre-competitive technologies." (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, described some of the benefits Americans enjoyed in their daily lives that resulted from space-based research. Among these were insulation techniques used by Meals on Wheels to deliver food to senior citizens, miniaturization and computers, laser technology for use in the information superhighway, and biomedical discoveries. The latter included laser systems used in heart treatment, pacemakers, and body imaging techniques used in breast cancer detection. In addition, the space program created thousands of jobs. Despite the above achievements, Mikulski admitted that NASA in the past had over-promised technology and underestimated cost. NASA needed a clear set of priorities, and space programs must become multinational. (W Post, Jul 20/94)
NASA announced the dedication of the Independent Verification and Validation facility, a new research facility in Fairmont, West Virginia, that was to support NASA's work in advanced research, stimulate commercialization efforts, and provide training in a variety of engineering and technology areas. In addition to housing staff working on software for the International Space Station, it was to house parts of the Earth Observing System Data and Operations System. Senator Robert C. Byrd attended the opening. (NASA Release 94-88; Times-West Virginian, Jun 2/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and head of the Appropriations subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding, informed NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin that he must consider cutting one of two major programs: the Cassini mission to Saturn or the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility that included the Hubble Space Telescope. Reportedly, Mikulski said that if NASA did not make the decision, Congress would. On June 8, Goldin met with James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and the highest ranking Republican on the House space subcommittee, to answer his concerns about Russia's stability in view of its major Space Station role. (NY Times, Jun 8/94; B Sun, Jun 8/94; USA Today, Jun 8/94; C Trib, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 8/94; H Post, Jun 8/94; H Chron, Jun 9/94; O Sen Star, Jun 13/94; USA Today, Jun 13/94)
The Senate voted 64 to 36 to defeat the amendment offered by Senator Dale Bumpers, Democrat from Arkansas, to end funding for the International Space Station. (W Post, Aug 4/94; W Times, Aug 4/94; Huntsville News, Aug 4/94)
Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)
George Brown, Democrat from California and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, called a closed-door meeting on May 5 to discuss the $30 billion International Space Station. He called the meeting after Administration officials assured him that Space Station costs would not shortchange other NASA programs. Observers said Brown wished to assure that NASA received sufficient funds to conduct its activities. Committee members decided they could take no action until they heard of the decisions of the Appropriations Committee. (Fla Today, May 5/94; AP, May 5/94; O Sen Star, May 6/94; H Chron, May 6/94; H Post, May 6/94; Fla Today, May 6/94; LA Times, May 11/94; Huntsville News, May 11/94)
Jack Anderson's column reported that Margaret Barnes, a NASA employee, sent a confidential letter to Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, on September 2, 1993, alleging among other things, that women in NASA Inspector General Bill D. Colvin's office were treated like "second-class citizens." Barnes was called in and berated by Colvin who had a copy of the letter, which was apparently leaked by Glenn's office. NASA sources said GAO had added the Barnes/Glenn episode to its investigation of Colvin. (W Post, Apr 7/94)
Guy Bluford, the first African-American astronaut in space, served as master of ceremonies of a celebration the week of June 13, honoring the 30th anniversary of the Civil Rights Act. The Tuskegee Airmen participated as NASA honored those known as the "Civil Rights Movement of the Armed Services of World War II." (Metro Herald, Jun 17/94; Washington Informer, Jun 23-29/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement hailing the vote in the House of Representatives that defeated an amendment to end the Space Station program. In his statement, he expressed appreciation for the leadership of the President, the efforts of the Vice President, and the hard work of Chairman Brown and Representative Walker. He also praised the collaboration of NASA with international partners, which strengthened the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 94-106)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin released a statement in response to the markup of NASA's budget by the House Appropriations Subcomittee on VA-HUD-Independent Agencies. He said that "Given the enormous challenge that Chairman Stokes and the members of his committee had in adequately addressing the many needs of the agencies covered in this budget, NASA is pleased with today's markup." He added that NASA was pleased to comply with the further challenge Stokes presented in the markup. (NASA Release, Jun 9/94; AP, Jun 9/94; W Times, Jun 10/94; O Sen Star, Jun 10/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 10/94; H Post, Jun 10/94; Fla Today, Jun 10/94; AP, Jun 10/94; SP News, Jun 13-19/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
NASA announced the departure from NASA, effective April 11, of Space Shuttle astronaut Ronald J. Grabe. He was to become Vice President, Business Development, for Orbital Sciences Corporation's Launch Systems Group. (NASA Release 94-57)
New Mexico's senators, Democrat Jeff Bingaman and Republican Pete Domenici, sent a letter urging NASA to keep two data facilities at the White Sands Space Network Complex northeast of Las Cruces. A $5 million building planned for NASA data operations remained empty in Las Cruces because NASA had decided to shift activities to West Virginia, according to NASA officials. However, NASA's inspector general said NASA could save $39 million through fiscal year 2000 and nearly $97 million thereafter if data operations connected with the Earth Observing System remained at White Sands instead of being moved to Fairmont, West Virginia. According to a September 5 syndicated column by Jack Anderson, Senator Robert Byrd engineered the change in location. (Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 9/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 10/94; Las Cruces Sun-News, Sep 12/94; Times-West Virginian, Sep 15/94)
The new chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, David Obey, Democrat from Wisconsin, divided a $540 billion federal spending budget in such a way that NASA had a good chance of getting 98 percent of the funds it requested for fiscal 1995. Efforts to kill the International Space Station project on the House floor remained likely. (O Sen Star, May 12/94; Fla Today, May 12/94; H Chron, May 13/94; H Post, May 13/94; W Post, May 13/94; SP News, May 16/94)
A lengthy article on the Clinton Administration's science and technology policy dealt with these two fields and the President's goals in their regard. The government spent more than half of its research and development money on developing usable technologies. The remainder was divided almost evenly between applied research and basic research. However, the availability of funding was a serious problem. Funding increased significantly during the Cold War but scientific disasters such as the failure of a nuclear reactor at the Three Mile Island electric power plant and the explosion of the Challenger Space Shuttle eroded public support and federal funding. The accomplishments of the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC) in consolidating the two weather satellite systems of the Defense Department and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric administration as well as the NSTC's initiative in coordinating space launch policy among NASA and the Defense, Commerce, and Transportation departments were commended. (Government Executive, Nov 94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
In the absence of a National Space Council chaired by the Vice President, Vice President Al Gore's office became the focal point for space policy. Gore and the White House seemed confident that the administration had sufficient support to pass the Space Station. (SP News, May 16-22/94)
In a speech to aerospace executives at the South Bay Association of Chambers of Commerce, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that "survival of the fittest," the new motto at NASA's contract office, should also be the rule at aerospace companies. He asserted that defense and space companies must follow NASA's lead in streamlining operations and delivering results for the public. (Daily Breeze, Oct 21/94)
Glenn Cunningham, manager of the new program at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said NASA planned a new program of Mars exploration. The program was to begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996. Launchings were to occur every 25 months over the next 10 years, using relatively low-cost spacecraft. Funds in the current NASA budget were to go for designing the first of the orbiting craft, the Mars Surveyor. Another Mars program, the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR), was to establish a seismic network on Mars. The program was to begin with the already authorized $175 million Pathfinder mission. (NY Times, Feb 15/94; CSM, Feb 16/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's appropriation, wrote a major article on space policy for a space trade journal. In it she discussed the Space Station and NASA's various redesigns of it, and the lack of a clear mission and a clear purpose. She said the redesigned station cost too much and its early scientific capabilities were too limited. Specifically, she pointed out that in the summer of 1993, NASA and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy promised the Senate Appropriations Committee with NASA oversight that there would be the same level of science capability on the new station as on Space Station Freedom. That meant twice the power and space available on the current Space Shuttle. However, by November 1993, the power for science had been cut to about half of that available on the current Shuttle. This meant that it was far more difficult to win congressional support for the Space Station, particularly as budgets became tighter. Mikulski questioned whether enough votes for the Station would be available if it meant "killing the increase for National Science Foundation grants, national service, and funding for environmental technology or climate change." Furthermore, to avoid defeat, the Station needed to be approved by the House by a reasonable margin. She maintained that "Space policy should no longer be driven by the domination of space station," adding that the United States needed to establish a consensus on space policy. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
Lockheed Space Operations Company in Titusville announced that 183 personnel would lose their jobs as a result of NASA budget cuts. Lockheed was the main contractor in a $607 million-a-year shuttle processing agreement with NASA. (Fla Today, May 10/94)
NASA budget cuts and various problems experienced in recent flights aroused concern for the safety of astronauts, according to NASA critics. Despite assurances by Daniel Mulville, Director of NASA's Engineering and Quality Management Division that standards were not compromised, fears of another Challenger type disaster persisted. (AP, Mar 13/94; P Inq, Mar 14/94; LA Times, Mar 20/94; Fla Today, Mar 24/94)
Space, Inc., a Clear Lake company, and its vice president Leonard N. Jackson, pleaded guilty in a federal undercover probe of fraud among NASA contractors and employees. (H Chron, Nov 16/94)
Vice President Al Gore's Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program was described. GLOBE was a joint effort among the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), NASA, the EPA, and private contributors. Funding was proposed in the budget at $13 million: $7 million from NOAA, $5 million from NASA, and $1 million from EPA. The goal was to promote technical education while collecting environmental data. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 13/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
George E. Brown, Jr., Democrat from California and chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, said that if Congress allocated NASA less than $14.15 billion in the 1995 budget, he would probably oppose continuing the Space Station program in its present form. He said that he would submit a reduced NASA budget to Congress that kept Space Station funding intact but eliminated one Shuttle flight, the planned Mars Surveyor project, and other items. Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland and chair of the subcommittee that oversees NASA's annual appropriation, said the subcommittee needed to receive a higher 602 (B) budget allocation than its House counterpart to sustain NASA's programs. She added that if the Space Station lost in the House, she thought it would be difficult to maintain it. (W Post, May 20/94; NY Times, May 20/94; Fla Today, May 20/94; O Sen Star, May 20/94; Defense Daily, May 20/94; W Post, May 20/94; AvWk, May 23/94)
NASA was scheduled to deliver in late October for Clinton Administration review a comprehensive plan for the United States to develop a reusable launch vehicle (RLV). Proposals were contemplated that would be funded by business with NASA providing the needed technologies, for two RLVs: the X-34 for small payloads and the X-33 single-stage-to-orbit that could lead to a replacement of the Shuttle. The goal was, eventually, to replace expendable launch vehicles (ELVs). With a declining budget NASA's future depended on cheap space transportation and thus far there was little evidence that such RLVs were likely in the near future. In late November it was reported that Boeing Company and McDonnell Douglas Corporation would announce on November 29 that they were joining to compete for initial contracts to build a next-generation Space Shuttle based on reusable rockets. McDonnell Douglas had led in the development of single-stage-to-orbit launch systems and Boeing was a major integrator of complex programs. (AvWk, Nov 7/94; WSJ, Nov 29/94; Reuters, Nov 29/94; AP, Nov 29/94; LA Times, Nov 30/94; USA Today, Nov 30/94; H Post, Nov 30/94; Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94; SP News, Dec 5-11/94; CSM, Dec 6/94)
President Clinton, who was in Houston, spoke to the Discovery astronauts. Mission Control earlier had instructed them to abandon efforts to launch the Wake Shield Facility satellite. (UP, Feb 7/94; W Times, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 8/94; P Inq, Feb 8/94; LA Times, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin issued a statement following the defeat of the Senate amendment to end funding for the International Space Station. Goldin praised the Senate's vote of confidence as an indication of a bipartisan coalition of support. He said that the Space Station was a "truly international scientific effort, and a powerful symbol of peaceful cooperation in the post Cold War world." Subsequent to Goldin's statement, various media comments appeared stressing the commitment of "time and political capital" by the President and the Vice President to supporting the Space Station, in addition to Goldin's tireless efforts. (NASA Release 94-127; SP News, Aug 8-14/94; B Sun, Aug 12/94)
Senator Barbara Mikulski, Democrat from Maryland, in addressing a Maryland Space Business Roundtable, warned aerospace contractors that congressional budget cutters were targeting NASA's Space Station; meanwhile other congressional members supported increased funds for human services programs and sought to cut from science and technology projects. Senator Mikulski stressed the importance of investments in science and technology within the framework of a balanced budget. (B Sun, Feb 16/94)
President Bill Clinton presented astronaut Jim Lovell with the Space Medal of Honor, 25 years after he brought his crippled Apollo 13 spacecraft home. Actor Tom Hanks, who played Jim Lovell in the film �Apollo 13,� was present at the ceremony. The president said that the �extraordinary mission� was made even more vivid by the recent �Apollo 13� film. (W Post, July 27/95; W Times, Jul 27/95; USA Today, Jul 27/95; AP, Jul 26/95 & Jul 27/95; Reuters, Jul 26/95; UPI, Jul 26/95)
NASA and Boeing Defense and Space Group of Houston, Texas, signed a $5.63 billion contract for the design and development of the International Space Station. In particular, Boeing accepted responsibility for the design, manufacture, and delivery of the U.S. on-orbit segments of the station in a contract that extended through 2003. Assembly of the space station is projected to begin in November 1997; completion is foreseen in June 2002. (NASA Release 95-2; H Chron, Jan 14/95; Phillips Business Information, Jan 17/95; AvWk, Jan 23/95)
A contract for the design and development of the International Space Station was signed today by NASA and the Boeing Defense and Space Group, Missiles and Space Division. This 400-ton Space Station will be a catalyst for global cooperation, bringing together resources from the United States, Russia, Japan, member nations of the European Space Agency, Canada, and Italy. The new contract was for $5.63 billion. Assembly will begin in November 1997 with the launch of the U.S.-purchased Russian FGB �space tug� a power and propulsion module. It will be followed in December 1997 with Node 1, that would connect laboratory and crew modules and allow the Space Shuttle to dock. (NASA Releases 95-2 & 13; Space News, May 1/95; AvWk, Apr 10/95)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA intended to cut at least 2,500 civil servants from its payroll before the end of the century, scaling back its work force to levels not seen since the early 1960s. Supervisory positions at NASA headquarters and its field centers were to be targeted as the agency tried to stay in step with Clinton administration plans to shrink the government. (H Chron, Jan 20/95; APn, Jan 20/95; W Times, Jan 24/95; AvWk, Jan 23/95; Fla Today, Jan 22/95)
A press report said that President Clinton was expected to meet with about 20 former admirals and generals to seek their advice on national security issues.  Among those who were expected to attend was Vice Adm. Richard H. Truly, former Head of NASA. (AP Jan 8/95)
The first element of the International Space Station Alpha will be the Functional Energy Block (FGB). It is actually a 21-ton �space tug� being built in Russia and set for launch in November 1977. The U.S. Boeing Defense and Space Group has teamed with Russia�s Khrunichev Space Center on this project. Boeing will procure one block for launching. (Fla Today, Aug 18/95; Reuters, Aug 15/95; Space News, Dec 18/95; AvWk, May 8/95 & Sep 4/95)
Several Senate Democrats proposed a $33 billion package to balance the budget by the year 2002 by cutting defense and space programs. The package included elimination of NASA's space station for a savings of $10 billion over five years. (Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Jan 6/95; H Chron, Jan 6/95, Jan 8/92; Greensboro News & Record, Jan 6/95; News and Record, Jan 6/95)
As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing “increasing budget pressures.” Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one year’s time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, “Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters,” news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Speeds Up Downsizing,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, “NASA To Lighten Pay Load,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, “NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster,” Space News, 22−28 April 1996, 4−5.)
The Smithsonian Institution named former U.S. Navy pilot and aviation executive Donald D. Engen as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Engen succeeded Martin O. Harwit, who had resigned amidst criticism of an exhibition about the Enola Gay atomic bomb mission. Some World War II veterans had deemed the exhibition too sympathetic to Japan, and some members of Congress had faulted the National Air and Space Museum for deviating from its mission of exhibiting the history of the United States’ aeronautical achievements. Smithsonian employees praised Engen’s appointment, suggesting that he would restore the museum’s credibility.
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Former U.S. Representative Norman Y. Mineta received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, the highest civilian honor awarded by NASA. Mineta had served 21 years in the U.S. Congress, representing California’s Silicon Valley in the House of Representatives. As chairperson of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, he had played a vital role in bolstering the nation’s transportation infrastructure and fostering technological research. Mineta remarked that serving over the long term as the senior member of the House Committee on Science and Technology had given him the opportunity to see firsthand NASA’s significant achievements. When he accepted the award at a private ceremony, Mineta said, “I’m deeply honored to be recognized by NASA for any contributions I made furthering the mission of our nation’s space operations.”
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
Without holding any subcommittee hearings on the matter, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology voted to trim NASA’s budget for 1997 by US$450 million. NASA operated under a US$13.8 billion budget in 1996. Most of the cuts were from the budget of the initiative Mission to Planet Earth.(Brett Davis, “Panel Sets $450 Million NASA Budget Cut,” Huntsville Times (AL), 25 April 1996.)
President William J. Clinton signed legislation ending funding for the federal helium reserve. The United States, through the Bureau of Mines, had bought and stockpiled helium since the 1960s⎯expending more than US$250 million. Experts estimated that the U.S. government’s helium reserve could supply the world for more than 10 years and the federal government for 80. The legislation to end the reserve, spearheaded by U.S. Representative Christopher Cox (R-CA), closed down the helium facility outside Amarillo, Texas. NASA planned to sell the helium slowly, over a period of 18 years, so that the sales would not destabilize the worldwide helium market. The closure had the potential to affect NASA, the federal government’s largest user of helium. At the time of the reserve’s closure, NASA was using about 70 million cubic feet (2 million cubic meters) of helium annually to pressurize Shuttle fuel tanks, among other uses.(Associated Press, “Clinton Signs Law Killing Federal Helium Reserves,” 9 October 1996.)
The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nation’s science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report “a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies.” The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, “Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry,” New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, “NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights,” 13 May 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, chaired by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., released its recommendations for reforming the United States’ aviation industry. The Commission challenged NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the U.S. Department of Defense to combine their efforts, with the goal of reducing aircraft accident rates by 80 percent over the next five years. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin voiced immediate support for the challenge, explaining, “We’re looking for solutions that will save lives.” He pledged NASA’s commitment to interagency cooperation and committed US$500 million in NASA funds, to achieve a major reduction in aircraft-related fatalities. Both NASA and the FAA cited previous successful collaboration efforts between their agencies. The Gore Commission’s most controversial recommendation was the use of computerized databases to identify potential terrorists. Critics quickly called the plan an exercise in profiling, which would foster biased treatment, especially toward Arab Americans and passengers with Arab- sounding names. Other safety proposals included requiring children under the age of two to sit in their own seats, rather than on the lap of an adult, as the airlines had long permitted. The Commission further suggested that user fees, rather than ticket taxes, fund air-traffic control; that airports deploy a new satellite-based, air-traffic-control system, as soon as possible; and that airports make all airmail packages weighing more than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) subject to inspection. In total, the Commission recommended 53 changes to the current system.(NASA, “NASA, FAA, and DOD Challenged To Achieve White House Commission Goal To Reduce Aircraft Accidents,” news release 97-26, 12 February 1997; John Mintz, “Gore Panel Proposes Aviation Safety Steps,” Washington Post, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “FAA Ready To Depart on ‘Clear Path of Action’,” USA Today, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “53 Air Safety Changes Urged,” USA Today, 13 February 1997.)
NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administration’s budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASA’s deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clinton’s US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, “Holy mackerel⎯this is a great program,” and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASA’s budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttle’s funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering “faster, better, cheaper” science.(Anne Eisele, “Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000,” Space News, 10−16 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, “NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, “NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Rodney E. Slater, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin joined in leading an aviation safety event at Dulles International Airport in Virginia. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had invited media representatives and interested spectators to the event, to observe demonstrations of the new technologies that the agencies had developed to improve the safety of flying aboard commercial, private, and government aircraft. NASA made available one of its Boeing B-757 research aircraft, providing hands-on demonstrations of the new techniques and technologies produced by NASA’s and the FAA’s Task Force on Aviation Safety.(NASA, “Vice President To Showcase Aviation Safety Technologies Developed by NASA and FAA,” news release N97-47, 14 July 1997.)
President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a “reusable space plane.” The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clinton’s line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, “Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items,” New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, “Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universe’s most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universe’s brightest stars? and, where is the universe’s missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us “to look at the universe at all ages at once,” explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the program’s conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the “highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy,” but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, “NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky,” USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL) offered an amendment to the Subcommittee on Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies’ FY 1999 appropriations bill, adding US$33 million to the US$150 million budget for NASA already approved by the Senate Committee on Appropriations. The Senate defeated the amendment by a vote of 58 to 37. President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget had requested a US$183 million reduction in NASA’s budget.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Senator Sessions Offers Amendment To Increase NASA’s Budget by $33 Million,” government news release, 17 July 1998.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
As part of an overall restructuring, the Boeing Company announced plans to reduce its workforce by 12 percent over the next 18 months, through the layoffs of as many as 28,000 workers. Much of the restructuring plan focused on the company’s commercial airplane business, affecting those workers who were once part of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which Boeing had purchased in 1997. In contrast, the company reported it was making strides in its defense and space work.(Tim Smart, “Boeing To Retool, Lay Off Thousands; Condit Cites Need To Reduce Costs,” Washington Post, 14 August 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die,” 12 July 1998.)
Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASA’s top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, “Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA,” news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
Advanced Communication Systems Inc. announced that the Naval Air Systems Command had awarded its Aerospace Division a five-year contract with option years. The Naval Air Systems Command intended the US$46 million Aircraft Structural Life Surveillance contract to assist the U.S. Navy in developing, verifying, executing, and enhancing methods and processes for monitoring aircraft structural fatigue. Advanced Communication’s Aerospace Division Vice President Thomas M. Brennan remarked that the contract covered air vehicle technology that would “have application across all military services, as well as NASA and the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].”(PR Newswire, “ACS Wins $46 Million Aircraft Structures Contract,” 5 April 1999.)
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed “the U.S. launch industry’s worst string of accidents in more than a decade,” including “three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets” launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, “Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to “devote his full attention” to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been “bedeviled” by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes,” news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures,” Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
President William J. Clinton signed into law the FY 2000 appropriations bill for the Department of Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Other Agencies, which included the US$13.65 billion NASA budget. Congress had approved NASA’s budget on 7 October. In keeping with the President’s original request, the final appropriation included full funding for the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle program; US$80 million for Spaceliner 100, an MSFC program to find new propulsion technology; US$25 million for Shuttle upgrades; US$5 million for the National Center for Space Research and Technology, a joint venture including MSFC, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and private industry; and US$3 million to continue research into tether-guided satellites. The U.S. House of Representatives’ version of the bill had cut US$900 million from NASA’s funding, but the U.S. Senate had approved a budget equal to NASA’s FY 1999 budget: US$13.6 billion. House Republicans had voted to eliminate funding for Triana, a controversial Earth-observing satellite first envisioned by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., but the House and Senate conference committee had voted on a compromise, providing for the National Academy of Sciences to review the program and forbidding NASA from launching Triana until 1 January 2001.(Brett Davis, “Congress Approves Full NASA Budget,” Huntsville Times (AL), 8 October 1999; Stephen Koff and Tom Diemer, “Cleveland NASA Unit, CMHA Get Funding,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 21 October 1999.)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
A National Academy of Sciences task force issued a report supporting the development and deployment of the Triana research satellite proposed by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. Congress had authorized the task force in 1999, to investigate the feasibility of Gore’s plan, which called for a satellite to orbit Earth continuously, capturing live pictures of the planet. Gore believed that obtaining the images and making them available on the Internet would increase public awareness of environmental issues. The proposal had sparked a political controversy between Gore and the Republican Congress, prompting Congress to demand that a task force investigate the value of the project. The task force reported that the satellite had scientific merit. White House science advisor Neal Lane praised the study’s results, urging House members to act with “bipartisan Congressional support.” The process of investigation and approval of the project had drawn public attention to the political debate about space exploration.(Warren E. Leary, “Science Panel Supports Gore Satellite Plan,” New York Times, 9 March 2000; Associated Press, “Panel Finds Merit in Space Mission Proposed by Gore,” 8 March 2000.)
After a lengthy legislative battle, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a US$60 million increase for NASA in its FY 2001 budget. Although the amount was less than the Clinton administration had requested for NASA, the spending proposal marked the end of several years of cost cutting for NASA. Even during a period of budget surpluses, NASA had not achieved the victory without a fight. Some members of Congress, concerned over the delay in the completion of the ISS, had introduced a floor amendment to delete all funding for the ISS. However, the House had roundly defeated the budget-slashing amendment, as it had in previous years, with a vote of 325 to 98. Noting that the ISS was nearly complete, Representative Robert E. Cramer (D- AL) spoke for NASA proponents when he said, “This is not the time to pull the rug out from under this program.”(Tamara Lytle, “House OKs Giving NASA $13.7 Billion in 2001 Fiscal Year,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 June 2000; Gannett News Service, “House Votes Down Measure To Cut Space Station,” 22 June 2000.)
President William J. Clinton signed into law H. R. 1654, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, authorizing funding for “a robust space and aeronautics program for the Nation.” Clinton commended bipartisan efforts to pass an authorization bill funding NASA’s priorities, such as building the ISS, improving Space Shuttle safety, and using the Space Launch Initiative to reduce the cost of access to space. However, Clinton criticized the bill for limiting “NASA’s flexibility to pursue a promising commercial habitation module” for the ISS, saying that the bill included several “objectionable provisions” and only one of the 14 legislative provisions that his administration had proposed.(U.S. Newswire, “Clinton Statement on Signing of the ‘National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000’,” 30 October 2000.)
Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
Science and business leaders from the United States and Singapore signed an agreement to collaborate on biotechnology research conducted in space. The pact, focused on improving drugs and crops, outlined experiments planned for a 2001 Shuttle Columbia mission. U.S. Senator Christopher Bond (R-MO) called the agreement an “important step toward increasing scientific knowledge.”(Associated Press, “Singapore, U.S. Scientists Sign Accord on Outer Space Research,” 14 January 2000.)
The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
Administrator Daniel S. Goldin became NASA’s first head to serve three different presidents when George W. Bush assumed the presidency of the United States. Although some had speculated that Goldin’s tenure would end when President William J. Clinton left office, President George W. Bush asked Goldin to remain in his position indefinitely, while the new administration reviewed possible candidates to replace him. Originally appointed by President George H. W. Bush in 1992, Goldin had instituted vast changes at NASA with his “faster, better, cheaper” approach. During his tenure, Goldin had reduced the number of NASA employees from 24,000 to 18,000 while overseeing the successful building and deployment of the International Space Station (ISS).(Frank Morring Jr., “Goldin Sees Station, Innovation as Legacies of His NASA Tenure,” Aerospace Daily, 8 January 2001; Brian Berger, “Goldin Responds to Presiding over NASA Through Bush Team Transition,” Space News, 23 January 2001; Bryant Jordan, “NASA’s Goldin Likely Gone,” Federal Computer Week, 11 January 2001, http://www.fcw.com (accessed 11 January 2001).)
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space held a hearing on safety and workforce issues related to NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. According to newspaper reports, much of the testimony addressed the effects of budget cuts on the safety improvements for the Space Shuttles. Subcommittee members and witnesses reportedly were critical of the budget cuts and concerned about their possibly detrimental effects on Shuttle safety. Individuals providing testimony at the hearing were NASA Deputy Associate Administrator William F. Readdy, Allen Li of the General Accounting Office (GAO), Michael James McCulley of United Space Alliance, Richard D. Blomberg, chair of the ASAP, and Bryan D. O’Connor, former chair of the NRC’s Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Shuttle Safety, 107th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2001; Tamara Lytle, “Experts Fear for Shuttle Safety as NASA Budget Is Trimmed,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
NASA suspended indefinitely the launch of the climate-monitoring satellite Triana, which NASA had designed to provide imagery of entire hemispheres from nearly 1 million miles away in space. By contrast, weather satellites often remain in low Earth orbit and, therefore, are only able to provide images of continents. Triana was also called GoreCam or GoreSat, because former Vice President Gore had originated the project. Gore had conceived of the satellite in March 1998, choosing to name it in honor of Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Columbus’s ship who had first sighted land. NASA had planned to launch the US$120 million Earth-observation satellite by the end of 2001. However, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives had voted to eliminate the project’s funding from NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2000 appropriation. A conference committee of the House and the Senate had later agreed to suspend funding for Triana and to delay its launch, so that the National Academy of Sciences could review the project’s merits. Although the National Academy of Sciences had strongly endorsed the project, NASA had decided to shelve the satellite project indefinitely, as part of its effort to prioritize scientific expenditures and concentrate its resources on projects such as the HST and the ISS.(Joel Achenbach, “For Gore Spacecraft, All Systems Aren’t Go; Earth Observation Satellite Shelved,” Washington Post, 8 August 2001.)
In a letter to the congressional committees overseeing NASA’s budget requests, the GAO stated that it could not verify NASA’s accounting of amounts charged against cost limits for the ISS and Space Shuttle programs, as reported to Congress in NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Federal law required GAO to provide verification of these amounts to the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology and to the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. However, GAO said that NASA’s lack of an integrated financial management system had prevented NASA from providing GAO with details of costs charged against these programs. GAO reported that NASA’s 10 centers operated separate accounting systems, each with its own policies and practices, and that some centers could not provide complete and detailed documentation of accounts covering several fiscal years. GAO also reported that NASA officials had responded that NASA’s accounts were verifiable, stating that the verification problems lay in GAO’s auditing methodology rather than in NASA’s system of accounting.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA Space Station Cost Limits” (report no. GAO-02-504R, Washington, DC, 10 April 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02504r.pdf (accessed 12 August 2008).)
The U.S. House Government Reform Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations held a hearing, “Financial Management at NASA: What Went Wrong?” Stephen Varholy and Alan Lamoreaux of NASA and Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li of GAO provided testimony to the Subcommittee. The hearing focused on NASA’s methods of financial accounting and on the role of its former auditor, Arthur Andersen LLP, in assessing those methods. Kutz reported that NASA’s system of accounting had made it difficult for GAO to assess NASA’s financial records and questioned Arthur Andersen LLP’s ability to assess those records accurately.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “National Aeronautics and Space Administration: Leadership and Systems Needed to Effect Financial Management Improvements” (testimony of Gregory D. Kutz and Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management, and Intergovernmental Relations; report no. GAO-02-551T, Washington, DC, 20 March 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d02551t.pdf (accessed 12 August 2002).)
The House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearingNASA Workforce and Management Challengesto garner information about NASA’s efforts to address concerns regarding its human capital, competitive sourcing for the Space Shuttle program, and other matters. Committee members heard testimony from NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe; David M. Walker, Comptroller General of the United States; and Mark D. Roth, General Counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees. O’Keefe discussed NASA’s Strategic Human Capital Plan, a systemic method of managing human capital according to NASA’s vision and mission. In addition, O’Keefe announced the termination of the comprehensive Strategic Resources Review initiated during the Clinton administration to create a blueprint for NASA’s future facility, missions, and workforce requirements. Roth argued that, because NASA expected a high number of retirements in the near future, its existing and proposed personnel policies were inadequate to address the resulting loss in human capital. Walker discussed methods NASA could use to strengthen its human capital and to address its difficulties with contract management, as well as the increasing expense of the ISS program and of space exploration.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA Workforce and Management Challenges, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 18 July 2002, http://science.house.gov/publications/hearings_markups_details.aspx?NewsID=1424 (accessed 21 August 2008 through Lexis-Nexis Congressional); Larry Wheeler, “O’Keefe Scraps Review of NASA,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 July 2002.)
Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology concerning NASA’s FY 2003 budget. Administrator O’Keefe also reported a recent independent audit of NASA’s finances, which NASA planned to release to the public the next day. According to newspaper reports, the lawmakers questioned O’Keefe in a tone that was frequently skeptical and even critical. At the time of O’Keefe’s testimony, NASA was already under public scrutiny regarding its budget overruns and financial accounting procedures, and critics had proposed reductions in its budget for human space travel.(Karen Masterson, “Skeptical Lawmakers Quiz NASA Chief About Budget,” Houston Chronicle, 28 February 2002.)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe testified before the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, which has primary jurisdiction for setting NASA’s annual funding levels. The subcommittee hearing was held in preparation for markup of FY 2003 appropriations legislation. Major media reported that subcommittee members were critical of NASA’s plans to eliminate certain programs to achieve President George W. Bush’s proposed reduction of US$1 billion in funding from NASA’s human spaceflight programs. In response to the comments of some members of the subcommittee, O’Keefe noted that, because NASA planned to complete its review of human spaceflight programs later in the year, he could not yet identify the programs that the budget cuts would affect. O’Keefe also said that NASA would provide Congress with a review of its scientific priorities by June and an independent cost assessment by August.(Karen Masterson, “DeLay Calls Plans for NASA ‘Timid’,” Houston Chronicle, 18 April 2002; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Apropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Appropriations for 2003, Part I, 107th Cong., 2nd sess., 17 April 2002.)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
President George W. Bush signed into law an omnibus appropriations bill (Pub.L.No.108-7), setting aside US$50 million to help NASA fund its investigation of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. Taking into account that NASA’s costs could exceed US$50 million to cover the investigation and to correct the problems with the Shuttle program, the law allowed NASA to seek additional funding if necessary. U.S. Senator Bill Nelson (D-FL) initiated discussion about the need for additional funding for the Columbia accident investigation, urging senior members of the Senate responsible for appropriations to include enough money to help NASA avoid further erosion of the already depleted Shuttle funds. The Challenger accident investigation had cost the United States US$75 million.(Frank Oliveri, “NASA Gets $50 Million for Shuttle Investigation,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 February 2003.)
Federal investigators concluded that a series of avoidable mistakes had caused the fatal crash of the chartered King Air A100 carrying Senator Paul D. Wellstone (D-MN) on 25 October 2002. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that the two charter pilots had possessed inferior flying skills, they had twice failed to align the twin-engine turboprop on the proper course for an instrument landing, and they had subsequently permitted the airspeed to drop to dangerously low levels. The craft had stalled and plummeted into the woods, killing all eight on board. The NTSB recommended that the FAA improve inspections of on-demand charter companies in an effort to improve pilot training and in-flight procedures. The NTSB report also recommended that the FAA and NASA create a special technical panel to study the feasibility of “low airspeed alert systems,” which would automatically warn pilots, especially those of small aircraft, of conditions that could lead to a disastrous stall.(Ricardo Alonso-Zalvidar, “Pilots Are Blamed in Wellstone Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 2003. 173)
CAIB Chair Harold W. Gehman Jr. and three other Board members appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss the CAIB’s findings. Gehman testified that budgetary pressures that the U.S. Congress and the White House ultimately controlled had been partly responsible for NASA’s management failures. House Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) concurred that Congress shared some of the blame in the 1 February loss of Columbia but reiterated that NASA needed to make changes. Many of the committee’s questions focused on prospective remedies for NASA’s poor risk management. While agreeing that NASA had a tendency to be overly optimistic in risk assessment, Gehman and other investigators explained to the committee that, because of the age of the Shuttle fleet, risk calculations were little more than estimates. Boehlert expressed concern that NASA was rushing to meet unrealistic return-to-flight dates―NASA had proposed a March 2004 launch date―rather than studying the CAIB report carefully and taking deliberate steps toward returning the Shuttles to flight.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Probe Rips White House, Congress,” Washington Post, 5 September 2003; Patty Reinert and Mark Carreau, “Don’t Rush New Launch, Lawmakers Warn NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2003.)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbia’s mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Board’s ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIB’s office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, “Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews,” Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
.html (accessed 14 January 2009); Justyn R. Maund et al., “The Massive Binary Companion Star to the Progenitor of Supernova 1993J,” Nature 427, no. 6970 (8 January 2004): 129–131. billion from existing space programs over the next years to fund the development of the technology to travel to the Moon and Mars. President Bush also extended an invitation to other countries to cooperate in attaining the objectives of the Vision. Major newspapers described the Vision for Space Exploration as a response to the Columbia disaster and a means of regaining public support for continued space exploration.(Patty Reinert, “Bush Aims for ‘Worlds Beyond Our Own’,” Houston Chronicle, 15 January 2004; David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson, “Bush Backs Goal of Flight to Moon To Establish Base,” New York Times, 15 January 2004; NASA, “The Vision for Space Exploration,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 55584main_vision_space_exploration-hi-res.pdf (accessed 30 January 2009).)
NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe provided testimony concerning NASA’s FY 2005 budget request to the U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies. In his testimony, O’Keefe highlighted NASA’s planned efforts to achieve the goals that President George W. Bush had established for NASA in his Vision for Space Exploration. According to major media, although several House subcommittee members were supportive of NASA’s goals, they also expressed doubts about whether Congress would give NASA its requested FY 2005 budget, which included an increase of 5.6 percent over its FY 2004 budget.(NASA, “Administrator O’Keefe’s House Testimony,” 21 April 2004, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/ speeches/okeefe_house_testimony_042104.html (accessed 23 march 2009); Patty Reinert, “Lawmakers Warn NASA Fund Boost May Be Modest,” Houston Chronicle, 22 April 2004.)
In a speech at NASA Headquarters, President George W. Bush announced the new space policy for the United States, which he called the Vision for Space Exploration. President Bush’s new policy called for the completion of the ISS by 2010, the subsequent retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, and the development of a replacement Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) capable of conducting human spaceflight missions by 2014. President Bush stated that he would seek US$1 billion in funding over the next five years to begin research on the new vehicle program. In addition, he called for robotic exploration of the Moon by 2008, followed by crewed missions to the Moon in 2020 and, eventually, astronaut missions to Mars, directing NASA to divert US$(Kelly Young, “First Woman Directs Launch,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 January 2001.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The company’s goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, “Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space,” news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007,” MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
At a hearing on NASA’s FY 2007 budget request for its Science Mission Directorate, the House Committee on Science received testimony from the Directorate’s Associate Administrator Mary L. Cleave. NASA’s FY 2007 budget request for science programs was US$3.1 billion less for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 than its FY 2006 budget request had projected. The request reflected NASA’s decision to slow the rate of growth for scientific missions by 1.5 percent in 2007 and by 1 percent thereafter. Cleave defended this decision against concerns of the House committee that the policy would result in the delay or cancellation of numerous missions, and insufficient funds to initiate new missions. She stated that, to comply with NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin’s directive to provide “a robust and executable program that can be implemented in this resource-constrained environment,” the Directorate would be “selecting, developing, and launching a slate of Science missions within cost and schedule targets.” NASA would have to delay, but not abandon, new scientific missions, such as the mission to Jupiter’s moon Europa. Democrats on the committee joined the scientists testifying before the House panel in opposing the proposed cuts to NASA’s science programs, particularly in the areas of research and analysis. Opponents of the budgetary reduction argued vehemently that the cuts could potentially cause long-term damage to the health of NASA’s science program, and that the continuance of university-based research was critical to training the next generation of scientists and engineers.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “NASA Budget Puts Key Science Priorities at Risk,” news release, 2 March 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1057 (accessed 12 July 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA Science Mission Directorate: Impacts of the Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 2 March 2006, 3, 4, 24, http://www.gpo. gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId= CHRG-109hhrg26204&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg26204&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine NASA’s development of the Orion CEV, NASA’s planned replacement for the Space Shuttle. Hearing witness Allen Li of GAO testified that NASA had contracted with Lockheed Martin to develop Orion before it had established clear cost estimates and design requirements for the project. GAO had previously raised the same concerns in a July 2006 report. Li reported that, in response to the GAO report’s criticism, NASA had made efforts to control the project’s costs. However, he acknowledged that NASA needed to do more to control costs and to clarify the project’s design requirements. The other hearing witness, NASA’s Scott J. Horowitz, Associate Administrator of the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, reported that Orion’s design relied on proven technologies, whereas earlier projects had relied on anticipated technological breakthroughs. He argued that NASA would therefore be able to control the costs of building Orion more easily than it had controlled the costs of previous projects. Furthermore, Horwitz pointed out that NASA was developing Orion for multiple applications over several decades. Committee members concluded that they would continue to monitor development of the CEV and other elements of NASA’s exploration initiative to ensure the completion of those projects in a fiscally responsible manner that did not interfere with other NASA programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “Democrats Call for Increased Oversight of NASA’s Exploration Program,” press release, 29 September 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx? NewsID=1200 (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Implementing the Vision for Space Exploration: Development of the Crew Exploration Vehicle, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 28 September 2006, 48–53, http://science.house.gov/commdocs/hearings/full06/Sept%2028/Horowitz.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010); U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Sound Management and Oversight Key To Addressing Crew Exploration Vehicle Project Risks” (testimony of Allen Li before U.S. House Committee on Science; report no GAO-06-1127T, Washington, DC, 28 September 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d061127t.pdf (accessed 15 April 2010).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing on NASA’s FY 2007 budget proposal, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. Griffin reiterated NASA’s budgetary priorities, which he had outlined on 6 February when President George W. Bush submitted the federal budget to Congress. NASA had proposed using money previously allocated for science, lunar exploration, and aeronautics programs to fund the programs that would now take precedence, according to the Vision for Space Exploration. Priorities would include supporting human spaceflight programs, completing the assembly of the ISS, and placing the CEV in operation by 2014. Committee chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) and ranking member Bart Gordon (D-TN) were equally critical of the proposed budget. Boehlert stated that the budget was “bad for space science, worse for Earth science, perhaps worse still for aeronautics. It basically cuts or de-emphasizes every forward looking, truly futuristic program of the agency to fund operational and development programs to enable us to do what we are already doing or have done before.” Although he expressed support for the Vision for Space Exploration, Boehlert said that he saw no need to accelerate the deadline for an operational CEV to a date earlier than 2014. Gordon criticized the Bush administration for sending Congress a budget request for funding that was inadequate to implement NASA’s exploration initiative and other programs.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2007 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 16 February 2006, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath= 109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG-109hhrg25937&packageId=CHRG- 109hhrg25937&fromBrowse=true (accessed 30 December 2010); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, “NASA’s Stated Goals Don’t Match Budgetary Realities,” press release, 16 February 2006, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1044 (accessed 12 July 2010); Brian Berger, “Congress Criticizes NASA Budget Request,” Space.com, 16 February 2006, http://www.space.com/news/060216_griffin_ nasa.html (accessed 27 September 2010).)
The House Committee on Science held a hearing to address the results of the statutorily mandated Nunn-McCurdy review of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS). NOAA, NASA, and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) jointly managed NPOESS, which would provide data and imagery to help weather forecasters, climatologists, and the military map and monitor changes in weather, climate, the oceans, and the environment. The Nunn-McCurdy amendment to the Defense Authorization Act of 1983 (10 U.S.C. 2433) provided that Congress must review any DOD-funded program that was more than 25 percent over budget, to determine whether and in what manner it should continue. In January 2006, the Secretary of the Air Force had notified Congress that the NPOESS program would exceed the 25 percent Nunn-McCurdy threshold. The three NPOESS managing agencies had reviewed the program and determined that it should continue. However, NPOESS must reduce the number of its satellites from six to four and eliminate five sensors, including three for climate research. The agencies would postpone the first NPOESS satellite launch until 2013 and discontinue work on the key weather sensor known as Conically Scanning Microwave Image/Sounder (CMIS). The United States would temporarily rely on Europe for the data that CMIS would have collected, including ocean wind speeds. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified regarding NASA’s compliance with the mandates of the Nunn-McCurdy recertified NPOESS program, emphasizing that NASA would continue to provide cost-effective technologies for two key components of this program—the NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) and the continuity of long-term climate measurements.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NPOESS: Results of the Nunn-McCurdy Review of NOAA’s Weather Satellite Program, 109th Cong., 2nd sess., 8 June 2006, 3−6, 22−25, http://www.gpo.gov/ fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=109%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science&granuleId=CHRG- 109hhrg27970&packageId=CHRG-109hhrg27970&fromBrowse=true (accessed 20 December 2010); NOAA, Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR), “STAR Acronyms,” http://www.star.nesdis.noaa.gov/star/ acronyms.php (accessed 5 October 2010).)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASA’s proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASA’s FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to “transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems.” Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administration’s failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s ‘Lean’ Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs,” press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin testified before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science and Related Agencies regarding NASA’s FY 2009 budget. During the hearing, several members of Congress expressed concern that the president’s budget request of US$17.6 billion was insufficient to fund NASA’s programs adequately. Griffin defended the request, stating that NASA had expected lower funding levels and that the president’s budget was sufficient. Discussing the future of NASA, Griffin stated, “in the wake of the very wrenching transitions we have had over the past several years and in view of the transition yet to come, what we need is stability and a sense of purpose.”(Mark Matthews, “Griffin Defends His Budget on the Hill,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 6 March 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, “Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations for 2009,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 5 March 2008, http://democrats.appropriations.house.gov/images/stories/ pdf/cjs/Hearing_Volumes/CJS- FY09-Pt7.pdf#page=45 (accessed 10 February 2011).)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Braun’s program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew America’s first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
NASA announced that engineers from NASA’s JPL, working as part of an agency-wide team, had successfully tested the first deep space communications network modeled on the Internet. NASA, in partnership with Vinton G. Cerf, a Vice President at Google, had designed the software, called Disruption-Tolerant Networking (DTN). Unlike the Internet’s Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) communication suite, DTN did not assume end-to- to-end connection, enabling it to withstand delays and disconnections in space. Instead of discarding information that could not reach its destination, each of DTN’s network nodes could store information until it could safely communicate with the next node. Engineers had begun testing DTN in October 2008, transmitting dozens of space images. As a Mars data-relay orbiter, they had used NASA’s Epoxi spacecraft, which was approximately 20 million miles (32,186,880 kilometers) from Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests First Deep Space Internet,” news release 08-298, 18 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-298_Deep_space_internet.html (accessed 22 August 2011). 147 NASA, “NASA and DOE Collaborate on Dark Energy Research,” news release 08-300, 19 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08300_NASA_DOE.html (accessed 22 August 2008).)
The Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies received testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin regarding the FY 2009 budget request. Griffin supplied the Subcommittee with a detailed explanation of the request, which would provide NASA with US$17.6 billion in funding. Griffin stated that he believed that this budget would maintain an adequate fiscal balance between NASA’s aeronautics research missions, Earth and space science missions, and space exploration missions. However, Senator Barbara A. Mikulski (D-MD) expressed disappointment over the funding request. Calling the budget “stagnant,” she expressed her concerns regarding requested cuts in funding for aeronautics research; the lack of funding to reimburse NASA for the cost of returning the Space Shuttle to operation after the Columbia disaster; and the inadequate funding for the period between the 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle and the expected 2015 launch of the Orion and Ares vehicles.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies, “Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies Appropriations for Fiscal Year 2009,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 3 April 2008, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_senate_hearings&docid= f:41242.pdf (accessed 15 March 2011).)
NASA observed the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act, the 1958 law that combined the staff and facilities of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics with those of other governmental space research facilities, thereby establishing NASA. In honor of the occasion, the House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing to discuss NASA’s accomplishments to date and to consider future challenges facing NASA. On 9 July, the U.S. House of Representatives had commemorated the creation of NASA with the passage of H. Res. 1315, honoring the men and women of NASA on its fiftieth anniversary, acknowledging NASA’s discoveries and accomplishments, and pledging that the United States would maintain a position of leadership in aeronautics, space exploration, and technology.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, “House Passes S&T Bills Commemorating NASA’s 50th Anniversary, First Woman in Space,” press release, 9 July 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/ Item.aspx?ID=118# (accessed 18 May 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Research and Science Education, “Committee Holds Hearing Honoring NASA’s 50th Anniversary,” press release, 30 July 2008, http://gop.science.house.gov/PressRoom/ Item.aspx?ID=121# (accessed 18 May 2011); Clinton Parks, “50 Years Ago: NASA Born in Sputnik’s Wake,” Space.com, 29 July 2008, http://www.space.com/5671-50-years-nasa-born- sputnik-wake.html (accessed 25 May 2011).)
George David Low, a former NASA astronaut who had flown on three Space Shuttle missions, died at the age of 52 from colon cancer. Low, who was the son of former NASA Director George M. Low, had worked at NASA’s JPL from 1980 to 1984 before NASA selected him to train as an astronaut. During his 12 years as an astronaut, Low had spent more than 714 hours in space and had circled Earth more than 540 times. After retiring as an astronaut, Low had continued to serve NASA on the Russian Integration Team and in the Legislative Affairs Office. In 1996 he had joined Orbital Sciences Corporation, and in 2006 he had become the Senior Vice President and Program Manager for Orbital’s Commercial Orbital Transportation Service program.(Joe Holley, “G. David Low, 52; Cerebral Astronaut Flew on 3 Shuttles,” Washington Post, 20 March 2008.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held its first hearing to review NASA’s proposed fiscal year (FY) 2009 budget request and FY 2008 Operating Plan. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony in support of NASA’s US$17.6 billion request, which would allocate US$5.78 billion for Space Shuttle and ISS programs, US$4.44 billion for science, US$3.5 billion for development of new crewed spacecraft, and US$447 million for aeronautics research. Griffin devoted much of his oral testimony to NASA’s request for an extension of a statutory waiver, which permits funding for payments to Russia for crew transport to the ISS. The current waiver had been a provision of the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Non Proliferation Act (Pub. L. No. 106-178, as amended). Griffin stated that NASA needed legislative authorization for the funding in 2008, because Russia required 36 months to fabricate new transport vehicles; therefore, NASA needed to finalize contractual agreements by late 2008, so that Russia could complete the vehicles by 2012.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “Committee Examines FY09 NASA Budget,” press release, 13 February 2008, http://sciencedems.house.gov/press/ PRArticle.aspx?NewsID= 2088 (accessed 4 January 2010); United Press International, “NASA Proposes $17.6 Billion Budget,” 4 February 2008; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2009 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 2nd sess., 13 February 2008, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG- 110hhrg40598/pdf/CHRG-110hhrg40598.pdf (accessed 4 January 2011).)
Ernst Stuhlinger, one of the original members of Werner von Braun’s rocket team, died at his home in Huntsville, Alabama, at the age of 94. The U.S. government had brought the team to the United States after World War II. Stuhlinger, Associate Director of Science on von Braun’s team, was an expert in spacecraft guidance and navigation instruments. Stuhlinger had also made important contributions in the field of propulsion. He had developed an innovative second-stage firing device for Explorer 1 in his garage, becoming renowned for having pressed the button that triggered that device at exactly the right moment during the satellite’s 1958 launch. Before his retirement in 1975, Stuhlinger had served as Director of Science at NASA’s MSFC. He was author of the 1964 book, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight and co-author of the 1993 biography Werner von Braun: Crusader for Space.(John Noble Wilford, “Ernst Stuhlinger, Rocket Scientist Crucial in Space Race, Is Dead at 94,” New York Times, 28 May 2008; Martin Weil, “Ernst Stuhlinger, 94; Space Program Pioneer,” Washington Post, 27 May 2008.)
NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced that she would resign her position, effective 17 January 2009. Dale’s career had included service for the University of Texas; the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology; the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation; the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy; and for various law firms. Since November 2005, she had served as NASA’s Deputy Administrator. Dale stated that she planned to use her time off to evaluate the options for her next career phase and to spend time with her family.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Dale To Resign on January 17,” news release 08-317, 3 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-317_Dale_resigns.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
Harrison “Jack” H. Schmitt, a scientist, former astronaut, and former U.S. Senator, announced that he was resigning as Chair of the NASA Advisory Council. The NASA Advisory Council, a panel of experts in various fields, advised the NASA Administrator on major policy. Since becoming Chair in November 2005, Schmitt had led the Advisory Council in submitting over 100 recommendations to the NASA Administrator. He had been the primary advocate behind a February 2007 workshop that produced 35 scientific recommendations related to NASA’s return to the Moon and had led the Advisory Council’s efforts to build relationships fostering the use of the ISS as a national laboratory. NASA named Kenneth M. Ford as the new Advisory Council Chair. Ford had served on the Exploration Committee of the Advisory Council since June 2007. He was the founder and Director of the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition. Ford had developed and directed NASA’s Center of Excellence in Information Technology at NASA’s ARC. He had also served as both Director and Associate Director of NASA’s ARC. A recipient of NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal and the Robert S. Englemore Memorial Award, Ford had served on the U.S. Air Force Science Advisory Board and the National Science Board. He was also a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.(NASA, “Schmitt Completes NASA Advisory Council service; Ford Named Chairman,” news release 08-262, 16 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-261_Scmitt_Leaves_NAC.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
Walter Jacobi, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team, which had come to the United States at the end of World War II, died at the age of 91. Jacobi had worked with von Braun’s team at Peenemuende during World War II, building V-2 rockets. After taking him prisoner, the U.S. Army had sent Jacobi, along with von Braun and 116 other German rocket engineers, to Fort Bliss, Texas, where they had worked for the Army. In 1950 Jacobi had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to work at MSFC, where he had handled the component work and design work of the massive valves that moved super-cold fuel and other fluids in the Saturn rockets. After retiring from MSFC, Jacobi had moved to the U.S. Space and Rocket Center, where he had spent several years during the 1970s in the center’s archives, identifying and translating the von Braun team’s German records and documents.(Shelby G. Spires, “Original Von Braun Team Member Jacobi Dies at 91,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 August 2009.)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
