France’s Alcatel Space signed a US$148 million contract with South Korea’s state-operated KT Corporation to build South Korea’s first satellite with military capabilities. South Korea planned to place Koreasat 5 in orbit by early 2006. KT Corporation spokesperson Cho Chul-Je told the media that South Korea’s military would use military transponders on the satellite for communication and operation, but he declined to confirm reports that the craft would assist the military in collecting security information in Northeast Asia. The craft would also be equipped with commercial transponders. Koreasat 5 would replace Koreasat 2, which had launched in 1996, allowing telecommunications companies to expand mobile networks to Japan, the People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, and the Philippines.(Agence France-Presse, “French Company To Build South Korea’s First Military Satellite,” 8 June 2003.)
Telesat Canada selected Astrium, Europe’s largest space company, to manufacture a replacement for its Anik F1 satellitethe Anik F1R. Engineers had determined that the Anik F1, based on the 702 platform of Boeing Satellite Systems, was defective. Several of the Boeing-built 702 satellites were “afflicted with a solar panel malady” expected to shorten each craft’s operational lifetime. Telesat planned to base the Anik F1R, which would carry 24 C-band and 32 Ku-band transponders, on Astrium’s Eurostar 3000 platform.(Telesat, “Telesat Selects European Manufacturer for New Anik F Satellite,” news release, 4 February 2003, http://www.telesat.ca/news/releases/2003/03-02-e.asp (accessed 12 August 2008); Sam Silverstein, “Telesat Canada Selects Astrium to Replace Anik F1,” Space News, 4 February 2003.)
JAXA officials announced that the chances of restoring the operations of ADEOS 2, known as Midori 2 in Japan, were extremely slight. JAXA had lost contact with ADEOS 2 on 25 October and had been unable to restore communications with the US$654 million craft. Analyses of the malfunction had provided little hope for recovery. ADEOS 2 had replaced the ADEOS 1 mission of 1996, which Japan had abandoned after 10 months when its solar panel had broken down as a result of a design fault. Japanese officials stated that they believed ADEOS 2 had not suffered exactly the same fate as its predecessor but, rather, had experienced a problem with its power circuitry. A JAXA spokesperson suggested that recent solar flares might have affected the craftone of the solar flares had been the largest in three decades.(Agence France-Press, “Japan Bids Adios to ADEOS Earth Observation Satellite,” 31 October 2003; Justin Ray, “Hope of Salvaging Japanese Environmental Satellite Fades,” Spaceflight Now, 31 October 2003.)
A NASA four-engine, P3-turboprop, “flying laboratory” airplane flew its last flight in a two- week-long series of flights scanning a section of Alaska’s coast. The scanning was part of a collaborative project between NASA, NOAA, and representatives from the University of Colorado and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks. The project, called Arctic 2003, had collected data about sea-ice variability for comparison with data that NASA’s Aqua satellite had collected. The Aqua had launched in May 2002 with a state-of-the-art radiometer for studying water systems. The P3 had carried equipment similar to Aqua’s radiometera Japanese- developed microwave scannerbut because it had flown closer to the ground than the Aqua, the P3 had been able to collect sharper images. P3 flights had traveled over Norton Sound, St. Lawrence Island, St. Matthew Island, Point Hope, and Barrow. In addition to the P3 and Aqua data, ground crews had traveled to some areas to collect samples of ice and snow.(Associated Press, “Flights Help Scientists Understand Sea Ice Changes,” 24 March 2003.)
NASA announced the successful implementation of new software in three computers controlling the precision pointing of NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscope Explorer (FUSE) satellite. In mid-April 2003, NASA had installed the software for the spacecraft’s Attitude Control Instrument Data System and the processor for the Fine Error Sensor guide camera, and testing of the new configuration had been ongoing since that time. George Sonneborn, FUSE Project Scientist at NASA’s GSFC, explained that the uploaded software would allow FUSE to operate with any number of gyroscopes, or none, in the event of gyroscope failure. Tests showed that FUSE could operate with no gyroscopes without experiencing any degradation in quality of scientific data and with only a slight loss of efficiency in scheduling observations. Before the new software installation, FUSE had required at least one operating gyroscope on each of its three axes to conduct normal scientific operations.(NASA, “NASA Team Gives Fuse Spacecraft Triple Brain Transplant,” news release 03-243, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03243_fuse_transplant.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
to 62.1 miles). Designed to last two years, the craft would orbit Earth 15 times each day, focusing on the chemical processes that control the distribution of ozone in the atmosphere.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “Canadian Ozone Satellite Successfully Launched from Plane Off California Coast,” 13 August 2003.)
NASA announced its selection of the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) project for the next mission of NASA’s Medium-class Explorer (MIDEX) program. The mission would study the causes of auroras. THEMIS comprised five small satellites with identical suites of electrical, magnetic, and particle detectors. With a launch date set for 2007, NASA would place the craft in carefully coordinated orbits, where they would line up along Earth’s magnetic tail every four days, to track disturbances. THEMIS satellite data would combine with data gathered from a network of observatories across the Arctic Circle. NASA also announced that it had the opportunity to select an instrument for ESA’s Extreme Universe Space Observatory mission aboard the ISS, which would observe the blue light generated when high-energy cosmic rays collide with Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects Next Medium-Class Explorer Mission,” news release c03h, 20 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03h.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
The U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) announced that it had awarded a five- year contract worth up to US$500 million to the Colorado-based companies Space Imaging and DigitalGlobe. Under the contract, which stipulated a base performance period of three years with two additional one-year options, NIMA agreed to purchase a minimum of US$72 million worth of data from DigitalGlobe and a minimum of US$120 million from Space Imaging during the first three years. The contract and accompanying agreements marked “the Pentagon’s strongest commitment yet to buy products and services from the U.S. commercial satellite imaging industry.” Space Imaging, based in Thornton, Colorado, operated the Ikonos satellite launched in September 1999, which was capable of distinguishing ground objects as small as 1 meter. DigitalGlobe, based in Longmont, Colorado, operated the QuickBird satellite, launched in October 1999, which, under certain conditions, was capable of distinguishing objects as small as 0.61 meter.(NIMA, “NIMA Partners with Remote Sensing Industry,” media release 03-05, 17 January 2003, http://www.nga.mil/NGASiteContent/StaticFiles/OCR/nima0305.pdf (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren Ferster, “NIMA Awards Lucrative Contracts to U.S. Satellite Imaging Firms,” Space News, 17 January 2003; Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the Ikonos Satellite,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/ satellite-sensors/ikonos.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the QuickBird Satellite Sensor,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-sensors/quickbird.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
