DISCOVERER XI launched from Vandenberg AFB and stayed in orbit, reentry capsule was not recovered. (See Appendix A.)
DISCOVERER DC failed to orbit from Vandenberg AFB.
American Bar Association's “Report to NASA on the Law of Outer Spnce’’ was released, which contained collation of legal opinion on the broad spectrum of space activities.
Construction begun on the world's largest radar at Arecibo, P.R., capable of bouncing signals off Venus, Mars, and Jupiter, with Cornell University as the prime contractor under direction of ARPA and USAF.
NASA selected Recketdyne Division of North American Aviation to develop a 200,000-pound-thrust engine utilizing hydrogen and oxygen propellants. This engine is second only to the F-l in single-thrust chamber level.
Radar beam transmitted along electron lines of the earth’s magnetic field extending into the exosphere, first confirmation of theory and work of Roger M. Qallct of the National Bureau of Standards and Henry G. Booker of Cornell University. Echo reflected from the earth successfully received 0.2 of a second later after traveling 37,000 miles, perhaps offering a new tool to study the effect of solar eruptions on the earth’s magnetic field and a new long-range sur-velUance method using radar.
FCO received formal application of American Telephone & Telegraph for authority to operate a communications satellite.
Completion of technical review of Dyna-Soar program announced by the Air Force.
Department of Defense placed Navy’s SPASUR (Space Surveillance Detection Net) and the Air Force’s SPACE-TRACK (National Space Surveillance Control Center) under the North American Air Defense Command for military functions. NASA would assume 3PAOB-TRACK’s function of passing on Information on space vehicles to the world’s scientific community. November 12:	DISCOVERER XVII placed into polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, restartable Agenda B second stage successfully flown for the first time.
NASA announced creation of Launch Operations Directorate (LOD) to become operational on July 1, to be beaded by Dr. Kurt Debus of Marshall Space Flight Center, who headed the Army launch operations of EXPLORER 1 and the first American payload to orbit the sun, PIONEER IV.
First Industry Conference conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
Atlas-D with Mark 3 nose cone fired 4,381 nautical miles into Enlwetok Atoll in first SAC launching from Vandenberg AFB.
X-15 (No. 1) rocket research airplane was delivered by North American to NASA for further testing.
Stanford University scientists reported on successful reflection of radar signals off the sun’s corona on April 7,10, und 12,1959.
USAF SAMOS 1 launched from Vandenberg AFB, but failed to orbit.
Civil Service Commission approved new examination for career professional positions in aerospace technology, part A covering work in the physical sciences, engineering, and mathematics, and part B covering work in the life sciences and related systems. December 7:	DISCOVERER XVIII launched into polar orbit by new Thor-Agena B from Vandenberg AFB, carrying survctllance-system equipment and human tissue In recovery capsule.
NASA selected Hughes, North American, Space Technology Laboratory, and McDonnell to study designs for the first lunar soft-landing spacecraft.
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced selection of Biaw-Knox Equipment, Hughes Aircraft, North American Aviation, and Westlnghouse Electric to study feasibility of a large space-tracking antenna.
USAF DISCOVERER XIV launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (See Appendix A.)
Air Force dedicated the National Space Surveillance Control Center (SPACETRACK) at Bedford, Mass.
North American A3-J Vigilante set a world altitude record with
First manmade object recovered from an orbiting satellite, the 65-pound instrumented capsule of DISCOVERER XIII recovered from the ecean off Hawaii after 16 orbits. Silken 50-star American flag it carried was presented to the President on August 15.
