Explorer XII (S-3) placed into highly eccentric orbit by Thor-Delta from Atlantic Missile Range, which would provide detailed evaluation of behavior of energetic particles between 170- and 50-000-mile altitude. Under Goddard Space Flight Center, this “windmill” satellite carried six experiments developed by Ames Research Center, State University of Iowa, University of New Hampshire, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Several days were required to confirm orbit.
NASA and the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. signed a cooperative agreement for the development and testing of two, possibly four, active communication satellites during 1962. A.T. & T. would design and build the TSX satellites at its own expense, and would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launchings by Thor-Delta vehicles at Cape Canaveral. Relationship between this contract and the overall NASA communications satellite program aimed at early development of an operational system was explained at a NASA press conference.
Italian Air Force crew fired Jupiter IRBM from Atlantic Missile Range, the third such launching.
Explosion in hydrogen system canceled full-power run of AEC Kiwi B-1A reactor at Jackass Flats, Nev. Five men were injured, and the reactor was not damaged. NASA announced award of a contract to North American Aviation Co. to study the feasibility of a large erectable manned space station based on Langley Research Center concept.
Representatives of 30 American aerospace firms in Europe formed an informal organization known as U.S. Aerospace Industries in Europe.
Two U.S. Air Force officers were sealed in space simulator for 17-day test of man’s reaction to almost pure oxygen at 35,000 feet altitude, at School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Tex. Emerging on August 25, Lts. B. Appel and J. Slider had eaten dehydrated food, drunk water processed from the atmosphere and their own body wastes, and were pronounced in good physical condition.
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., commander, U.S. Navy, and Virgil I. Grissom, captain, U.S. Air Force, were awarded the first astronaut wings (almost identical design of a shooting star imposed on the traditional pilot’s badge) in a joint ceremony by their respective services.
First Northrop T-38 supersonic jet trainer was delivered to USAF Air Training Command at Randolph Air Force Base, Tex.
National Aeronautic Association appointed committee headed by Maj. Gen. Albert Boyd, U.S. Air Force (retired), to program U.S. efforts to break world aircraft records now held by other nations.
In article in New York Times, Mr. George J. Feldman, consultant to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined several areas of international space law that urgently require solution, including sovereignty in space, liability for damage from spacecraft, conflicts of interest arising from space experiments, sovereignty claims on celestial bodies, and the international allocation of satellite radio frequencies. Communications satellites make latter point particularly critical, as well as posing an unprecedented problem in American contract and antitrust law.
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking to the American Rocket Society, said NASA scientists “are going to consider the rendezvous technique with great care before going ahead with Nova.” Decision on whether to give priority to the rendezvous technique would probably be made by the end of 1961, he said.
X-15 flown more than 40 miles into space—217,000 feet— and reached a speed of 3,647 miles per hour, Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. This was above 99.9 percent of Earth’s atmosphere; pilot’s heartbeat and respiration rose to twice above normal; and outside skin temperature of the X-15 rose to 900° F. on reentry.
Marshall Space Flight Center’s Procurement and Contracts Office reported that a contract was let to the Noble Co. for disassembling the Redstone gantry at Atlantic Missile Range and reassembling and erecting it at Pacific Missile Range. This gantry would be erected on pad 75-1-1 at Vandenberg Air Force Base for use with Thor-Agena B launches after January 1962.
Jacqueline Cochran set woman’s altitude record of 56,071.3 feet, in Northrop T-38 jet trainer at Edwards Air Force Base.
NASA selected North American Aviation to design and build a three-man Apollo spacecraft leading toward eventual lunar landings and exploration of the Moon. Each proposal was evaluated by a team of nearly 200 NASA and DOD specialists.
Twelfth Congress of the International Astronautical Federation held in Washington, D.C.
Astronomers of Lick Observatory positioned 36-inch refractor telescope so as to intersect the path of Echo I at its predicted point of maximum elevation. Prediction of Goddard Space Flight Center was confirmed at exact time and within 10 minutes of arc.
Lt. Hunt Hardisty, U.S. Navy, pilot, and Lt. Earl H. DeEsch flew an F4H Phantom II over the 3-kilometer course of Holloman Air Force Base, N. Mex., and averaged 902.769 miles per hour for a new world’s record for speed at low altitude.
USAF B-58 Hustler flown from Carswell Air Force Base, Tex., to Le Bourget, Paris, in record 6 hours 15 minutes, covering distance from New York to Paris in 3 hours 20 minutes. This flight commemorated the 34th anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s transatlantic crossing on May 20-21, 1927, and the opening of the 24th Paris International Air Show.
Ten scientific organizations recommended that the American Association for the Advancement of Science create a new section to deal with scientific information and communication. The problem was seen to be one of an overabundance of information not accessible for the scientist, particularly in interdisciplinary science. Only three other new sections have been created in the American Association for the Advancement of Science in this century.
A new world aircraft altitude record for sustained horizontal flight was claimed by Comdr. George W. Ellis, U.S. Navy, who flew an F4H Phantom II at 66,443.8 feet over Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
NASA awarded contracts to Convair, Lockheed, and North American for studies of space vehicles beyond the Saturn class, having first-stage thrust of 6 to 12 million pounds.
Explorer XIII (S-55A) placed into orbit by NASA Scout from Wallops, a micrometeorite counting satellite developed by Langley Research Center and Goddard Space Flight Center.
USAF Discoverer XXVI orbited from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying instrument capsule to be recovered after 32 polar orbits and 4 days. Of the 25 previous Discoverers, 17 had gone into orbit and 15 carried recovery capsules, of which 5 had been recovered.
USIA reported that U.S. space achievements were a leading item in their overseas information program and covered all media. USIA concluded: “The policy of ‘openness’ observed in both U.S. manned space flights during the year dramatized the basic difference between the American open society and the Soviet closed society, and drew widespread approval from commentators throughout the free world. The availability of full information about the events through all news media, together with the presence of foreign correspondents—who gave firsthand, on-tlie-spot coverage—enabled oversea audiences to achieve a high degree of self-identification with one. of the greatest adventures of our times.”
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Chief of Theoretical Division and Director of the Institute for Space Studies, Goddard Space Flight Center, making the 25th annual Wright Brothers’ Lecture before the Institute of Aerospace Sciences, reviewed progress in the space sciences, said the most exciting and fruitful area thus far had been investigation of “solar control over the atmosphere of the Earth, causes of weather activity in the lower atmosphere, and the structure of the upper atmosphere.”
NASA Associate Administrator Seamans announced the addition of four additional Ranger spacecraft, bringing the total to nine, the number of Rangers to be launched in this phase of the lunar exploration program. “This new third phase of the Ranger program is a part of the general acceleration of the program to land an American on the Moon by 1970,” said Dr. Seamans.
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking at the 20th American Assembly, said the accelerated space program was necessary or else “we would see the Russians, with the advantage of their advance position in booster thrust, stay continuously ahead. * * * The cost over the 10 years of the accelerated program will very probably be less than if it were stretched out over 15 years.”
At the request of Senator Paul H. Douglas, the membership of the American Astronautical Society was polled by the University of Illinois Observatory as to their opinion regarding the “scientific value” of the U.S. space program to land on and return one or more men from the Moon.
Maj. Robert Rushworth, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 to 2,820 miles per hour, with bottom tailfin missing in programed malfunctions for test of stability and control.
Discoverer XXXVI was launched by the USAF into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., with a piggyback 10-pound Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satellite aboard in addition to the Discoverer payload. Oscar was the first satellite built by private citizens to be put in orbit, transmitted Morse signal to world amateur radio operators.
In a luncheon address to the American Rocket Society, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever said: “I have been, am being, and, if the situation is not changed, will continue to be inhibited if our space efforts continue to be carried out under an unnecessary, self-imposed national restriction; namely, the artificial division between space for peaceful purposes and space for military purposes.” Asserting USAF management experience in space systems, General Schriever added: “There is no short cut to the creation of a team of dedicated and experienced men with a tradition of accomplishment.”
Javelin launched 70.6-pound payload to an altitude of 475 miles in beginning of Goddard Space Flight Center program to measure the density of electrons in the ionosphere.
NASA selected North American Aviation to develop an upper stage (S-II) for an Advanced Saturn launch vehicle to be used on both manned and unmanned missions.
Dr. Carl Sagen, of University of California (Berkeley), disputed the “space seed” life theory in American Association for the Advancement of Science paper. “Panspermic” theory did not seem plausible in the light of the fierce environment of space and the vastness of the universe, he said.
Survey of leading space experts on U.S. space goals from 197075 by the North American Newspaper Alliance produced a consensus that the United States would establish a Moon base from which to thoroughly explore the Moon and to launch interplanetary manned probes. Those interviewed included important figures in space industry, USAF, NASA, and space research.
Air Force Office of Aerospace Research (OAR) announced that its Office of Scientific Research had awarded 139 basic research grants and contracts worth almost $8 million so far this fiscal year.
USAF awarded an additional $52 mlliion contract to North American Aviation for development of a prototype B-70 bomber, bringing to $267 million the amount allocated for the B-70.
Nuclear Vehicles Project Office established at Marshall Space Flight Center, Col. Scott Fellows, U.S. Air Force, named as Chief.
USAF Discoverer XXV placed into polar orbit by Thor-Agena B, at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.
Dr. Thomas Gold, of Cornell University, submitted that water exists on the Moon, perhaps shielded from evaporation by a layer of ice below the surface, in a paper given at American Physical Society.
New 20-inch wind tunnel at the Aeronautical Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base announced as capable of testing at mach 14, at 200,000-foot altitude, and at 2,500° F.	;
USAF announced plans to institute special course for the instruction of space pilots at Edwards Air Force Base, and it was activated in June.
X-15 flown to unofficial record 2,275 miles per hour by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratory successfully flighttested largest plastic balloon (318 feet in diameter and 434 feet long).
Capsule of Discoverer XXXII recovered by C-130 piloted by Capt. Warren Schensted, U.S. Air Force, the sixth aerial recovery of an ejected satellite capsule and Schensted’s second catch. Capsule contained test objects including seed corn.
Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corp. launched Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station with 60-pound payload that reached 90-mile altitude in a study of electron density and temperature in the upper level of the atmosphere.
NASA-USAF-USN rocket research X-15 flown to 169,600 feet by Joseph A. Walker, NASA pilot, the highest altitude ever reached by man and which included 2 minutes of weightlessness at the top of his climb. The X-15, powered by XLR-99 rocket engine designed to thrust it to 50 miles altitude and speeds of up to 4,000 miles per hour, was only run at three-quarters throttle. March SO: USAF announced reduction of the B-70 program contract commitments to North American, Westinghouse, and other firms. Five major subcontracts were canceled and four others sharply reduced.
Italian Air Force personnel fired Jupiter IRBM in training launch at Cape Canaveral.
President Kennedy awarded the Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy jointly to the three X-15 test pilots. The first joint award in the liistory of the trophy went to A. Scott Crossfield of North American, Joseph A. Walker of NASA, and Maj. Robert M. White, U.S. Air Force.
USAF Bomarc B launched from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., on command from SAGE Center at Montgomery, Ala., destroyed supersonic Regulus launched from Venice, Fla.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Deputy Administrator of NASA, speaking in Denver before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said: “The sheer magnitude of the manned lunar exploration program, amounting as it will to $3 billion or more [in fiscal year 1963], represents a significant application of the Nation’s resources. These billions of dollars will be spent in the laboratories, workshops, and factories of the Nation and thus constitute a significant factor in the Nation’s employment and economy generally. The personnel in the space program are not all scientists and engineers but come from every walk of life. “The ultimate and practical purpose of these large expenditures is twofold: (1) Insurance of the Nation against scientific and technological obsolescence in a time of explosive advances in science and technology; and (2) insurance against the hazard of military surprise in space.”
General Curtis E. LeMay, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, said in interview with U.S. News & World Report: “I think we’re at the period of space technology that we were in aeronautical technology along about 1914. At that time no one could predict the type of weapon systems that the airplane was going to produce, or the transportation system that it would eventually produce. As a matter of fact, it was pretty much a laughing stock—a very expensive toy. “We, of course, initially did a very poor job in our development program to advance the science of aeronautics in this country. I hope we do a better job in space. At the present time we can’t predict what will eventually come out of research in space in the way of weapon systems or commercial vehicles or any other use that we might put space to. I am sure that men are going out into space. I’m sure that they’ll find useful things to do out there, and I’m sure that, unless something is done to preclude it, they’ll find things to fight over out there, too.”
At autumn meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Los Angeles, Dr. Hilde Kallmann-Biji reported on Committee on Space Research report by an international studies group on data discovered by Soviet and American satellites as well as sounding rocket observations including those of Britain and West Germany. Findings indicated that 500 miles in space, temperatures may fluctuate 1,000° F., and that the Earth’s upper atmosphere has distinct day and night variations in density and pressure. During October: A series of some 50 supersonic flights to analyze the characteristics, intensity, and air and ground effects of supersonic booms began at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., under joint sponsorship of the USAF, FAA, and NASA.
Thomas F. Dixon of North American Aviation was appointed Director of NASA’s Office of Launch Vehicle Programs (OLVP), effective September 18, 1961. He replaced Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, U.S. Air Force, who returned to military duty as Vice Commander of AFBSD (AFSC), having served as first Director of OLVP since December 16, 1959.
Northrop T-38 (Talon) jet flown 842.6 miles per hour to claimed world speed record for women, by Jacqueline Cochran at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
Marine helicopter crews conducted extensive tests to perfect water recovery of Mercury capsule at Langley Air Force Base.
NASA outlined specifications for a low-altitude active communications satellite Project Relay at Goddard Space Flight Center.
Full Tass text of Marshal R. V. Malinovsky’s speech on October 23 as it appeared in Soviet dailies, showed no statement to the effect that the Soviets had perfected an antimissile missile, as had been reported by Moscow correspondents of the American press.
The American Rocket Society presented its major annual awards as follows: Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Medal to Dr. Weraher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; Astronautics Medal to Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Mercury astronaut, for his MR-3 flight of May 5; James H. Wyld Memorial Medal to Harrison A. Storms, Jr., of North American Aviation; Propulsion Medal to Robert B. Young of Aerojet-General Corp. for his role in development of Titan II engine; G. Edward Pendray Award to Kraft Ehricke for his contribution to astronautical literature; and Research Medal to Dr. James Van Allen of State University of Iowa for basic research.
In speech at the American Rocket Society, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded contracts to North American Aviation and Ryan Aeronautical to develop paraglider recovery system for the Saturn booster, based upon concept developed by Francis M. Rogallo of NASA’s Langley Research Center.
Ballute (balloon braking system) reentry test of 500-pound Cree vehicle, launched by three-stage Nike rocket, reaching an altitude of 28 miles and a speed of near 1,900 miles per hour, at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla.
In a ceremony at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., the USAF graduated its first class of five pilot-engineers from its school for space pilots. Graduates were awarded advanced technical degrees.
NASA conducted a press conference for foreign correspondents attending the IAF Congress, pointing out that some 40 nations are now participating in NASA programs or are obtaining NASA help for their respective space programs. Director of the Office of International Programs, Arnold Frutkin, pointed out that growing space research cooperation would soon include a university training program in which 100 foreign students would work at American universities on peaceful space experiments.
An F4H Phantom II piloted by Lt. Col. Robert B. Robinson (USMC), claimed a new world speed record at Edwards Air Force Base, averaging 1,606.324 miles per hour.
Capsule of Discoverer XXVI snatched at 15,000 feet during final descent after 32 polar orbits. Midair recovery by C-119, Capt. Jack Wilson, U.S. Air Force, as pilot, was fourth so performed. Capsule carried undisclosed payload.
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, speaking before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said that although science had become a determining factor in national and international events, its effectiveness was hampered because educated men did not understand science. Yet, he said, science was truly a part of the humanities; “Who in our times can make an adequate criticism of life without knowledge of the ideals, the methods, the dynamics of science?”
State Department ruled that Soviet space scientists would not be allowed to visit the American Rocket Society’s Space Flight Report to the Nation in New York on October 9-14, a reciprocal action prompted by Soviet restrictions on American scientists in the U.S.S.R.
Largest known rocket launch to date, the Saturn 1st stage booster, successful on first test flight from Atlantic Missile Range. With its eight clustered engines developing almost 1.3 million pounds of thrust at launch, the Saturn (SA-1) hurled water-filled dummy upper stages to an altitude of 84.8 miles and 214.7 miles down range. In a postlaunch statement, Administrator Webb said: “The flight today was a splendid demonstration of the strength of our national space program and an important milestone in the buildup of our national capacity to launch heavy payloads necessary to carry out the program projected by President Kennedy on May 25. We in NASA deeply appreciate the contribution by the military services and American industry in achieving this important milestone. * * *” Development of Saturn had begun under Advanced Research Projects Agency auspices in 1958.
Final NASA report on the study proposed for Saturn for use as Dyna-Soar booster was presented to the Air Force.
USAF reorganized its research and development activities, creating the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) to replace parts of the Air Research and Development Command and the Air Materiel Command, to be commanded by Lt. Gen. Bernard Schriever. Also separately created was the Office of Aerospace Research (OAR) to function as a separate air command reporting directly to Chief of Staff, USAF.
15 flown to record speed of 3,300 miles per hour by NASA test pilot, Joseph Walker, at Edwards Air Force Base.
The space surveillance system (Spasur) was formally commissioned at the Nava] Weapons Laboratory, Dahlgren, Va., under the operational control of the North American Defense Command.
Freedom 7, manned Mercury spacecraft (No. 7) carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as pilot, was launched from Cape Canaveral by Mercury-Redstone (MR-3) launch vehicle, to an altitude of 115.696 miles and a range of 302 miles. It was the first American manned space flight. Shepard demonstrated that man can control a vehicle during weightlessness and high G stresses, and significant scientific biomedical data were acquired. He reached a speed of 5,100 miles per hour and flight lasted 14.8 minutes.
Prof. Martin Schwarzschild, of Princeton University, named by the National Academy of Sciences to receive the Henry Draper Medal for his work as director of ONR’s Project Stratoscope (produced clear photos of the structure of the surface of the Sun).
USAF fired an Aerobee sounding rocket from Point Arguello, Calif., out over the Pacific 1,300 miles high and 900 miles toward Hawaii, at which point the rocket released three sets of flares to be photographed from California, Hawaii, and Alaska. Purpose was to provide a more precise knowledge of the location of Hawaii with respect to the North American mainland by means of photogrammetric triangulation of the flare photos.
Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., awarded the Theodore Roosevelt Distinguished Service Award in New York City.
Tiros II completed 4 months in orbit and continued to provide useful cloud picture and radiation data. Signal from Tiros II was used on 1,763d orbit to trigger dynamite to break ground for new RCA Space Environment Center at Princeton, N.J.
Federal Communications Commission allocated a radio frequency to the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. to establish the first space satellite communications link between Europe and the United States on an experimental basis, a program calling for NASA launching of a series of experimental communication satellites capable of relaying telephone calls, television programs, and other messages across the Atlantic.
NASA announced that a Life Sciences Research Laboratory would be established on February 1 at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
NASA announced establishment of Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) in New York City, which would be an extension of the Theoretical Division of Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. It will be headed by Dr. Robert Jastrow.
USAF Discoverer XXVII destroyed by range safety officer 60 seconds after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
15 flown to record 3,614 miles per hour by NASA’s Joseph A. Walker at Edwards Air Force Base.
Air Force reorganized its headquarters staff to reflect creation of Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), which made the Deputy Chief of Staff for Development, Lt. Gen. Roscoe C. Wilson, Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Technology.
In testimony before House Appropriations Committee, Hugh L. Dryden revealed that simulated free-flight speeds just under 30,000 miles per hour had been achieved at NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.
Studies of “unconventional” rockets using liquid fuels in the thrust range from 2 to 24 million pounds announced by NASA; 2 contracts being carried out by Aerojet-General and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation.
Tass announced that the “Air Force Herald” would be retitled “Aviation and Cosmonautics” (Aviatsiga I Kosmo-navtika), beginning in January 1962.
Gen. Thomas D. White, USAF Chief of Staff, ordered space surveillance functions transferred from Air Research and Development Command to the Air Defense Command at Ent Air Force Base, Colo., as technology in this field moved from research and development to an operational stage. The ADC established Spadats (space detection and tracking system).
Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1961 announced as going to three winners for the first time—X—15 rocket research airplane pilots: A. Scott Crossfield, of North American; Joseph A. Walker, of NASA, and Maj. Robert A. White, U.S. Air Force.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
NASA announced that Dr. Hiden T. Cox, executive director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences, would become Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, and “charged with developing NASA policies to insure that the character, the intent, and the results of America’s space effort are correctly and adequately interpreted to the people of this country and the world.”
Second Atlas ICBM launched by SAC crew, from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
NASA Robert H. Goddard Space Flight Center officially dedicated at Greenbelt, Md., dedication address delivered by Dr. Detlev Bronk, President of the National Academy of Sciences. It was the 35th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s successful launching of the world’s first liquid fuel rocket. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard accepted the congressional medal honoring her husband.
Workshop: Telemetry in Europe” at National Telemetering Conference in Chicago brought seven European representatives together with American scientists in working out unofficial preliminary standardization planning on bands, means, and frequencies.
In San Bernardino news conference, Gen. Bernard Schriever, U.S. Air Force, said: “I have never felt we were behind Russia in missile development.”
USAF Discoverer XX placed in polar orbit with 300-pound recovery capsule from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
X-15 (No. 1) on its first flight with new XLR-99 engine was flown to 2,735 miles per hour by Comdr. Forrest S. Petersen, U.S. Navy, at Edwards Air Force Base.
Three-day meeting of Satellite Panel of the World Meteorological Organization concluded at Washington, D.C., minus participation by the Soviet member.
Convair B-58 Hustler, jet bomber powered by four GE J-79 engines, broke six world speed records, Maj. H. J. Deutsch-endorf, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. On first closed-course run, the Hustler averaged 1,200.194 miles per horn, and it averaged 1,061.808 miles per hour on both runs carrying a payload of 4,408 pounds and a crew of three.
Dr. von Karman and some of his associates organized the Astronautics Foundation, Inc., in Washington, D.C., to enable U.S. individuals and corporations to support through this nonprofit foundation various cooperative international activities.
First silo launching of an ICBM, a USAF Titan at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Lt. Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, said that plans to orbit a monkey in Discoverer XXII (March 30) were canceled at the last minute, and that such plans had not been rescheduled.
Gold-plated capsule of Discoverer XXXV recovered after 18 orbits in midair over Fern Island by C-130 aircraft, Capt. James F. McCullough, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. It was the 10th recovery from orbit in the Discoverer series and the 1st recovery observed from the ground.
Air Force Systems Command formed a Bioastronautics Division, effective October 1, to consolidate all USAF applied research in this area into a single organization. School of Aerospace Medicine, now under Air Training Command, becomes a part of Air Force Systems Command.
Air Force Systems Command announced consolidation of all USAF research and development in bioastronautics under single management. The new Bioastronautics Division, Air Force Systems Command, would have its headquarters at Brooks Air Force Base, San Antonio, Tex.
Massive Soviet air show over Tushino Airport in Moscow, on Soviet Air Force Day, which demonstrated that U.S.S.R. had continued development of all classes of military aircraft.
USAF established a Council of Scientists to be comprised of senior civilian scientists of major Air Force organizations, Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold as Chairman.
Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 a record speed of 2,905 miles per hour, topping his mark of 2,275 miles per hour set on February 7 with interim engine.
Operational Atlas raised from emplacement and fired in an operational test exercise at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
The Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Foundation announced openings for 18 young scientists and engineers for graduate study in rockets, jet propulsion, space llight and space structures at Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Aerospace Laboratory at Princeton, and the Institute of Flight Structures at Columbia. Established in 1949, Guggenheim fellowship program in the aerospace sciences has provided financial aid to 142 students to date.
Speaking at the Air Force Association convention in Philadelphia, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, said that “the United States has been notably slow to recognize the military application of new inventions. Two of the most significant inventions of this century— the airplane and the liquid-fuel rocket—are American inventions. Yet in each case their first application was made by other nations.” Gen. Schriever also stated: “We should recognize that there is no inherent difference between basic military and nonmilitary space technology. What really matters is not the technology but the intent * * * space power must become a vital part of our national strength and security.”
X-15 flown to announced record 4,070 miles per hour (later revised to 4,093) by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, in top-speed test flight, making safe landing with outer right windshield cracked.
