Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), addressing the Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers, declared development of the laser may prove more important to the world than “development of the ballistic missile, the discovery of the transistor, or the reality of telstar. ... As a new method for transmission of energy, the Laser has almost infinite potential. The Laser can direct a concentrated beam of light across great distances with extreme precision. It is therefore ideally suited for application in space. In addition, it appears to have many practical applications in research, industry, medicine and communications. . . . “In the Air Force, our current funding for Laser technology is about six mlliion dollars. Our efforts range from instrumentation development to the search for means of using Laser beams in support of our military space objectives. Our budget for Fiscal Year 1964 shollid include an increase for Laser research and development. “The Laser is a striking example of the potential to be found in today’s advanced technology. We must make full use of its possibilities for national security purposes. . . .”
Goddard Space Flight Center officials reported that they had received “indications the voltage had recovered somewhat” in relay satellite, but doubted that its communications mission would be accomplished.
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb. This was 100th launch with Thor as space booster, 93 of which were considered successful. To date, Thor launched more satellites and probes into space than all other boosters combined, including pioneer i space probe, explorer vi scientific satellite, pioneer v space probe, and tiros i weather satellite as Thor-Able vehicle; and echo i balloon-satellite, oso i, ariel, telstar, and four Tiros satellites as Thor-Delta. Thor-Able-Star (Vanguard-derived upper stages) combination launched series of usn navigation satellites, Army communications satellites, and tri-service anna geodetic satellite. With Agena upper stage, Thor boosted series of usaf satellites as well as Canadian alouette satellite for nasa.
Pertinent facts of human evolution should be included in preparation for interstellar communication, according to Prof. Robert Ascher of Cornell Univ. dept of anthropology and his wife, Marcia, assistant professor in Ithaca College dept, of mathematics and physics. Models of primitive man’s efforts in surmounting barriers can be used as theoretical background for thinking about !>ossible civilizations on other planets. Problem of watching and istening for signals across space and developing means to reach source of those signals is essentially same as problem of prehistoric man making contact with other races or civilizations. Ascher also declared whenever two civilizations have made contact, conquest by dominant group has followed. Models of those communications should be constructed and studied, Ascher said, and applied to future interstellar communications.
nasa announced establishment of an on-site management unit of some 100 persons at the Space and Information Systems Division Plant of North American Aviation at Downey, Calif. It will be an element of the nasa Western Operations Office of Santa Monica. The Downey office is to expedite nasa contractor decisions and actions essential to development contracts such as the Apollo lunar-landing spacecraft and the second stage for the Advanced Saturn booster.
Reported that the Air Force Logistics Command (aflc) civilian retraining program begun in October 1957 has proved to be highly successfm. According to aflc program director Eric W. Jordan, 80,000	civilian employees, whose skills have become obsolete in today’s rapidly changing technology, wlli have been retrained and placed in new jobs by the end of 1962.
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) began negotiating a new type of three-year contracts for basic research with Westinghouse Electric, ibm, and rca in the solid-state field. This was the first time that basic research had been contracted on any other basis than one year at a time, is designed to provide more continuity and certainty of completion of research projects. As under the previous system, osr and industry each bear roughly half of the costs of the research.
American Airlines 707 jet transport crashed in Jamaica Bay, N.Y.. seconds after takeoff from New York International Airport, and all 95 persons on board were kllied, the highest toll in U.S. history in the crash of a single airplane. The crash occurred about one hour before the start of the giant parade in honor of Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr.
nasa announced that LCdr. M. Scott Carpenter (usn) would be the pilot on the next Mercury orbital space flight (MA-7). Major Donald K. Slayton (usaf), the astronaut originally scheduled for the flight, was disqualified because of an “erratic heart rate,” after the medical findings had been reviewed by an Air Force medical board and a board of civilian cardiologists. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra was named as Carpenter’s backup pilot.
Awards for 1961 announced by the American Helicopter Society: first Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy to Mikhail L. Mil of the Soviet Union; Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Brig. Gen. Robert R. Williams, U.S. Army Aviation Center Commander; Capt. Wm. J. Kossler Award to'Air Rescue Service, mats; Frederick L. Feinberg Award to Lt. Col. Francis M. Carney (usaf) ; and the Grover E. Bell Award to the engineering organization of Sikorsky Aircraft.
In address at dedication of the nasa Space Exhibit at the Seattle World’s Fair, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said that “our entire space program now costs each American about 30 cents a week. During the next few years we plan to spend about 50 cents a week per person on space. “However, our space program and its by-products will stimulate a sharp increase in the nation’s productive output which in turn will increase our gross national product, our income, and the Federal Government’s intake . . . “. . . we are hopeful of achieving fruitful cooperation with the Soviet Union in such fields as communications, weather forecasting, mapping the earth’s magnetic fields and space medicine. “We feel that cooperation in outer space may establish a firm basis for greater mutual understanding—which in turn will help in our efforts to obtain disarmament . . . “The responsibility to cooperate also lies heavily on the other great space power—the Soviet Union. I am able to tell you in a spirit of cautious optimism that the Soviet Union appears to realize that—in outer space, at least—there may be something to be gained by cooperatingwith the rest of humanity.”
Six candidates were selected by the usaf for Dyna-Soar, including four Air Force and two nasa test pilots. Dyna-Soar is designed to be boosted into orbit by a Titan III.
Nike-Apache launch vehicle carried 63-lb. payload to approximately 80-mi.-altitude from nasa Wallops Station, in experiment to measure ion concentration and composition in the upper atmosphere. Impact occurred approximately 67 mi. from the launch site, and no attempt was made to recover the payload. Experiment was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center in cooperation with Lockheed Missile and Space Co.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center (gsfc) announced it was training Italian scientists and engineers for the launching of Italy’s first satellite. The 165-lb. satellite would be launched by 1965 from platform in Indian Ocean off eastern coast of Africa.
One year ago, President Kennedy in Iris address to Congress declared the national space goal of “landing an American on the moon in this decade.”
usaf announced that an unidentified statellite using a Thor-Agena B booster was launched from Vandenberg afb.
Radio Moscow quoted Mikhail Yarov-Yarovoy, senior scientist at U.S.S.R. Astronomical Institute, as saying: _ “We learn today that America’s space vehicle, the Mariner II, has passed quite close to Venus. The successful launching and the reception of radio signals from such a great distance indicate that American scientists and engineers have achieved more and more in conquering space. “We congratulate our American colleagues.”
Mercury Astronaut Virgil I. (Gus) Grissom was presented the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographical Society in Washington. In his presentation remarks, Secretary Zuckert said: “. . . The National Aeronautics and Space Administration carries responsibility for the development of space technology and, in company 97317—63---8 with like-minded peoples of the world, the utilization of space for the benefit of men. Captain Grissom and the other astronauts are playing a vital role in the national space effort, nasa’s program is of vital importance to the Air Force. We must build the nation’s defense capability in space on the foundation which nasa lays . . . “The feat for which he [Capt. Grissom] is recognized,” said Secretary Zuckert, “is one step, a very, very early step, toward mastery of space for constructive purposes. The American people have launched a tremendous program to acquire the capability to master the aerospace just as we have mastered the seas and the air, and kept them free . . .”
In joint letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences Robert S. Kerr and Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller said: “The world must of necessity admire the remarkable achievements of the Soviet Union in the field of space. A shadow is thrown over the entire space effort through their refusal to admit to failures. . . . “We feel it is important that if the U.S. Government possesses any information relative to unsuccessful attempts by the Soviet Union to launch a spacecraft to Venus, or other planetary probes, that this information should be made available to our committees and to the American people.”
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Aviatrix Jerrie Cobb told Women’s Advertising Club of Washington, D.C.: “We’re bypassing the one scientific space feat we could accomplish now—putting the first woman in orbit. . . .”
usaf launched two Atlas D missiles in quick succession from Vandenberg afb toward impact area 5,000 miles away. Officials said the tests, the first demonstration of a multiple countdown capability, were successful.
usaf combat missile crew launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., during President Kennedy’s visit to the missile base, the first time an American President had witnessed a live launching of an icbm.
Development of new type of laser by General Electric and International Business Machine researchers was reported in American Physical Society’s Physical Review Letters and American Institute of Physics’ Applied Physics Letters. Called “injection laser,” new crystal laser was powered by electrical current; previous solid lasers used strong flash lamps as energy source. At least 10 times more efficient than existing lasers, injection laser was expected to enable engineers to broadcast audio messages on the beams of light and to modulate the brightness of the light according to voice, television, or other pattern. Researchers anticipated that single laser beam could transmit a million telephone messages or a thousand television channels.
At national conference of American Geophysical Union at Stanford Univ., scientists John D. Anderson and George Null of jpl reported mariner ii fly-by of Venus produced the most accurate estimate yet of the mass of that planet—0.81485 times the mass of the earth, with probable error of 0.015 per cent. Final analysis might slightly alter value and further reduce error.
Incorporators of communications satellite corp., authorized by the Communications Satellite Act of 1962, decided temporary headquarters for the new company would be established in Washington, D.C. Also at the meeting held in N.Y.C., the incorporators discussed name for the corp.; considered names of 50 persons for its management; and discussed budgetary requirements. Next meeting of group was set for Dec. 21, in N.Y.C.
The Air Force Space Plan, a ten-year blue-print for military space technology, was given to a House committee by Lt. Gen. James Ferguson, dcs/r&t. The Space Plan foresaw a mllitary need for rendezvous, docking, and transfer. The usaf expected to depend on a manned rendezvous vehicle, using the two-man Gemini, built by nasa, as an initial vehicle. The Space Plan was sent to the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board for review.
In testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee Air Force Chief of Staff LeMay requested additional funds to speed the development of the RS-70. Asking for nearly three times the Administration’s budget request, or $491 million, LeMay said that limiting funds “wollid lose more than a year” beyond the 1967 target date for the first three prototypes. “This program has been slowed down at least four years. We have delayed and delayed until there is practically no risk in it now.”
Research Center for Celestial Mechanics at Yale University announced by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research and the Office of Naval Research, to be headed by Dr. Dirk Brouwer, Director of the Yale Observatory. The facility, to be opened on July 1, will seek new approaches for problems involving earth satellites, lunar and interplanetary probes, and the predetermination of trajectories for interplanetary vehicles.
Major problem under study by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories’ Sacramento Peak Observatory was the prediction of safe intervals for manned space flight. Since March 1961, intensive study has been made of proton showers originating from solar flares and arriving at the earth from 30 minutes to 6 hours after the flare has peaked. One major flare out of every four produces proton showers wnich follow the 11-year cycle of activity. Sunspot maximum occurred in 1957-1958 and the minimum is expected in 1964-1965.
David J. Mann of Thiokol Chemical Corp. told American Chemical Society that Thiokol was developing new rocket fuel, oxygen difluoride, 15% more powerful than current rocket fuels. Used as oxidizer with such substances as diborane or monomethylhy-drazine, oxygen difluoride could save 7 ft. in length and 350 lbs. in weight on an Apollo-type launch vehicle. Other claimed advantages were improved storability and capacity to remain in liquid form under wider range of conditions than possible with liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen. New fuel’s density would permit large amounts to be stored in smaller volume.
Maj. Gherman Titov in San Francisco press conference continued to chide U.S. space program. He said that if he was asked to join a U.S. astronaut in a cooperative space mission: “I would be a bit afraid because there have been quite a lot of failures in your program.” And, he remarked, the MR-3 capsule was “not even good enough for flying in orbit.”
First J-2 engine of Block I r&d series of Saturn C-l was successfully test-fired by Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation. During January: Manned Rogallo-wing paraglider built by nasa’s Flight Research Center launched by automobile tow from Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Tests may include launch of glider by aircraft tow, leading to development of inflatible paraglider for use with Gemini and Apollo programs.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, testified before a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics that the revised usaf solid-propellant development program would cost considerably less than the $60 mlliion originally planned. He said that current program review ordered by Secretary of Defense and nasa Administrator had shown that solid-fuel program was larger than necessary to demonstrate the feasibility of the boosters. Once approved by the Secretary and the Administrator, the new master plan for solid-propellant boosters wollid limit the program to feasibility study, since neither dod nor nasa had specific mission requirements for their application.
Massive celebration in the Kremlin on Soviet Air Force Day as the new Russian space heroes, Cosmonauts Major Andrian Nikolayev and Lt. Colonel Pavel Popovich, were feted. In round of speech making, Premier Nikita Khrushchev welcomed the cosmonauts and their famllies, awarded them “Hero of the Soviet Union” medals, and said: “We are gathering new strength to surprise the world with our discoveries and victories.” He also demanded that the Western Allies get out of Berlin.
Dr. James A. Van Allen, State University of Iowa physicist, criticized Government report on atmospheric radiation resulting from U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July, which stated radiation levels were much higher than had been predicted and would last longer than had been predicted. Dr. Van Allen charged the Government report was a “hasty and ill-considered” interpretation of the facts; he predicted the bulk of artificially formed radiation would no longer be detectable by summer of 1963. Dr. Van Allen said President’s Science Advisory Committee ignored findings from injun satellite (which he used to study effects of the explosion) and relied instead on data from telstar satellite, launched after the nuclear test. Scientist James W. Warwick of University of Colorado, basing his conclusions on radio measurements from ground stations in Hawaii and the Philippines, said his studies were in general agreement with those of Van Allen and his coworkers and were “inconsistent” with Government estimates .based on telstar data. The two scientists were in Philadelphia for session of American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In television interviews in New York, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov denied reports that any Russian cosmonauts had been killed prior to the orbital flight of Gagarin as reported in the American Sress. Titov said he also saw the tiny “fireflies” reported by ohn Glenn.
Thomas Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa, told Liquid Propulsion Symposium in San Francisco that nasa was studying large liquid-propellant rocket engines, beyond the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust F-l engine, that would be necessary for manned planetary flight. Pointing out the unacceptability of simply scaling up the F-l engine to produce the required 20 to 30 million-lb. thrust, since it would then measure about 60 ft. high and 45 ft. nozzle diameter, Dixon cited need for “new and imaginative approaches for propulsion in the future .... nasa will emphasize advanced research that could culminate in the development of these giant engines for the future.” He added that current nasa research projects in advanced propulsion were making progress. “These studies wlli assess current work on advanced propulsion concepts and point out areas where new concepts need to be investigated.”	_	_
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $1 mlliion contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for a paraglider development program.
usaf released unclassified “U.S. Air Force Space Policy” Report to the House Armed Services Committee in executive session. It was reported as saying that the U.S. must “recognize the peril” of Soviet space supremacy, take the lead in military space technology, and called for continued close cooperation with nasa.
usaf discoverer xxxvu launched from Vandenberg afb but did not attain orbit.
American Meteorological Society issued statement on the implications of the control of weather and climate, which endorsed the resolution adopted in the United Nations on December 20, 1961. U.N. resolution called for a cooperative international effort to improve weather prediction and to explore the possiblli-ties of weather control and climate modification.
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center selected Rohr Aircraft Corp. to negotiate for the manufacture and erection of three 85-foot-diameter parabolic antenna systems to be located at Pisgah National Forest (Rosman, N.C.), Fairbanks, Alaska, and an undetermined location in eastern Canada. When completed, these facilities in addition to similar system completed at Gilmore Creek, Alaska, would serve as the core of nasa’s wide-band satellite instrumentation network. They would receive and record telemetry from large “second generation” satellites including Nimbus and the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao).
Sodium-vapor experiment launched with Nike-Apache vehicle from nasa Wallops Station was not successful because the payload did not perform properly. Flight was part of current upper-atmosphere studies being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
usaf Atlas F missile flown 5,000 miles from Vandenberg afb carrying a special package of cameras to help locate and correct propulsion problems encountered in previous tests, the missile meeting all test objectives.
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch by sac crew at Vandenberg afb on training mission, usaf spokesman said no one was injured and no facilities were damaged.
In speech at Cleveland, Miss., General Bernard A. Schriever said: “As long as the Soviets remain committed to their goal of world domination, their accomplishments in space can be a potential source of danger to free men everywhere. In their efforts to bring about the complete victory of their system, they have not hesitated to use any means. There is no reason to believe that space will be an exception. ... “National defense missions in space have certain unique requirements, but in many ways they are closely related to other aspects of the national space program. There has been and continues to be close cooperation between the Air Force and “The rate of progress in our space program will be determined by two factors. The first of these is research. Development of space technology urgently calls for new knowledge. . . . “Research alone is not enough. The knowledge we acquire must be applied in timely fashion. The key to this application is management. ...”
First known antimissile missile interception of icbm nose cone announced by dod, the interception of an Atlas nose cone launched from Vandenberg afb high over the Pacific by a 3-stage Nike-Zeus fired from Kwajalein. Interception of 16,000-mph nose cone by experimental Nike-Zeus was regarded as comparable to a bullet hitting a bullet, although dod did not state whether physical contact had been made.
In response to statement by Col. Gen. Pyetr Braiko, Soviet Air Force chief of staff, regarding U.S.S.R. lead over U.S. in aircraft records, National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced that Soviet claim was based on January 1, 1961, figures. At that time, U.S.S.R. held 176 world records— 113 aircraft, and 63 parachute; U.S. held 106 world records—all aircraft. By July 20, 1962, U.S.S.R. still led U.S. in total world records (including parachute), but U.S. held more aircraft records than U.S.S.R. Parachute records: 83 U.S.S.R. to 8 U.S.; aircraft records: 112 U.S.S.R. to 161 U.S.
Congressman Victor Anfuso (N.Y.), speaking before the Pan American Management Club at Cape Canaveral, said: “Recognizing the very significant contrast between our mission in space and that of the Russians, we must do three things: “1. Convince the world that our venture into space is a peaceful one—to bring back benefits which will create a world of abundance, making war and strife among nations unnecessary. . . . “2. We must, at all costs, achieve dominance in all phases of space exploration for our own security and that of all peoples of the earth. “3. We must establish freedom in space and invite all nations of the world, having a contribution to make, to join our efforts. “To accomplish all these three things requires an all-out effort on our part—a mobilization of all our resources—sacrifices on the part of Government, business, industry, and labor. . . .”
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., under direction of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. Second stage failed to ignite, so rocket reached altitude of only about 9.5 mi.
John Glenn Day in New York City. An estimated four mlliion people lined the streets to cheer the Mercury astronauts. Mayor Robert Wagner presented the city’s highest award, the Medal of Honor, to Col. Glenn and Robert R. Gilruth.
Representative John E. Moss (D-Calif.), Chairman of special House Subcommittee on Government Information, criticized “Government news management which is unique in peacetime.” He objected strongly to handling of news about military space launches: “All launches by military agencies, whether they are for a military purpose or to gather information of a scientific nature, are covered by a blanket of secrecy. . . . All information about the billions of dollars spent by the military in space research is channeled through the Pentagon’s single public information voice.” Moss recalled last September when nasa said that six Russian attempts to send space probes to Venus and Mars had failed. Since then, Moss said, “there has been a complete blackout of information about Russian satellite efforts. This is the kind of news management that causes grave concern. ... If we cover up Russian successes ... we can certainly cover up our failures. This . . . leads to a dangerous delusion of the American people.”
nasa announced that Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., University of North Carolina sociologist, had been named Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, effective September 1. Dr. Simpson had been Executive Director of the Research Triangle Committee of North Carolina, a regional development organization, since 1956. As a representative of the social sciences, he would bring them into working relationship to nasa’s physical science effort, and underline nasa’s awareness of the social and economic impact of the space program. Dr. Simpson succeeds Dr. Hiden T. Cox who resumed his post as Executive Director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences on July 1.
In later nasa press conference at Cape Canaveral, Astronaut John Glenn described his three-orbit flight. He related his observation, his pilotage during almost two orbits, and his concern when burning fragments of the retrorocket package during re-entry appeared to indicate to him that the heat shield was breaking up. He referred to “weightlessness” as a “very pleasant” sensation to which he is becoming “addicted.” Administrator Webb and Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, Robert Gilruth, spoke briefly. This conference, like all events associated with the MA-6 flight, was fully covered in all detail by the entire American press, radio, and TV.
nasa announced that Mercury Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (Major usaf) would assume new operational and planning responsibilities. Extensive medical observation and examination of Slayton’s irregular heart action (atrial fibrillation) by msc medical staff, by groups of Air Force specialists, and Dr. Paul Dudley White agreed that he should not be considered for solo space flights.
Canadian satellite alouette was placed in polar orbit by Thor-Agena B vehicle launched by nasa from Vandenberg afb. Initial orbital data: apogee, 619.2 mi.; perigee, 597 mi.; inclination, 80.84° to the equator; period, 105.4 min. Named for Canadian high-flying songbird, alouette was first satellite both designed and built by a nation other than U.S. or U.S.S.R. Launching was nasa’s first into polar orbit, first from pmr, and first use of Thor-Agena B combination. To sustain its experiments in study of the ionosphere, the 320-lb. alouette had two crossed antennae, one 150 ft. long and the other 75 ft. long.
Through the official Soviet newspaper Pravda, the U.S.S.R. asserted that the U.S. was endangering an international program for cooperation in the use and exploration of outer space by failing to accept the Soviet drafts of codes to regulate activities in space, and by planning to undertake a program for the military use of space. Pravda reported: The “United States thus had left the door open for carrying the armament race into outer space. It seems that American representatives have come to Geneva not so much to negotiate on the peaceful exploration of space as to justify by legal pettifogging the Pentagon’s militaristic plans in space and these plans already are too well known.”
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, at press conference and luncheon announcing Chicago and Midwest Space Month, said: “ . . . I would like to stress one of the most challenging opportunities of the Space Age for American business—and for the consumer. In designing, building, testing, and flying space hardware we are searching for and creating new materials, lubricants, manufacturing processes, and techniques. We are stressing miniaturization, quality control, and foolproof automatic operation over long periods of time. We hope that many of these new products and new techniques can be put to good use on earth as well as in space and that the benefits they yield for business and the American consumer will eventually pay a substantial portion of the cost of the space program. We do not know what new products or uses may develop from space activities of the next few years. But we are hoping that businessmen throughout the country will be watching closely for profitable possibilities. And this is one way in which close contacts between business and the scientific community will pay off. The university can act as a transmission belt to make this accumulation of new technology available to industry . ... ”
Report at American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies forum that Western Europe was planning 440 sounding rocket, 22 satellite, and 2 moon probe launchings by 1970.
At least 15 per cent of the original synchrotron radiation” created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear blast last July could persist for more than a year, American and Peruvian scientists reported. Measurements made at National Bureau of Standards radio astronomy observatory in Jicamarca, Peru, showed that about one half the radiation had decayed within two months of the explosion, but that the rate of decay was “thought to be decreasing.”
Analysis of data from mariner ii interplanetary probe revealed there are 10,000 times as many small dust particles near the earth as there are in interplanetary space, reported W. M. Alexander of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. This was revision of earlier estimate of 1,000 times as many dust particles near earth as in interplanetary space. Other observations from mariner ii included in the report, which was published in Science: solar plasma experiment showed constant presence of solar plasma (or “solar wind”), generally ranging from 850,000 mph to 1,550,000	mph; magnetometer experiment found “convincing evidence” that magnetic fields of at least a few gamma are nearly always present, except perhaps for occasional, transient lulls.
Office of Aerospace Research announced scientists at Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl) would conduct the “most thorough study of atmospheric ozone ever made,” a concentrated one-year series of observations with more than 700 balloons carrying sensitive ozone meters into the upper atmosphere. New 11-station network, from Canal Zone to Greenland, would participate in project. To begin in January 1963, project was expected to yield data on nature of ozone.
nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the selection of Motorola, Inc., Military Electronics Division, of Scottsdale, Ariz., as contractor for research and development on the Goddard range and range-rate tracking system. Intended for tracking satellites in near-space and cislunar space, the system will measure spacecraft position to within a few feet and velocity to within fractions of a foot per second by measurements of carrier and side-tone modulations.
National Aeronautic Association announced that U.S. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard wollid receive fai medal on September 28 for his suborbital space-flight records May 5, 1961. Also to receive medals: U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Gherman S. Titov, for their record-setting orbital flights in 1961. Another American, Lt. Col. R. G. Robinson (usmc), would receive award for closed-course, aircraft speed record of 1,606.5 mph in F4H over Edwards afb, Calif., November 22, 1961.
In speech to the American Astronautical Society, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, submitted that Russia could match the U.S. in space “only if we place short-run convenience ahead of our nation’s future. . . . There are those who seem to take for granted that a country like Soviet Russia, with less than half the per capita income of the United States, can afford a major successful space program, while we can not. That is, at best, ridiculous, and, at worst, deliberate sabotage.”
dod opened Defense Research Office in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to coordinate basic scientific research throughout Latin America. Col. Leonard M. Orman (usa) headed the office and the Army Element, and Lt. Col. Charles J. Lyness (usaf) headed the Air Force Element. Also established, near the Defense Research Office, were nsf and nih offices. U.S. Department of State would coordinate all the offices’ activities.
Navy Polaris missile destroyed over Cape Canaveral after launch. March 31: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Division at nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the $1,000 Galabert Prize in Paris for his studies on nonchemical booster rockets. During March: nasa completed work on its first major launching facility on the West Coast, a Thor-Agena pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. A used gantry was shipped from msfc and installed at a $1 million saving over cost of new construction. Pad would be used for nasa polar-orbit launches, such as Echo II, Nimbus, and Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory).
The Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched a 150-foot balloon made of .001-inch-thick plastic. The test, intended to provide data for better research balloons, would send the balloon to an altitude of 117,000 feet for a fifty-hour period.
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was promoted from major to lt. colonel in the Soviet Air Force.
usaf announced that an unnamed satellite had been launched by a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Dr. Ross A. McFarland of Harvard University was awarded the Walter Boothby Award by the Aerospace Medical Assn, for outstanding research directed at the promotion of health and prevention of disease in professional airline pilots.
John Glenn Day in Washington, D.C. An estimated 250.000	persons lined the rain-drenched parade route from the White House to Capitol Hill. In 20-minute address to the joint session of the Congress, Astronaut Glenn paid tribute to the Project Mercury team and pointed to the unbounded future of space exploration: “. . . I feel that we are on the brink of an area of expansion of knowledge about ourselves and our surroundings that is beyond description or comprehension at this time. “Our efforts today and what we’ve done so far are but small building blocks on a very high pyramid to come . . . “We’re just probing the surface of the greatest advancement in man’s knowledge of his surroundings that has ever been made . . . There are benefits to science across the board. Any major effort such as this results in research by so many different specialties that it’s hard to even envision the benefits that will accrue in many fields. “Knowledge begets knowledge. The more I see, the more impressed I am not with how much we know but with how tremendous the areas are that are yet unexplored . . .”
Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz said in San Francisco that Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s “extraordinary intransigence” was responsible for deadlocked negotiations with the International Association of Machinists which resulted in two-day strike (iam strikers returned to work today). Three-man board of inquiry appointed by the President began their investigation of the “union shop” conflict. During November: In letter to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Administrator James E. Webb advised Congress of plans to reprogram $10,426,000 in FY 1963 funds to begin construction of facllities at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr). Of this sum, $1,717,000 was needed for Little Joe launch-complex construction; $9,084,000 was for site development and support facilities. During November: Goodyear Aircraft Corp. announced development of tunnel to simulate conditions encountered by satellites, missile nose cones, and recovery packages during re-entry into earth’s atmosphere.
Consolidation Steering Committee of the Board of the American Rocket Society (ars) and the Council of the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias) completed preliminary “Principles of Consolidation” for a proposed new society to be known as the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa).
Dr. Charles M. Herzfield, Washington physicist, reported that the luminous particles sighted in space by both Col. John Glenn and Maj. Scott Carpenter probably were particles of solid nitrogen trapped in the extreme upper atmosShere. “As the temperature rises, the luminosity disappears. To other systems seem to have all the requisite properties. These particles may exist independently at the altitudes involved. They may be produced from leaks of gas from the capsule or from fas trapped in various portions of the vehicle. . . .” Dr. lerzfield presented his evaluation in report to American Association for the Advancement of Science.
British scientist Sir John Cockcroft, addressing the British Association for the Advancement of Science in Manchester, said the British had a “good deal to learn from some American organizations who have a consistent record of success in developing new products by objective basic research and applied research.” He cited three discoveries of Bell Laboratories of New Jersey as “among the principal promoters of economic growth today”: extraction of pure crystals of the metal germanium; creation of strong magnetic fields in tin-and-niobium alloy; and development of the maser (molecular amplification of stimulated emission of radiation).
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $12 million worth of contracts for tracking-network modification in preparation for lengthy manned space flights. Contracts were awarded to: Canogo Electronics Corp., for tracking antenna acquisition aid systems; Radiation, Inc., for digital command encoders; Collins Radio Corp., for RF command systems; and Electro Mechanical Research Corp., for pcm systems.
nasa announced that friendship 7, the Mercury capsule in which Astronaut John Glenn orbited the earth three times, would be lent to usia for a world tour, with some 20 stops on the itinerary and touching all continents. In mid-August the capsule would be displayed at the Century 21 Exhibition in Seattle, Washington, before being presented to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for permanent exhibition.
North American Aviation expected to pass its peak World War II employment figure of 93,000 persons within the next 90 days, its current corporate employment now being at 90,000. Rocket-dyne Division has grown from 11,000 to 13,000 employees within the past year.
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Project Div. of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1962 Hermann Oberth Award of the Alabama section, American Rocket Society.
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus successfully intercepted icbm target in first test involving decoys, dod announced. Atlas icbm with its decoys was launched from Vandenberg afb toward Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, from which two Nike-Zeus were launched; one of the antimissile missiles had to be destroyed after launching, but the other successfully completed the mission.
Preliminary results of solar-wind experiments by mariner ii were reported by Dr. Conway W. Snyder of jpl at American Geophysical Union meeting. Experiment measured velocity, density, and temperature of solar plasma using electrostatic analyzer onboard the probe. Results showed energies of gas atoms in solar wind are very low as compared to cosmic-ray particles, but number of solar-wind particles is about a billion times greater than number of cosmic rays, making total energy content of solar wind much greater than of cosmic rays. Solar flares eject plasma clouds which may have higher velocity, density, and temperature than undisturbed solar wind—which mariner ii found to be little less than 250 mi. per sec. velocity, 10-20 particles per cu. in. density, and few hundred thousand deg. temperature, mariner ii also found solar wind appears to be “supersonic”—and supersonic effects such as plasma shockwave ahead of the earth and other planets would be objects of study of future nasa space vehicles.
National Council of the Federation of American Scientists adopted a policy statement that space activities should be classified only when there are compelling military reasons.
In speech to the National Rocket Club, Senator Barry Goldwater said: “I am convinced that the American people fully endorse space preeminence for the United States. This is our long-range goal as a nation. . . . Space superiority in all its scientific, technological, and military aspects is fundamental to the future well-being, security, and prosperity of the United States . . . “As a new agency, nasa has picked up a momentum, a direction and a purposefulness directed toward long-range research and development which is one of impressive merit . . . “From all I can observe, the relationship between nasa and the Air Force in the space program has proceeded fairly well to date. But I would point out that the Department of Defense is responsible for military affairs, not nasa. nasa is not a military service, and its broad-based program will undoubtedly contribute greatly to our own national military requirements. . . . The point I am trying to make is that the requirements of the United States for military programs in space should not be neglected in any vital aspect . . .”
Cosmonaut Titov wrote in Pravda on his arrival in Moscow: “I returned home, heaved in a breathful of clear spring air, and told the comrades welcoming me: Despite all the comforts of America, there is no land on earth better than our dear, wonderful Soviet homeland.” He indicated that American astronauts Alan Shepard and John Glenn have been invited to visit the Soviet Union.
nasa announced award of facilities grants to five universities, first such grants awarded by nasa. Worth a total of $6,410,000, the grants were to provide research facilities for activities in space-related sciences and technology to universities making “substantial contributions” to the U.S. space program: University of California, Berkeley; University of Chicago; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; State University of Iowa; and Stanford University.
American Rocket Society gave Congressman George Miller of House Committee for Science and Astronautics a special award for his “outstanding leadership in space.”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would conduct experiments using laser in tracking S-66 ionosphere beacon satellite, to be launched in polar orbit early next year. Laser (light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation) would be tested as “potentially vastly more accurate than current tracking methods and requiring no electrical power from the satellite.” Laser device, emitting beam ){6 of a degree wide, would be mounted on tracking telescope at nasa Wallops Station. Laser signals to satellite would be received on passive reflector and bounced back to earth.
Jacqueline Auriol set a new women’s international air speed record for 100 kilometers (62.10 miles) at Istres, France, flying a French-built Mirage III jet at 1,149.23 mph. Previous record, held by American aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, was 783.02 mph.
Rep. Charles S. Gubser (Calif.) announced nasa and usn had agreed to convert an old dirigible hangar at Moffett Field, Calif., for production of Rift nuclear vehicle stage. Hangar was located about two mi. from prime Rift contractor, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., and adjacent to nasa Ames Research Center.
In nasa press conference in New York City, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of the Lewis Research Center, outlined factors in nasa’s nation-wide recruitment of 2,000 scientists, engineers, and technicians: (1) nasa had already interviewed 4,000 candidates in other cities and hoped to screen another 1,000 in New York; (2) salaries in industry tended to be higher than in Federal employment but nasa offered better postgraduate experience as well as opportunity to acquire national or international reputation; (3) nasa’s manpower drain on the annual pool of 40-45,000 engineering graduates was small; and (4) the new specialists trained in the space program during the next decade would be an effective argument for much of the cost of the entire space effort.
dod announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted Atlas icbm over the Pacific Ocean. Target Atlas was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., and two Nike-Zeus missiles were fired from Kwajalein Island, the first Nike-Zeus making the successful intercept. This was second successful intercept-test by Army’s Nike-Zeus.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the National Conference of the American Society for Public Administration in Detroit, said: “No new department or agency in the recent history of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government was created through the transfer of as many units from other departments and agencies as in the case of nasa. Three and one half years ago, nasa did not exist. Today nasa comprises approximately 20,500 employees, ten major field centers, and an annual budget approaching the $2 billion mark.”
Two tandem 600-ft.-tall research balloons launched from Palestine, Texas, with dummy payload of 6,300 lb., a development test for February 1963 launch of 36-in. telescope with germanium eye to obtain undistorted look at the Martian atmosphere. Scientists from Princeton University, Univ. of California, Vitro Corp., and Schjeldahl Corp. conducted test flight.
In address before joint American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies conference at Brighton, England, John J. McCloy urged Western Europe to forego its aspirations to become a third space power and to cooperate with the U.S. in the exploration of space. Mr. McCloy, chairman of the General Advisory Committee to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, appealed to the 70 delegates that once the leaders of the Soviet Union “sensed a united position on the part of the West, they are prepared to moderate their views accordingly.” When dealing with the Soviet Union on space issues, McCloy stated: “Questions of international prestige quickly emerge and we are still plagued with the almost frenetic antipathy of the Soviet Union to inspection.”
Addressing American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. Loren K. Eiseley, anthropology prof, at Univ. of Pennsylvania, said that space defense efforts are “consuming an enormous amount of our wealth and energy. . . . Let a few generations go by, and so much of society’s wealth and employment will be wrapped up in this sort of thing that you will get-—as we are beginning to get now—a vested interest in war. . . . [The space/defense effort is] a kind of gigantic tumor. When these emerge, you not alone run the danger of weakening society, but also encounter the fact that these tumors grow and become monstrous; to reduce them to normal size becomes difficult if not impossible. . . .” Dr. Eiseley predicted the massive emphasis on space and armaments might lead to downfall of modern civilization; he compared the preoccupation with space and armaments to Imperial Rome’s colonialism, Ancient Egypt’s tomb and pyramid building, and India’s elaborate caste system which contributed to downfall of those ancient civilizations.
usaf Minuteman icbm fired in combat-ready test from Vandenberg afb, Calif., range safety officer destroying missile shortly after launch.
Mercury capsule installed on top of Atlas booster preparatory for MA-6 manned flight; it was also reported from Cape Canaveral that first American orbital manned flight was now unofficially scheduled for January 23.
nasa announced U.S. and Swedish experimenters were studying samplings of noctilucent clouds obtained in four Nike-Cajun sounding rocket flights during August. Preliminary analysis indicated that samples taken when noctilucent clouds were observed contained significantly more particles than when no noctilucent clouds were visible. Analysis of origin and structure of the particles may take up to a year. Participants in the project include scientists from University of Stockholm Institute of Meterology, Kiruna (Sweden) Geophysical Observatory, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories.
In speech before the Aviation and Space Writers Association meeting in San Francisco, Dr. Harry Goett, Director of gsfc, reviewed the events in the life of scientific satellites after they are placed into orbit. Once in orbit, he said, a scientific satellite “does not have striking news value. . . . “Except for manned space projects there is no single personality on whom the spotlight can be concentrated; the job of putting together the cosmic jigsaw puzzle of space from the bits and pieces obtained from our satellites is one that engages the effort of many people throughout the scientific community; and this jigsaw puzzle goes together so gradually that there are no singular events which merit a headline. I suspect that there are Nobel prizes in the making, but it is going to be difficult to determine who should get the medal.” Dr. Goett, reviewing the scientific accomplishments in space, said that the general public needs to understand this part of the space effort “on the basis of its real accomplishments and potentialities.” He said that this was a real challenge to the space writers.
usaf Atlas F icbm was destroyed by tne range safety officer a few seconds after launch from Vandenberg afb.
usaf 564th Strategic Missile Squadron of sac successfully launched an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, said that in addition to nasa’s international program for space science and the European organizations for cooperative space research, “some South American groups are considering the possibility of cooperative sounding rocket endeavors.”
Preliminary results of particle-flux-detectors onboard mariner ii were reported by Dr. L. A. Frank and Dr. H. R. Anderson at American Geophysical Union meeting, Stanford Univ. The instruments showed absence of particles near Venus, indicating the planet’s magnetic field does not extend out as far as trajectory of mariner ii; this observation was confirmed by onboard magnetometer. Cosmic-ray measurements during the probe’s interplanetary flight indicated cosmic-ray flux was a constant measurement throughout the flight (approximately 3.0 particles per sq. centimeter per sec.). High-energy solar particles were generally absent except for a single solar-flare event beginning Oct. 23; low-energy solar-particle counter detected this event and at least eight others. Total radiation dose recorded in Oct. 23 event was only about 0.24 roentgens inside ionization chamber’s 0.01-in.-thick steel wall, and radiation was very non-penetrating.
Launch of usaf Titan I on 5,000-mile flight down pmr marked the 100th missile fired from Vandenberg afb, Calif., launchings which included 21 Thor irbm’s, 32 Atlas icbm’s, five Titan icbm’s, and 42 satellites.
Ten Air Force pilots emerged from simulated space cabin in which they had spent the last month, participating m psychological test to determine how long a team of astronauts could work efficiently on a prolonged mission in space. Project director Earl Alluisi said the experiment had “far exceeded our expectations.”
Thor-Agena D booster launched usaf satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. announced it had awarded grants totaling $1,693,300 to 161 American universities and colleges to strengthen the teaching of science and related subjects, to promote fundamental research, and to aid facilities for education or research in science and engineering.
Radiation research results reported by George M. Woodwell of Brookhaven National Laboratory to American Association for the Advancement of Science showed that plants, like animals, vary in sensitivity to radiation. Large plants that reproduce slowly, such as trees, appear more susceptible to radiation than less complex plants, such as algae and fungi. “. . . The hypothesis seems tenable that small organisms with wide ecological ampll-tudes and high rates of reproduction—in short, weeds and other organisms frequently considered pestiferous because of their persistence under persecution—have survival advantage under conditions of long-term exposure to ionizing radiation over large organisms with longer life cycles.”
usaf launched unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena B booster.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb.
usaf launched unidentified satellite (Alpha Theta) from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena booster.
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
explorer xiv had transmitted 589 hours of data to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, which had released about 240 hours of data to the various experimenters.
sac combat missile crew launched successful Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California.
Reported that hundreds of Soviet mathematics textbooks are being published in English, and that many of them are being used in American universities.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking before the American Management Association in New York, said: “We believe that the soundness of our present engineering program can be illustrated by the correlation between predicted events and time of occurrence in John Glenn’s recent flight. Indeed, the time from lift-off to impact in this mission was within one second of the pre-flight calculations.”
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that the U.S.S. Skate and U.S.S. Seadragon, nuclear-powered submarines based in different oceans, had made underwater rendezvous beneath the ice at the North Pole. In answer to questions on the present and future significance of the flights of vostok iii and iv, President Kennedy said: “Well, we are second to the Soviet Union in long-range boosters. I have said from the beginning—we started late; we’ve been behind. It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also of the much larger size which we're presently engaged in in the Saturn Program. “So we are behind. We’re going to be behind for a while. But I believe that before the end of this decade is out, that the United States will be ahead. But it’s costing us a tremendous amount of money. We’re putting a tremendous effort in research and development; but we just might as well realize that when we started—we started late. “Last year, as you know, we made a decision to go to the moon, with bipartisan support, and it’s going to take us quite a while to catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are directing . . . thereV no indication the Soviets are going to quit .... “But we’re in for some further periods when we’re going to be behind. And anybody who attempts to suggest that we’re not behind misleads the American people—we’re well behind—-but we are making a tremendous effort. “We increased, after I took office, after four months, we increased the budget for space by 50 per cent over that of my predecessor. The fact of the matter is that this year we submitted a space budget which was greater than the combined eight space budgets of the previous eight years .... “. . . we are spending for military purposes in space three times what we were in 1960—about $1,500,000,000. The two, at least at present, the two important points that should be kept in mind are the ability to build a large booster which can put a large satellite into atmosphere. That is being done, nasa is doing that, though there has been, of course, under Titan III contract, a booster program for the military. “In addition, the guidance, navigation, etc., that’s extremely important. That we are making a major effort in. And so that I recognize that there are those who oppose this program and then suddenly a month later say we ought to suddenly go ahead on a different basis. “The fact of the matter is that 40 per cent of the R and D funds in this country are being spent for space. That’s a tremendous amount of money and a tremendous concentration of our scientific effort. “I’m not saying that we can’t always do better. But I think the American people ought to understand it’s billions of dollars we’re talking about which I believe a month ago a prominent— mentioned as a great boondoggle. “I think it’s important, vital and there is a great interrelationship between military and peaceful uses of space. But we’re concentrating on the peaceful use of space which wlli also help us protect our security if that becomes essential. . . .”
Astronomer Dr. Carl Sagan told American Rocket Society, meeting in Los Angeles, that there was a statistical likelihood that earth had been visited at least once by intelligent beings from other worlds. In interview, he suggested that successful planetary civilizations endure for perhaps a hundred mlliion years and that, as the societies advance, they reach farther from their respective planets into space. He predicted man would begin interstellar travel in about 100 years—in star ships, powered by hydrogen-fusion ramjet engines and built in space.
In testimony before closed session of the House Appropriations Committee, Prof. James A. Van Allen stated that man-in-space programs were not necessary for scientific space exploration. “For the same investment of effort we learn much more without the man. ... A monkey made the first orbital trip and he made out alright.” In testifying on behalf of the National Science Foundation appropriation, Van Allen said that the U.S. should not rush into a cooperative space program with Russia; failures would worsen relations since Russia has more to gain from such a program. The U.S., he said, had surpassed Russia “in nearly all areas of purely scientific investigation of outer space” but some American scientists have “an uneasy, creeping feeling that Russia is about to launch a manned flight around the moon.” Testimony was released on May 14.
First International Symposium on Rocket and Satellite Meteorology opened in Washington, D.C. Attended bv some 500 delegates from more than 20 nations, the conference was sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization, the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, and the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions. It was hoped that the symposium would lead to an international sounding rocket program during the International Year of the Quiet Sun in 1964-65.
Full-size test boilerplate command module of Project Apollo spacecraft was delivered by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Div. to Northrop Corp’s Ventura Div., which would equip spacecraft with earth-landing system in preparation for drop tests early next year.
nasa announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded three three-month study contracts for design of an Advanced Oso (orbiting solar observatory) satellite, to be launched into polar orbit during 1965. Advanced Oso wollid aid development of method of predicting solar flares. Contractors were Republic Aviation Corp., Space Technology Laboratories, and Ball Brothers Research Corp.
Spokesman for American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (at&t) said telstar communications satellite was still operating despite almost three months of intense radiation exposure.
Four American scientists led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, research scientist at Lamont Geological Observatory of Columbia University, left New York on three-month expedition to Argentina, where they hoped to find and unearth a 13)£-ton meteorite. Supported by National Science Foundation grant, the expedition would seek the huge meteorite which was reported in late 1700’s by Indians of north central Argentina.
First anniversary of the dedication of the Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa. During that year, seven Goddard satellites were orbited, the Center successfully operated the new 18-station world tracking network for the Glenn flight, began expansion of the 13-station scientific satellite tracking and data network, saw some 70 of its sounding rocket payloads launched from Wallops Station, established the Institute for Space Studies in New York, and added three buildings and 700 persons to the Goddard staff.
Separation of the disciplines of geology and geophysics in U.S. universities is “nothing short of an intellectual outrage,” Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner told the American Geophysical Union in Washington when that organization presented him with its first John Adams Fleming Award. Only three American universities were moving toward broad programs in geophysical study, he said. He urged the nas and universities to work toward programs that would recognize that geology and geophysics are now “intimately intertwined.”
usaf Atlas F icbm was launched from a silo at Vandenberg afb in successful 5,000-mi. flight to vicinity of the Marshall Islands in the Pacific, the first Atlas F launch from an underground silo.
John Dykstra, president of Ford Motor Co., told American Ordnance Association meeting that a great potential defense capability lay untapped in industry—particularly in heavy, mass-producing manufacturing. Asserting that the problem of developing and maintaining broad defense and space capability throughout industry had not been adequately realized or defined, Dykstra suggested reorganizing U.S. productive resources and putting “much more of our heavy manufacturing industry in a state of preparedness to switch readily from peacetime to wartime production. Such preparedness would mean, at a minimum, that heavy industry would be kept current in matters of defense technology in areas of natural interest to it. Such preparedness could also involve a broader distribution of space and defense research and development effort, as well as of production, on a systematic basis. . . . “Whatever form an Industrial National Guard might take, I believe the concept is essential. In view of the enormous demands now being made on all our resources of brainpower, we cannot afford to make less than the best possible economic and efficient use of them. ...”
faa released memorandum dated December 29, 1961, stating that Stanford Research Institute’s radiotelescope was a hazard to air navigation. The first of three such telescopes to be built in the U.S. by sri extends 90 feet too high for Moffett Field air traffic and 128 feet too high for Palo Alto Airport traffic.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
During Fiscal Year 1962, ending this date, North American Aviation, Inc., received highest dollar-value contracts from nasa— $199.1 million worth of contract awards. Other top contractors were McDonnell Aircraft Corp., with $68.4 mlliion; Douglas Aircraft Co., $68.3 million; and Aerojet-General Corp., $66.3 million. During June: fa a proposed a regulation to restrict firings of the 5,000	amateur rocket clubs in the U.S. Beyond firing safety precautions, faa is con 1	''	' 1	' '	^	‘ " altitude of over five miles.
Space science might provide an answer within five years to the question of whether gravitation is growing weaker with time, Dr. Robert H. Dicke, Professor of Physics at Princeton University’s Palmer Physical Laboratory, said in a lecture for the Voice of America. This new theory of gravitation, not in accord with Einstein’s theory of gravitation, could be tested with a satellite that was instrumented to act as a “gravitational clock” and checked against an atomic clock.
usaf launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., a satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster combination, nasa Satellite Situation Report indicated this satellite attained orbit and decayed on July 7, 1962.	'
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Michael E.	Lipschutz discovered diamonds in meteorite that fell in India 90 years ago, the findings published in Science. Dr. Lipschutz, an astrochemist, is first lieutenant in U.S. Army on active duty with nasa. His research was made with minute portion of the Dvalpur meteorite, which fell to earth May 8, 1872. Dr. Lip-scnutz observed two sizes of diamond crystallites in the meteorite—a few large crystals and many small ciystals. He concluded that diamonds in Dyalpur meteorite were formed by shock when meteorite’s parent body collided with another body in space. December 17: Although relay power supply remained low, Nutlev, N.J., ground station was able to obtain about 10 min. of usable telemetry data from the nasa satellite. Engineers were conducting intensive analysis of telemetry data in effort to diagnose cause of relay’s low battery voltage.
Two-week meeting of Study Group IV of the International Radio Consultative Committee (ccir) of the International Telecommunication Union (itu) concluded in Washington, D.C. Study Group IV reviewed technical phases of space communications, including the selection of frequencies for telecommunications with and between space vehicles. Over 200 representatives from 30 countries participated in these sessions, Dr. John P. Hagen serving as head of the U.S. delegation.
nasa selected American Telephone and Telegraph Co. as contractor for system engineering support for the manned space flight program. It was estimated that some 200 specialists would be available under the contract for quick fact-finding in regard to critical decisions on the complex program.
explorer x detected a “shadow” on the side of the earth facing away from the sun; in this shadow there is an absence of the solar “wind”, a belt of plasma moving out from the sun at about 200 miles per second but deflected around the earth by the earth’s magnetic field and creating a cone-shaped “shadow” some 100,000 miles across at its larger end. The explorer x findings were reported to the annual meeting of the American Physical Society in New York by Dr. Bruno Rossi of mit.
The seven Mercury astronauts were presented with Distinguished Service Awards from the Lower Virginia Peninsula in ceremonies at the Manned Spacecraft Center Hq. at Langley afb, Va. June 2; usaf announced that oscar ii satellite had been launched piggyback on an unidentified satellite on June 1, on behalf of the American Radio Relay League. With a 92-minute period, the 10-lb. satellite broadcasts “Hi” in Morse code on 144.993 megacycles for use by amateur radio operators. Unlike oscar i launched on December 10, 1961, advance notice was not given the Project Oscar Association on the launching of oscar ii.
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with Thor-Agena launching alouette satellite on Sept. 29, measured low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided “. . . data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most important in designing future experiments and structures for the Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built, tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in only 20 days.
usaf announced launching of unnamed satellite employing a Thor-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Spokesman said that the comsat corporation created by an act of the Congress would be named the Space Communications Corporation by decision of the board of incorporators. The board also decided to lease Tregaron, estate of Mrs. Herbert May and her former husband, the late Joseph E. Davies, as temporary headquarters in Washington, D.C.
Dr. Sheldon J. Korchin of National Institutes of Health and Dr. George Ruff of Univ. of Pennsylvania reported at aaas conference that American astronauts are typically Protestants, natives of small towns, members of middle or upper-middle class families, and have average IQ of 135. Summing up results of testing astronauts, two psychiatrists concluded astronauts have normal anxieties but above normal ability to control them. Average astronaut prefers outdoor sports to indoor; is oriented to action rather than thought; prefers facts to speculation; has abiding belief in his own competence and wlliingness to strive for perfection.
Samuel K. Hoffman, President of Rocketdyne Division, naa, received the Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers for his “contributions to aviation, aerospace and rocket industries through the development of the first major long-range rocket engine.”
Dr. Freeman H. Quimby, Chief of Exobiology Programs in nasa Office of Space Sciences, announed U.S. plans to land life-detecting devices on Mars in 1966. “Perhaps Mars is sterile. But we’re working on the postulate there may be some forms of life,” Dr. Quimby told the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Philadelphia.
Announced that American Cable & Radio Corp., subsidiary of it&t, would conduct the first experiments in sending teletype messages between the U.S. and Great Britain via telstar communications satellite. Tests would be made between August 20 and September 7, in cooperation with at&t and British Post Office Department.
usaf awarded contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for development of RS-70 prototypes, including fabrication of three aircraft.
Astronauts John Glenn and Scott Carpenter, and George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, testified before House Subcommittee on qualifications for astronauts. Low testified that qualifications would be raised rather than lowered for Project Apollo, that the sex of pilots had never been a requirement, but that if any resources were diverted for a woman in space effort “we would have to slow down on our national goal of landing a man on the moon in this decade.” Astronaut Glenn said on women astronauts: “I couldn’t care less who’s over there [in the next seat] as long as it’s the most qualified person. . . . I wouldn’t oppose a women’s astronaut training program; I just see no requirement for it.” nasa had not found one woman to date who met all astronaut requirements: American citizenship; excellent physical condition; degree in physical or biological sciences or engineering; and experimental jet flight-test experience.
Aerospace Research Pilot School began a seven-month course to train seven Air Force and one Navy officers for future space missions and projects. This was the second space-training course given at Edwards afb, Calif., but the first for potential “operational” personnel.
Israel Finance Minister, Levi Eshkol, speaking in Washington, D.C., said that the “missile race has entered the Middle East” and Israel must be prepared to defend itself “no matter what the cost.” He said: “When Colonel Nasser stands by Egyptian rocket launchers and boasts they are trained in our direction, we dare not mistake this for an idle propaganda boast.”
Army launched Nike-Zeus missile in what was described as a successful intercept of a simulated icbm nose cone. Apriif!: nasa sponsored a day-long technical symposium in Washington on results of the MA-6 three-orbit space flight. Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and officials of Project Mercury reviewed the findings of the Feb. 20 flight and stressed the conclusion that the presence of the astronaut had been indispensable to successful completion of the three-orbit mission. On the Glenn effect—the firefly-like particles Glenn reported seeing outside Ms capsule during each of the three sunrises—Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief, Theoretical Division, Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that study had shown them to be flakes of paint from the spacecraft.
dod announced reassignment of responsibilities for the dod Communications Satellite Program. The Air Force was assigned responsibility for the development, production, and launch of all space devices, consistent with the general policy for the development of military space systems announced in March 1961. The Army was assigned responsibility for the development and operation of the ground environment except for that portion of the ground environment associated with launch and control of satellites themselves. Defense Communications Agency (dca) was assigned task of integrating ground and space components. First effect was the transfer to the Air Force of overall systems management of Project Advent, a responsibility of the Army since September 1960 when it was transferred from arpa.
“American Roulette 500 Miles Up” was the title of the article by Sir Bernard Lovell in the Sunday Observer (London"), which repeated his arguments against the planned nuclear explosions by the U.S. over Johnston Island in June and July.
Dr. Harry Wexler, meteorological research director of U.S. Weather Bureau since 1955, died unexpectedly. Holder of distinguished service citations from the Air Force, Navy, Commerce Department, and National Civil Service League, Dr. Wexler had been with the Weather Bureau since 1934. With Col. Floyd Wood as pilot, he made the first aircraft penetration of an Atlantic hurricane, in September 1944. In June 1961, Dr. Wexler and Prof. Viktor A. Bugaev of the U.S.S.R. were principal figures in drafting plans for cooperative use of satellites to improve weather forecasting.
In speech at Lubbock, Texas, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said that Armed Forces Day 1962 has a special meaning: “It means John Glenn and our rising capabllities in space. It means our desire to share space for peaceful purposes with the rest of the world. And it underscores our determination to see to it that no nation is disfranchised in space . . . “The primary purpose of our arms has always been peace, not war . . . “Space is the new measure of our problems as well as our opportunities. The principal responsibilities for the nation’s space program are vested in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Air Force. We work together as a team, not rivals. And together we are doing the spadework for the space technology of tomorrow. “Today, space is still free and open. It must stay that way. We can not allow it to be pre-empted tomorrow for use as a military staging area by those who hope to dominate the world. “I believe with President Kennedy that space is a great opportunity as well as a great task. ...”	_
Announced that 1962 Daniel Guggenheim Medal for achievement in aviation would be awarded posthumously to James H. Kindle-berger, late board chairman of North American Aviation, Inc.
nasa and Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Eglin Gulf Test Range, Fla. Intended to measure winds by sodium vapor method, rocket rose to 117-mi. altitude and emitted a fair vapor trail.
usaf sac crew launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in routine training exercise.
In an address before the American Management Association Forum in New York, Maj. Gen. Robert J. Friedman, afsc Comptroller, spoke on “Management of the Decision-Making Process.” He pointed out that the Air Force Systems Command was an organization of 60,000 employees with an annual budget of seven billion dollars to administer, afsc has, he said, over 33,000 active contracts involving companies of all sizes and in all states. Gen. Friedman discussed the “boundaries” within which afsc must manage its decision-making processes: (1) actions of the military competitors of the U.S.; (2) the constraints of limited funds; (3) the number of alternative courses available in the solution of technical, strategic, and tactical military problems; (4) limitations of time; and (5) the availability of information and competence at various organizational levels within one jurisdiction.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
Air Force announced the award of a contract to Pan American World Airways for operation and logistic support of a Rocket Range Test Facility at Fort Churchill, Canada. Operated by the U.S. Army for the past five years, the Fort Churchill Test Range wlli transfer to usaf operational contract on July 1 of this year and will be managed by the Office of Aerospace Research. The facllity was originally established as a joint Canadian-U.S. project to support the International Geophysical Year.
nasa announced signing of detailed contract with Space and Information Division of North American Aviation, Inc., for development and production of Saturn S-II stage. The $319,922,328 contract, largest single contract ever awarded by nasa, covered production of nine live flight stages, one inert flight stage, and several ground-test units for the Advanced Saturn vehicle.
usaf launched Thor-Agena from Vandenberg afb, with unidentified satellite to be placed in polar orbit.
Speaking at meeting of American Institute of Biological Sciences in Corvallis, Ore., James C. Finn, Jr., of North American Aviation, predicted a permanent moon base would be established before 1990. He said the base would be dug at least 40 ft. underground to protect crew from bombardment by meteors and radiation and from temperature extremes between day and night.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
usaf revealed that three “plastinauts,” plastic dummies of human astronauts, were undergoing tests at Kirtland afb preparatory to being sent into space. Plastinauts in space would be used to determine radiation hazards to astronauts. During early October: J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine successfully completed its first full-duration static firing (more than four minutes) at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. J-2 engines will be clustered to power S-II stage of Advanced Saturn vehicle.
Studies conducted by American Airlines revealed that 78% of Americans have never traveled on commercial airliner, while 8 million use the airlines regularly (15% of these accounting for 64% of commercial air passengers).
norad announced Soviet manned spacecraft vostok iii and iv crossed the North American continent 70 times during their double orbital trips August 11-14. norad space detection and tracking system tracked the flights for 112 earth orbits.
Soviet News Agency Tass announced that the U.S.S.R. was again resuming nuclear tests in the atmosphere, quoting an official Soviet Government statement, in part: “The explosions of the American nuclear bombs above Christmas and Johnston Islands have produced their echo—they have made Soviet nuclear tests in reply inevitable.”
afsc formed the Research and Technology Division, Provisional, to “plan and manage afsc’s basic research, applied research, and advanced technology and . . . create a broad base of research and technology for rapid use in the development of Air Force aerospace systems.”
Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke to the American Astronautical Society on the broad benefits derived from the space program. He said: “Space exploration is of such immense importance to man’s total knowledge that it wlli benefit and alter the course of his existence in ways no more foreseeable today than those which resulted from the invention of the wheel. . . . One of the major benefits being gleaned from this vast effort to conquer space is the stimulus which it is providing for scientific research in new and uncharted areas. . . .”
nasa confirmed Rift nuclear rocket stage would be manufactured in renovated dirigible hangar at Moffett Field nas, Calif. To be used to flight-test nasa-aec Nerva engine, Rift was being developed under technical direction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. as prime contractor. Rift would be flight-tested in 1967-68 as top stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5) launch vehicle.
Cosmonaut Gherman Titov arrived in New York City for 8-day visit to the U.S. in conjunction with cospar sessions in Washington.	_ _
Lt. Col. Joseph A. Connor, Jr. (usaf) of nasa Office of Manned Space Flight received Air Force Legion of Merit for establishing and directing nuclear safety board for transit iv-a satellite. Lt. Col. Connor’s work on the project was done more than a year ago when he was assigned to the aec.
nasa awards of less than $1,000 for inventions were made to the following nasa employees: D. H. Buckley, R. L. Johnson, Earl W. Conrad, R. J. Weber, F. D. Kochendorfer, John C. Nettles, Glen E. McDonald, Gerald Morrell, L. A. Baldwin, V.	A. Sandborn, C. J. Blaze, C. G. Richter, and Marcus F. Heid-mann of Lewis Research Center; and David H. Schaefer of Goddard Space Flight Center.
Tropical storm developed 420 mi. east of Puerto Rico, traveling on path that would cross impact area for Astronaut Schirra’s third orbit, nasa flight officials were closely watching the storm to determine whether it would necessitate postponing Schirra’s MA-8 flight scheduled for Oct. 3. During September: Conclusion that wheel-shaped space station was technically feasible and identification of problems that still exist were revealed in nasa Technical Note D-1504, compilation of 11 papers by nasa Langley Research Center staff. Selection of this 150-ft.-diameter, 171,000-lb. structure was result of studies by Langley for more than 2 years and detailed analyses by North American Aviation, Inc., for past 6 months. The report indicated the space station primarily would provide a means of learning to live in space, where zero-gravity and variable-gravity experiments could be performed, closed life-support systems could be qualified, and rendezvous techniques and systems developed. Chosen model could support up to 38-man crew.
United Aerospace Workers and the International Association of Machinists served a notice of intention to strike on July 23 “unless an honorable settlement is reached by that time” against five major space companies—Lockheed, North American, Douglas, General Dynamics, and Aerojet. Fifty-one plants, test sites, and missile bases would be affected by walkout of 125,000	union members.
Specific use of the fuel cell as source of auxiliary power was confirmed when North American Aviation, Inc., prime contractor for nasa’s Apollo vehicle, awarded two fuel-cell development contracts to Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and Tapco Div. of Thompson Ramo Wooldridge.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing National Rocket Club, asserted: “Developing the right kind of space program is a continuing job in the Department of Defense. . . . The difficulties encountered do not relate to problems of principle. The problems are questions of specifics. There are tough decisions of choice to be made. We have to weigh effects on other activities, make careful estimates as to time, determine rates and select the projects to be pursued. . . . The current rate of investment in space by the Department of Defense reflects our best judgment as to which projects are dictated by specific requirements and those which should be carried on for general development purposes. ... As projects become more precisely defined and funding and time estimates can be firmed, and as requirements become clearer and more specific, then efforts are focused on those most pressing and most promising. . . .”
United Auto Workers and International Association of Machinists unions in Los Angeles announced they had set September 22 as strike date against 4 aerospace companies—North American Aviation, Inc., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and Ryan Aircraft Co. President Kennedy warned that such a strike, involving nearly 100,000 workers, “would seriously set us back in space exploration and would imperil the Nation’s defense.”
usaf Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., launching conducted by 12-man combat crew of sac’s 565th Strategic Missile Squadron from Warren afb, Wyo.
A Blue Scout booster combination space probe was launched from Point Arguello, Calif., by the Air Force. No details were released.
Scientists at Hughes Aircraft Co. displayed Surveyor lunar probe at American Rocket Society, the probe containing redesigned payload weighing about 114 lbs. as compared to originally designed payload weighing 220 lbs. Payload of instruments would be placed on the moon in late 1964. Dr. Leo Stoolman, Surveyor project chief for Hughes, said reasons for redesigning Surveyor instrument package were difficulty in Centaur launch vehicle program and decision to include only instruments that would directly assist U.S. manned lunar landing program.
American Newspaper Publishers Association meeting in New York, set up a scientific advisory committee to make a year’s study of possible application to newspapers of space technology, nuclear energy, computer technology, and other developments. Members appointed were: Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, Dean of U. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, chairman; Trevor Gardner, President of Hycon Manufacturing Co.; and Dr. John R. Pierce of Bell Telephone Lab.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, addressed National Advanced Technology Management Council in Seattle on the U.S. lunar program. “Although we are still in a very early phase of the greatest engineering project that man has ever undertaken, the Nation has made four crucial management decisions which clear the way for action. First, the goal has been identified. We are to land American explorers on the moon. Second, the timetable has been laid down. We are to carry out the mission and return the U.S. explorers safely to earth within this decade. Third, we have settled on the organization to meet the national goal on schedule. Finally, we have selected the method which we believe can accomplish the lunar expedition on the shortest possible time schedule, with the greatest assurance of success, and at the least expense. You do not need to be a specialist in management to realize that decisions such as these are central to the success of any job—what to do, when to do it, who is to be in charge, and how it is to be done. In the United States space program, these fundamental decisions have been made. And we have proceeded with the work to carry them out at the swiftest pace consonant with other processing needs of the country and with the resources available .... “The achievement which stands out [in the manned lunar landing program] . . ., in my opinion, has been the launching by the people of the United States of a truly national effort to demonstrate our determination and our capacity to sail on the new ocean of space and to master the technology of the space age in all its aspects—for the security of the Free World and the good of all mankind. “The lunar landing is no stunt. The most important accomplishment will be the development by this Nation of the ability to make the landing, and not the landing itself. Achievement of such ability is worth the great investment in brains and industrial capacity and technological advance that we are making. The lunar landing is a yardstick—a measure of this country’s technological leadership, a measure of the ability of this democracy to ‘manage,’ if you will, a great engineering and technological undertaking in the national interest.”
usaf launched an unidentified satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, writing in the General Electric Forum, said that there were unique military problems in space that a civilian space program never could solve. “The Air Force wlli make orbital flights much sooner than previously planned,” he wrote.
Pioneer naval aviator, Vice Admiral Patrick N. L. Bellinger, died. In 1915, Bellinger became the second American flier to be launched by catapult, established flying boat distance record, established altitude record of 10,000 feet, and participated in aerial spotting for artillery fire. In 1916, he made naval tests of live bombing and practical tests of air-to-ground radio communication. In 1917, he made machine-gun firing tests from seaplane and first night seaplane flights using floodlights. In May 1919, he commanded the NC-1 in transatlantic flight to the Azores, damage to aircraft ended the flight there. During World War II, he was commander of the Atlantic Fleet Air Force.
United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., voted to defeat union shop proposal, iam workers at General Dynamics/Convair and uaw workers at Ryan Aeronautical Co. would also vote on the proposal.
Langley Gold Medal of the Smithsonian Institution was awarded to Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa’s Deputy Administrator, at the annual meeting of the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. Cited for his “important applications of experimental science to the problems of flight and for his wise and courageous administration of much of America’s research and technical developments that now make possible the conquest of air and space,” Dr. Dryden was the tenth recipient of the 54-year-old award.
U.S. patent (No. 3,008,154) was granted to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin for a rocket to be used in detecting strength and polarity of electric fields in clouds. Such data could then be used in control of cloud movements and in effecting weather changes. Patent was first applied for in 1948 but until now was kept secret at request of dod. Dr. Zworykin is a consultant to the Princeton Laboratories of rca and honorary vice president of rca.
usaf Atlas-E icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, the first such launch from this base.
Atlas icbm launched by usaf squadron from Vandenberg afb, two Polaris A-2 irbm’s successfully launched from submerged u.s.s. John Marshall off Cape Canaveral, and a usaf Minuteman exploded 50 seconds after launch from silo at Cape Canaveral.
President Kennedy made a statement to the press on the lawn of the White House, expressing the “great happiness and thanksgiving of all of us that Col. Glenn has completed his trip .... “I also want to say a word for all those who participated with Col. Glenn in Canaveral. They have faced many disappointments and delays—the burdens upon them were great—but they kept their heads and made a judgment and I think their judgment has been vindicated. “We have a long way to go in this space race. We started late. But this is the new ocean, and I believe the United States must sail on it and be in a position second to none. “Some months ago I said that I hoped every American would serve his country. Today Col. Glenn served his, and we all express our thanks to him.”
In remarks referring to the editorial in the nasa issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology, Representative George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, said that “the national space program continues to fire the imagination of the American people. The spectacular space achievements are but the top of the iceberg. Underneath is a rapidly growing base of solid scientific knowledge which will benefit the Nation in thousands of different ways. The agency spearheading the massive scientific effort is the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . .”
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using an Atlas-Agena launch vehicle.
In NAS-sponsored lecture on “Geomagnetism” for Voice of America broadcast, Dr. James P. Heppner of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said: “Each new space experiment adds to the list of unanswered questions about our electromagnetic environment.” He pointed to the changes in the scientific concepts of the boundary of the earth’s atmosphere and of relationships between the earth’s magnetic field and solar radiation that have resulted from data already acquired by satellites and probes. • Soviet officials indicated that newsmen may be allowed to cover the next Soviet space shot, a report later denied.
Unidentified usaf payload launched with Thor-Agena vehicle from Vandenberg afb.
usaf Minuteman icbm exploded within seconds after launch attempt from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster, the fourth unidentified satellite reported launched from Vandenberg afb in ten days.
At annual nasa awards ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb presented Group Achievement Awards: to four groups at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Assistant Directorate for Engineering and Development, Preflight Operations Division, Mercury Project Office, and Flight Operations Office; and to nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Directorate for Tracking and Data Systems, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to Robert E. Bourdeau and John C. Lindsay, both of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa Associate Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Outstanding Leadership Awards to Maxime A. Faget, Assistant Director for Engineering and Development, msc; George B. Graves, Jr., Assistant Director for Information and Control Systems, msc; George M. Low, Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, Office of Manned Space Flight; and John W. Townsend, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Science at GSFC.
Titan I icbm was successfully fired 4,000 mi. down the pmr in test of recently modified ground support equipment. This was sixth Titan I launch from Vandenberg afb.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists have agreed on a proposal to establish a “world weather watch” for improved collection, analysis, and dissemination of world weather information by means of conventional weather techniques and weather satellites. Dr. Harry Wexler, Director of Research, U.S. Weather Bureau, and Dr. Viktor A. Bugaev, Assistant Director of the Hydrometeorological Service, U.S.S.R., drafted the plan at the World Meteorological Organization headquarters in Geneva. Plan would call for expanded and improved weather observation by both conventional and satellite means, the establishment of world and regional weather centers to collect, analyze, and disseminate weather information, including participation by underdeveloped countries through pooling of their resources to develop regional weather forecasting centers. Soviet participation was indicated by Dr. Konstantin T. Logvinov, Deputy Director of U.S.S.R.’s Hydrometeorological Service. He indicated possibility of Soviet weather satellites, although he said U.S.S.R. was not as advanced as U.S. in this area—“We are just learning from American experience”—and establishment in U.S.S.R. of a ground station to receive cloud-cover photos from satellites. The proposed global weather plan was to be submitted to the WTorld Meteorological Organization May 22 and then to the U.N.
usaf Titan I icbm launched by military crew at Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Congressional Record reprinted monograph on “U.S. Space Legal Policy—Some Basic Principles,” by Robert D. Crane, director of the Space Research Institute at Duke University. Mr. Crane urged U.S. initiative in the formulation of space law, which “can serve not only to promote scientific research and economic progress and to facilitate the growth of a free and peaceful world order, but to implement on a higher moral level American military and political strategies ...”
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert announced signing of contract with United Technology Corp. for solid-propulsion rocket motors to be strapped to sides of Titan II rocket in Titan III configuration. He said contract with Martin-Marietta Corp. for airframe assembly and test of the rocket, as well as for structure of transitional upper stage, would be signed soon.
usaf launched an Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb, Calif., in a test flight down the Pacific Missile Range. A sac combat missile crew launched the Atlas from a horizontal, semi-hard “coffin” launcher.
First commercial transmission of live TV via satellite and first transatlantic TV transmission, when telstar experimental communications satellite of at&t demonstrated vast new capabilities. Pictures were telecast from at&t center near Andover, Me., to telstar, then received and placed on all three major TV networks in the U.S. TV signals also were relayed from Andover, Me., to telstar, and then relayed to French antenna at Pleu-meur-Bodou on the Brittany peninsula and the British station at Goonhilly, Cornwall. In American relay experiment via telstar, at*t Board Chairman Fred Kappel in Maine called Vice President Johnson in Washington. In the first successful transatlantic TV transmission, picture of waving American flag was transmitted via telstar to both France and Britain, while transmission was also picked up at both Andover and Holmedel, N.J., and relayed to American TV networks. First voice transmission from space was the Christmas message of President Eisenhower which was broadcast from usaf Project Score satellite on December 18, 1960. echo i, passive communications satellite, provided a reflector for a host of communication experiments after its launch on August 12, 1960. The moon also had been used as a reflector in communications experiments, the first being a radar reflection on January 11, 1946, by the Army Signal Corps.
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ariel (U.K.-U.S.) satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of transmitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.
nasa announced that two technical notes propose new concept on the mechanics of solar heating of the upper atmosphere. Dr. Isadore Harris (TN-D-1443) and Dr. Wolfgang Priester (TN-D-1444) of Goddard Space Flight Center proposed that corpuscular radiation (i.e., solar wind) in association with hydromagnetic waves may be the energy source required to explain the results obtained from orbiting satellites. Harris’ note provided for the first time a diurnal picture of the thermosphere (120 to 2,050 kilometers above the earth’s surface). Priester’s note postulated the physical properties scientists are likely to encounter during a complete 11-year solar cycle when upper atmospheric conditions change according to solar flare activity.
usaf announced the launching of an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, said in a speech at Mississippi State College: “The Materials Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base developed the basic material and structures used in ‘sandwich construction’ of aircraft; titanium alloy as a structural material; plastic, ceramics, and metallic alloys to withstand the high temperatures encountered during re-entry into the earth’s atmosphere.”
Two new sources of radiation in the Milky Way had been discovered by usaf Aerobee probe on June 18, physicist Riccardo Giacconi announced at Third International Symposium on X-Ray Optics and X-Ray Microanalysis, Stanford University. Giacconi said that knowledge of x-ray emissions was valuable because this kind of radiation was “intimately connected with the creation and behavior of cosmic rays and the properties of a galaxy. . . .” Discovery and investigation of such x-rays would “further understanding of the origin and dynamics of the universe . . . and may have a bearing on the study of communication of matter between galaxies.” A second probe was planned for launch on October 2, to investigate the discoveries.
Albert R. Hibbs, chief of jpl Arms Control and Disarmament, told American Rocket Society convening in Los Angeles: “Most people on both sides don’t feel that space weapons will be too important . . .,” but military neglect of space could be dangerous pending ratification of a treaty.
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
Stars may devote % of their lifetime energy to production of neutrinos, according to Dr. Hongyee Chiu of Yale and nasa’s Institute for Space Studies, speaking before the American Physical Society in New York. Neutrinos are among the most elusive of atomic particles, having no weight and no electrical charge, passing through matter with little chance of being stopped and with minimum interaction. Dr. Chiu theorized that the universe may have once been made up entirely of neutrinos which interacted to produce other particles and elements and that eventually the universe may return to neutrinos.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before landing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched by nasa in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by University of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
Final usaf Atlas icbm squadron declared operational at Plattsburgh afb, N.Y., bringing total operational Atlas force to 123. Additional composite squadron of Atlases was being maintained at Vandenberg afb, partly for r&d and partly for training use. December 19-21: President Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, meeting in Nassau, reached defense agreement designating Polaris missile to replace the Skybolt air-launched missiles as Britain’s primary nuclear deterrent weapon. Under terms also to be offered to France, Britain and France would receive Polaris missiles from U.S. and eventually these would form the backbone of a nato nuclear force.
In speech on the floor of the House of Representatives, Congressman George P. Miller, Chairman of the Committee on Science and Astronautics, paid tribute to Astronaut Scott Carpenter, stating in part: “Science is the beneficiary of his operation. . . . Commander Carpenter’s success is a compliment to the program; it is a tribute to American ingenuity and American ability to solve the mysteries of outer space. . . “To Scott Carpenter, to Alan Shepard, to Gus Grissom, and to John Glenn, this House and the American people owe a great debt of gratitude. From a scientific standpoint, I am happy to announce to you today the great success of this orbital flight.”
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Air Force Association convention in Las Vegas that “the objective of our [national space] policy is to obtain and maintain leadership in space activities for the benefit of man’s freedom, man’s well-being, man’s understanding, and man’s scientific progress. The details of the policy are not quite so clear, as those who have studied our budgets and public documents have reason to know. It is clear, however, that our policy includes going to the moon during this decade. It includes developing an operational communications satellite system as well as navigation and meteorological systems on a world-wide basis. The specifics are less clear as to the roles of man in space and what can and should be done to maintain peace in outer space. This lack of clarity, however, is partly due to the difficulty of knowing what can be done and what cannot be done. Continuing efforts wlli be made to clarify policy, while keeping it necessarily flexible. . . .” September 21: Replying to September 20 statement by aec Chairman Glenn T. Seaborg regarding U.S. nuclear propulsion capabilities for a 1970 Mars mission, nasa spokesman said: “There is no such approved program for such a flight at this time, but the joint aec-nasa program is aimed at giving such a capability, and at this time it appears it may be feasible to conduct such a flight.”
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster, from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev said in speech to transport workers that despite the claims of American scientists no U.S. rocket has hit the moon: “The Americans have tried several times to hit the moon with their rockets. They have proclaimed for all the world to hear that they had launched rockets to the moon, but they missed every time. The Soviet pennant on the moon has been awaiting an American one for a long time but in vain and is becoming lonesome.”
usaf announced “routine training launch” of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb by the 576th Strategic Missile Squadron.
Nine Soviet cosmonauts were lost in space between February 1959 and October 1961, it was reported by Oton Ambroz of North American Newspaper Alliance (nana). Article, relying heavily on European sources, claimed five cosmonauts were sent on orbital space flights from which they did not return; two cosmonauts, a man and woman, orbited in a single spacecraft May 17, 1961, but did not return; and two cosmonauts, man and woman, were sent on lunar flight Oct. 14, 1961. Conversations of the dual flights were reportedly monitored by Western receivers; signal from a single cosmonaut ("World—S.O.S.—S.O.S.”) was received Nov. 28, 1960. Other flights were based on reception of physiological, tracking, and other signals. None of the flights was reported) by U.S.S.R. andjjNASA had no comment on the report.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Assistant Administrator Hiden T.	Cox, and other nasa speakers addressed the annual convention of the American Association of School Administrators. Mr. Webb said: “Space science and space exploration have become an integral and vital part of a great industrial and technological revolution which is now taking place in our own country and throughout the world . . . [the] rapid rate of change as much as the change itself is one of the dominant facts of our time.” Dr. Cox outlined nasa’s program of educational services to meet the needs of education in and for the Space Age.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $4,673,327-contract to Ets-Hokin and Galvin, Inc., of San Francisco, for construction of main structural portion of Advanced Saturn test stand at msfc, Huntsville, Ala. When completed, the 405-ft.-high test tower would be used for static-firing the 7.5-million-lb.-thrust first stage of Advanced Saturn.
Soviet Foreign Ministry told U.S. Embassy in Moscow that the “Soviet Union will not undertake any action that might hinder the flight of the American spaceman Walter Schirra.” The Soviets were replying to U.S. note requesting the U.S.S.R. to refrain from nuclear tests during the MA-8 flight.
usaf Atlas E successfully test-fired from pmr to impact near Wake Island, the second successflli firing of an Atlas E from Vandenberg AFB.
usaf Office of Aerospace Research announced establishment of a basic research laboratory at the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs, to provide in-house oar research capability and enable teaching faculty and honor students to conduct research.
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Explorers Club in New York, listed one of the nasa organizational accomplishments of recent months as “the establishment of a liaison office with the Department of Defense, particularly with the Air Force Systems Command.”
International Association of Machinists rejected contract offer of Aerojet-General Corp. and began a strike. In Washington, a Presidential committee opened talks on labor dispute between IAM and the Boeing Co. United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., had accepted a three-year contract, thus averting strike.
Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the President said: “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of the blow-up in the pad at Johnston Island and because of the earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the most important, if not the most important of our series. “So we are going to finish those. In addition, as a result of the earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things learned which we would like to prove out. “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.” Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to second place in the mllitary field, President Kennedy replied: “No, Mr. Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program. What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters, effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous, and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts, peaceful efforts, in space. “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go ahead with the Titan III, which gives the United States Air Force a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that the work that nasa is doing on Saturn and the work the Air Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . . “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administration, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as the money that we are spending for the military use of space. “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the control all would have, if the situation required it, a military use. We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government, but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort it is making both in the peaceful program and the military program, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union should attempt to use space for military purposes.” Asked if he were hopeful that U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative ventures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied: “No. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made, but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between the two countries should be improved.”
Dr. James B. Weddell of North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div. announced development of new technique to predict solar flares up to 35 days in advance with 70 per cent accuracy. Dr. Weddell announced his new forecasting technique at symposium on radiation hazards, Gatlinburg, Tenn., cosponsored by nasa, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and American Nuclear Society.
Ernest Brackett, nasa procurement officer, told American Management Association that about 80% of nasa’s contracts are made for research and development, and outlined nasa procedures of awarding r&d contracts.
President Kennedy announced labor agreements had been reached with two aerospace industry companies, North American Aviation and General Dynamics/Convair, ending threat of strike. Agreement was based on recommendations of the President’s Aerospace Board.
usaf reported that “an Air Force satellite had provided the first continuous data on the actual size and intensity of the inner belt” of proton radiation over the Equator at altitudes of 600 to 3,000 miles. Stating only that the data was acquired from a 23-lb. experiment aboard an Agena, the report said radiation intensity at the center of the belt was 600,000 proton particles passing through one sq. inch per second, previously estimated at 100,000.
usaf announced launch of an unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D vehicle from Vandenberg afb.
telstar, the first privately financed satellite, launched into orbit from amr by nasa Delta booster, telstar (apogee: 3,503 mi.; perigee: 593 mi.; inclination: 44.79 degrees; period: 157.8 min.) was funded by the American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (at&t) under a nasa-at&t agreement of July 27, 1961: Bell Telephone Laboratories design and build satellites at own expense; at&t reimburse nasa for Delta launch vehicles, launch, and tracking services (approximately $3 million per launch); Bell System conduct the communications experiments and nasa provide telemetry; and both nasa and at&t analyze data and results, to be made available by nasa to the world scientific community.
Proposals to ban orbiting of nuclear weapons, and to seek international agreement on space activities irrespective of other disarmament measures were included in the final report of the second American Assembly—British Institute for Strategic Studies at Brighton, England.
H. Douglas Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., aerospace technologists at nasa Langley Research Center, awarded $1,000 for invention of Horizon Scanning Active Attitude Orientation of Stabilized Space Vehicles. James S. Albus, engineer at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, awarded $1,000 for his invention of a Digital Solar Aspect Sensor. Invention awards of less than $1,000 were made to following nasa employees: William H. Kinard and Sidney A. Batterson, Langley Research Center; Estin N. Baker, Jess S. W. Davidsen, Ralph L. Mossino, and Gilbert G. Robinson, Ames Research Center; Wilhelm Angele, Marshall Space Flight Center.
usaf announced awarding of Distinguished Service Medals to Lt. General Thomas P. Gerrity (usaf), formerly commander of Air Force Systems Command’s Ballistic Missile Division (afsc/-afbmd) and now Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics; and Maj. General Osmond J. Ritland (usaf), formerly head of afbmd and afssd and currently Deputy for Manned Space Flight, afsc.
Search for two huge meteorites believed to have fallen in western Virginia near Covington and West Virginia near Clarksburg was conducted by Dr. Frank Drake, Director of National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va. Reports by witnesses indicated that the meteorites weighed^about one ton each and that they fell in sparsely populated, national forest areas. During September: Dr. Joshua Lederberg, of Stanford University, and Dr. Carl Sagan, former University of California professor, wrote in September Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences that large amounts of moisture may be frozen into the subsoil of the planet Mars. From openings in the planet’s crust, steam and gas may escape and create hot spots that would be “favorable microenvironments for life.” They said that recurrent clouds detected by telescope “may be symptomatic of this local outgassing of water vapor.”
Reported from Moscow and confirmed by Goddard Space Flight Center that pilots of vostok iii and iv were using radio frequencies of 19,990 megacycles, 20,006 megacycles, and 143,625 megacycles.
United Auto Workers (uaw) of North American and Ryan Aviation voted to delay walkout for 60 days as requested by the President, thus joining International Association of Machinists (iam) which had previously accepted the 60-day delay in planned strike against General Dynamics (Convair) and Lockheed.
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories announced series of three high-altitude balloon astronomy experiments—Star Gazer, Sky Top, and Balast—to be conducted later this year. The primary objective would be to obtain more and complete information about the space environment with emphasis on the moon, Mars, and Venus.
usaf named six men selected to pilot X-20 (Dyna Soar) orbital spacecraft. The pilots, all from Edwards afb, included five Air Force officers and one nasa civilian: Capt. Albert H. Crews, Jr.; Maj. Russell L. Rogers; Maj. James W. Wood; Maj. Henry C. Gordon; Capt. William J. Knight; and Milton O. Thompson (nasa). usaf also displayed full-scale mock-up of X-20 at Air Force Association convention, first public showing of the space glider.
Congressman Bob Wilson of House Armed Services Committee, addressing the Institute of World Affairs, recommended establishment of a U.S. Military Space Academy. He said he was “deeply concerned over the tendency of our space program to emphasize the experimental and scientific and de-emphasize the military aspects of space. . . . The Air Force has started a limited program to train spacemen for the future. It should be expanded into a full-fledged space manpower program. Perhaps a ‘fourth service’ should be set up to train men in astronautics, hypersonic aerodynamics, the physiological and psychological aspects of flight.”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, one from Wallops Island, Va., and one from Ft. Churchill, Canada, for purpose of comparing data on wind and temperatures in upper atmosphere. Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 69-mi. altitude and ejected 12 high-explosive grenades which detonated on schedule; ground instrumentation measured sound energy from exploding grenades and recorded rocket position during flight. Nike-Cajun from Wallops Island performed unsatisfactorily, reaching altitude of only 31.8 mi. instead of 69 mi. predicted; only two grenade explosions were observed.
nasa fired two experimental rockets into upper atmosphere within a half-hour of each other, to obtain a comparison of electron density profile with wind profile measured at about the same time. First rocket, two-stage Nike-Cajun, attained 82-mi. altitude with a 55-lb. payload to obtain measurements of electron density and electron temperature in ionosphere at night. Second experiment, using two-stage Nike-Apache, involved use of sodium vapor clouds to measure atmospheric winds and diffusion; rocket reached 34-mi. altitude before ejecting its vapor cloud, which extended to peak altitude of 103 mi. Twin launchings, conducted at nasa Wallops Station, marked first time such experiments were conducted together. Experiments were conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corporation of America.
Signals from Venus-bound mariner ii interplanetary probe opened 17th annual meeting of American Rocket Society in Los Angeles.
Tenth anniversary of Livermore Branch of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of California. Established to “help cope with problems involved in maintaining American superiority in nuclear deterrence,” the laboratory devoted about half of its effort to weapons research and the remainder to peaceful uses of atomic energy.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa’s Deputy Administrator, speaking to the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology in Atlantic City, said: “. . . the air age brought us great supplies of aluminum and the basis for building lightweight structures, not only for airplanes but also for trains, buses, and ships. The nuclear age brought applications of isotopes in medicine and in inspection of materials. Nuclear developments brought remote manipulators and sealed pumps for hazardous liquids and gases. The space age has brought to maturity the concept of systems analysis and optimization of designs involving many branches of science and engineering. In addition the space age has given us high-temperature ceramics, ablating materials for heat protection, pressure-stabilized lightweight tanks, computers handling large amounts of data, and many other developments which are finding application throughout industry.” April 16: Senate passed the nasa supplemental appropriations blli, with amendments providing $71,000,000 for construction at amh but contingent on passage of authorization legislation. Blli would now go to Senate-House conference to iron out differences between the versions passed by the two Houses.
Dr. William W. Kellogg of the nas Space Science Board reported on the study of the planet Venus at the American Geophysical Union. Bolometer studies of the atmosphere of Venus indicated a temperature of —40° C (presumably the cloud tops), while temperatures deduced from measurements by large radiotelescopes indicated temperatures of about 300° C (572° F) (believed to be surface temperature). A planetary probe could probably answer questions raised on the thickness and nature of Venus’ aerosphere.
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, presented details of Apollo spacecraft at Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias) meeting in Seattle. During launch and re-entry, 3-man crew would be seated in adjacent couches; during other phases of flight, center couch would be stowed to permit more freedom of movement. Apollo command module cabin would have 365-cu. ft. volume, with 22-cu. ft. free area available to crew. “The small end of the command module may contain an airlock; when the lunar excursion module is not attached, the airlock would permit a pressure-suited crewman to exit to free space without decompressing the cabin. Crew ingress and egress while on Earth wlli be through a hatch in the side of the command module.” During August: Under Secretary of the Air Force Joseph V. Charyk told Seventh Symposium on Ballistic Missile and Space Technology that usaf had flight-tested two Agena D upper-stage vehicles, the first firing occurring in June. Agena D would accommodate a variety of payloads, whereas earlier models Agena A and B had integrated payloads.
Boeing-Vertol was selected by the Air Force to build long-range helicopter capable of carrying a payload of at least 5,000 lbs. for 200 nautical miles or 2,400 lbs. for 700 miles. Modification of Vertol 107 helicopter, now in production for civil use, would satisfy usaf’s Specific Operational Requirement 190.
