Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President of Cal Tech, addressing Western Electronic Show and Convention banquet in San Francisco, noted that “many people talk about the space program as a scientific program. . . . [Actually] the engineers of the world ought to nave credit.” Dr. DuBridge said scientific bases of space program were laid from 60 to 300 years ago, but enormous advances in engineering and rocketry in last 50 years had made space accomplishments possible. “The scientists [of today] are working in their laboratories on things that may lay the groundwork for application 50 years from now.” (Davies, NYT, 8/23/63, 38)
At American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Cleveland, Prof. Kenechi Maeda of Kyoto Univ. described proposal for Japanese space booster submitted by Japanese engineers. Headed by Prof. H. Itokawa of Tokyo’s Institute of Industrial Science, the engineers are designing a multistage, solid-fueled booster capable of putting about 100 lbs. into low earth orbit. Development of the rocket, known by Greek letter “Mu,” is not yet approved by Japanese Government. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/27/63)
sao crew launched a Titan I icbm froin Vandenberg afb, Calif., in a routine training launch. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)
nasa Launch Operations Center awarded two contracts for construction at the Merritt Island site adjacent to Cape Canaveral: Ingalls Iron Works, $11,500,000 contract for three launching towers; and American Bridge Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., $23,534,000 contract for work on Saturn V vertical assembly building. {NYT, 7/10/63,5)	_
Louis B. C. Fong, Director, Office of Technology Utilization, addressing the American Management Association, Inc., said: “nasa’s activities in space operate across all of the interfaces in the total transition process which starts with basic research and advances through applied research, development, engineering design, test and fabrication to ultimate production. Industry must be ready to determine in which phase it should act and direct space technology to an industrially oriented goal. “Resistance to new ideas and new technologies is part psychological ; a good deal of it is practical when new expenditures have to be justified to stockholders in terms of an upward sales curve. Often it is economic, since to implement a new technology may result in a tremendous impact upon a way of life of a major industry—e.g., oil vs. coal, transistors vs. tubes, solid state physics vs. conventional circuit design, diesel vs. steam engines, etc. . . . “Companies must organize to accept this data; must be geared to use what is helpful; must work to break down the barriers between one division and another. For economic survival, the time lag can no longer be accepted as standard operating procedure in the laboratory-to-consumer cycle .... “The accepted business patterns of the past must change if you singularly as a company and we collectively as a national business enterprise are to stay in the race.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Council of New York City President Paul R. Screvane conferred in Washington on plans for nasa exhibit at 1964 World’s Fair, ^possibly to he a proposed 361-ft. inflatable Saturn V rocket replica to house 10,000 sq. ft. of exhibits. ( nasa Release 63-58)
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb using improved Thor-Agena booster (tat). This was second attempt and first successful launching of the improved Thor, thrust of which was uprated from 170,000 lbs. to about 330,000 lbs. by addition of three solid-propellant rocket motors to the liquid-fueled power plant, (dod Release 374-63)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on board a Thor-Agena booster. {M&R, 11/18/63,12)
On first anniversary of first U.S. manned orbital space flight, Astronaut John H. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft friendship 7 was presented to Smithsonian Institution by Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator. Astronaut Glenn presented to the Smithsonian the flight suit, boots? and gloves he had worn and the tiny American flag he had earned during his three-orbit space flight. Making the presentation, Dr. Dryden remarked: “It is appropriate that John Glenn’s friendship 7 spacecraft should join the Wright Brothers’ first airplane in this hall, dedicated to man’s pioneering efforts in flight. “These two machines . . . stand as constant reminders that mankind aspires to the stars .... “As in the early days of aeronautics we can only dimly foresee the future of space exploration, what we Shall find, and what benefits will come to us. We know only that we must move forward in knowledge and practical accomplishment as we strive to discover the nature of our universe .... “We are surrounded here by the cherished treasures of the Nation. Today, we add still another to bring to mind the promise of the future that men of imagination and courage will always find new frontiers to conquer . . . .” (WasJi. Post, 2/21/63, Bl; Text)
Reported that Boeing Co., North American Aviation, and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. had won study contracts on the proposed supersonic transport airplane. The (Seattle) Post-Intelligencer quoted Senator Warren G. Magnuson (D.-Wash.) as saying he and Senator Henry M. Jackson (D.-Wash.) had received confirmation of the awards from faa Administrator Najeeb Halaby. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/1/63) During March: Comet Ikeye, discovered by Japanese amateur astronomer Kaoru Ikeye, was most brightly visible in western horizon for about a week before its brightness began to fade as it drew closer to the sun. (Wash. Daily News, 3/12/63)
Sen. Ernest Gruening (D.-Alaska) criticized nasa on the Senate floor for its indifference to training and use of women astronauts in the manned space program. Also he inserted in the Congressional Record a recent article in Life by Clare Boothe Luce, in which she said: “The astronaut of today is the world’s most prestigious idol. Once launched into space he holds in his hands something far more costly and precious than the millions of dollars’ worth of equipment in his capsule; he holds the prestige and the honor of his country .... But the astronaut is also something else: he is the symbol of the way of life of his nation. “In entrusting a 26-year-old girl with a cosmonaut mission, the Soviet Union has given its women unmistakable proof that it believes them to possess these same virtues. The flight of Valentina Tereshkova is, consequently, symbolic of the emancipation of the Communist woman. It symbolizes to Russian women that they actively share (not passively bask, like American women) in the glory of conquering space.” (CR, 6/27/63,11228-30) Jwne 27: usaf launched Minuteman icbm from amr in 4,000-mi. flight down Atlantic Missile Range in successful test, (dod Release 929-63)
explorer xiv energetic particles satellite transmitted 38 sec. of complete data, and officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center were hopeful the satellite might eventually resume normal operations, explorer xiv developed transmission difficulty Jan. 10, after 100 days of nearly continuous transmission. Project Manager Paul G. Marcotte of Goddard reported explorer xiv received less than 10 per cent degradation from space radiation since its launch Oct. 2; project officials did not believe radiation damage to be cause of satellite’s transmission malfunction. (nasa explorer xiv Prog. Rpt. No. 4; nasa Release 63-6)
American Geophysical Union, at annual meeting in Washington, adopted resolution urging that fcc protect Channel 37 for radioastronomy uses, fcc had received applications for operation of commercial TV on that channel in Paterson, N.J., and scientists feared that broadcasts from such station would interfere with research being performed with radiotelescope at Danville, HI. fcc had proposed in March to exclude for five years commercial stations on Channel 37 within 600 mi. of Danville and to limit nighttime hours that stations could broadcast on Channel 37. agu resolution asserted that the “needs of radio astronomy are not met by the limited protection” provided by fcc proposal and that the proposal “leaves unprotected nearly all of the active radio astronomy observatories in the United States.” {NYT, 4/22/63, 24)
Letter from Harold S. Geneen, it&t President, to Sen. Warren G. Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee, and Rep. Oren Harris, Chairman of House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce, was made public. Replying to rca Chairman David Sarnoff’s April 2 letter to Leo D. Welch, Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman, and to Former fcc Chairman Newton N. Minow’s May 31 letter to President Kennedy, Geneen said he “must respectfully disagree with General Samoff’s suggestion that the merger [of international communications carriers] should be compulsory and include all international communications facilities, both voice and record, under the Communications Satellite Corporation.” Reasons against such merger: it would run counter to historical Government opposition to monopoly in any field; it&t believed that private enterprise should not abandon field to which it has made substantial contribution; and it&t believed that ComSatCorp was established as “a private corporation and intended ... to be a carrier’s carrier” rather than competition for carriers using its services. “The real problem, as we see it, is rather to strengthen competition than abandon it ... . “We have also urged that the international record communication carriers be permitted to merge, as a means of offsetting American Telephone and Telegraph’s dominant position in international voice communications . . . .” at&t also issued statement opposing rca Chairman Sarnoff’s proposal to create single communications company: “. . . The present arrangement ... is a good one. It is based on the principles of good service and sound economics and is working well. We see no reason to experiment with substitutes of doubtful merit . . . .” (Smith, NYT, 6/20/63) Ju/ne 19: faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told aiaa meeting in Los Angeles: “First, technically, a superior supersonic transport is feasible. “Second, it is an expensive aircraft to develop, but not fantastically so, and certainly not beyond the resources of the greatest industrialized nation in the world. “Third, there is a market for an American transport of perhaps 200 to 250 first-round orders. If we do not develop an American sst, then the entire market, which could be something like 400 planes during perhaps a decade of first-round buying, will fall to our overseas competitors. Among the purchasers would be the airlines of the U.S., which would be forced to purchase planes produced overseas in order to remain competitive. “Fourth, in the event that we did not proceed with sst development, the Nation would default its position of preeminence in international commercial aviation—with all that would entail in practical terms and in less measurable terms of confidence and prestige . . . .” (Text)
Rep. Robert E. Jones (D.-Ala.) inserted in the Congressional Record an article by Eugene Patterson, editor of the Atlanta Constitution, in which Mr. Patterson noted with approval remarks by Dr. Wemher von Braun on the lunar program viewed as a “ ‘capital investment into the next few decades of space exploration, both military and civilian.’ ” Patterson concluded: “It will be an incredible American performance if the United States shrinks back now from the space age into which von Braun dragged us, kicking and protesting, and in which he is now having to struggle to keep us.” {CR, 11/29/63, A7320)
Missiles and Rockets quoted Harrison Storms, president of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., prime contractor for Apollo program, on proposals that a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program would enable U.S. to proceed at more leisurely pace and less expensively: “When is soon enough? I don’t see anything blocking us now. ... If you put it off, it will cost more money. You must have the level of effort capable of developing the systems to do the job. If you go below that level, it costs money. . . . When you begin to lower your effort it’s not the least capable man who leaves first, it’s the most capable. You lose critical talent and you may actually need the same or more manpower to reach the same goal at a later date.” (M&R, 10/7/63, 86)
Senator Edward M. Kennedy (D.-Mass.), addressing Massachusetts delegates to NASA-Industry Program Plans Conference, Washington, reaffirmed his pledge to foster Government contracts for space and electronics industries in Massachusetts, and said: “It is my responsibility as a member of Congress to see to it that nasa lives up to its responsibility and make sure your case is heard. It it nasa’s responsibility to see to it that the bids made by Massachusetts companies get the fullest examination and the fairest consideration . . .” (Boston Record American, 2/13/63)
usaf launched an Atlas D iobm from Vandenberg afb, Calif. {M&R, 11/18/63, 11)
An American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft believed to be returning from a mission over Cuba had crashed into the Gulf of Mexico 40 mi. north of Key West. An air-sea rescue search failed to recover the pilot, (uri, Wash. Post, 11/21/63)
U.S. proposal for a major international effort to establish worldwide weather forecasting system was presented by Richard N. Gardner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, at meeting of American Geophysical Union and American Meteorological Society, in Washington. Proposed system would collect and analyze weather data on regional and global—rather than national—basis; it would call for expansion of ground weather stations and launching of w eather satellites to obtain global views of weather patterns. He noted that recent U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement for coordinated weather satellite launchings would “give increased significance to this international effort.” (Finney, NYT, 4/20/63)
Data from explorer xvii indicated the earth is surrounded by belt of neutral helium atoms, scientists of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said at American Geophysical Union meeting. Based on preliminary data received one day after launch, Goddard scientists said explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite had sent back more than eight hours of scientific information on physics and chemistry of tenuous gases making up the earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 63-79)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired and controlled from Kwajalein Island in mid-Pacific, recently made successful interception of target vehicle launched by Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1170-63)
Preliminary results of the first lunar contact with the new Lincoln Laboratory high-resolution radartelescope were reported at the 44th annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union by Vernon L. Lynn. The report was jointly authored with M. D. Sohi-gian and E. A. Crocker, also of Lincoln Laboratory. Lynn said that the first radar reflections from the lunar surface obtained at a frequency of 35,000 me., more than four times that of previous radar probes, suggest that the moon’s surface is fairly rough with respect to the dimensions of the 8.6-mm. waves employed. In addition to the advantage of being able to view a smaller area than previously possible, the new radartelescope would provide data on the absorption and reflection characteristics of the lunar surface at a new wavelength, offering additional clues to its composition and roughness. (Av. Wk., 5/6/63,91) During April: Alexander Kakunin, Soviet Vice-Minister for Communications, was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. would soon launch synchronous system of communications satellites for transmitting television worldwide. Using Cosmos satellites, the service would be called “cosmosvision.” (M&R, 4/8/63,9)
D. Brainerd Holmes, speaking before American Society of Newspaper Editors meeting in Washington, said of Project Apollo: “If we do not make these efforts, we will not be first on the moon, we will not be first in space and, one day soon, we will not be the first on earth.” (Wash. Post, 4/21/63)
Contract award for two Apollo mission simulators, for training astronauts from launch through lunar orbit and return to earth, was announced by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., was selected by North American Aviation’s Space Systems Div. to develop and install the two spacecraft simulators, one at msc in Houston and one at Atlantic Missile Range, (msc Release 63-79)
Dr. Soloman W. Golomb of Cal Tech, speaking before American Astronautical Society in Los Angeles? warned: “There’s been a great deal of thought given to preventing contamination of the moon and planets dunng visits by earth space vehicles, but an even greater problem entirely overlooked is . . . microscopic organisms carried to the earth on return flight.” Dr. Golomb said extraterrestrial organisms inadvertently brought to earth might be able to successmlly compete with terrestrial orfnisms for basic materials of life, (upi, Newport News Times-erald, 1/18/63)
nrl astrophysicists reported on “galactic X-ray astronomy” at American Astronomical Society meeting held at Georgetown University. By launching rocketborne “telescopes,” nrl scientists have detected, two x-ray sources previously unregorted. One, a mysterious x-ray source near the constellation corpius, is so strong that its x-ray output is one billion times as bright as the earth’s sun. This may be the hitherto elusive neutron star theorized by S. Bowyer, E. T. Byram, T. A. Chubb, and H. Friedman. The other x-ray source, located near Scorpius in the Crab Nebula, is the remnant of a super stellar explosion that occurred in 1054 A.D., according to nrl reports. Detectors in a rocket launched on April 29, 1963, spotted the mysterious x-ray emitter near Scorpius. “One possible hypothesis,” Friedman said, “is that the x-rays come from an invisible cloud of extremely hot gas, of the order of a million degrees . . . .” Friedman concluded that the development of more sensitive detectors for use on rockets and orbiting satellite observatories would help make less mysterious the strange phenomena now being observed in space. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/28/63, B2)
Delta Day at Cape Canaveral, the nasa Group Achievement Award presented to Delta Project Group of Goddard Space Flight Center, manager of Delta space vehicle for nasa. At Delta Day ceremony, nasa Director of Space Sciences Dr. Homer E. Newell remarked that the “Delta Team has had 16 times at bat, and a hitting streak of 15 in a row, for a batting average of .937. That is good hitting .... We would wish that all launch vehicles could boast of records equal to that of Delta. The scientific community would, I am sure, wish me to express its appreciation with a hearty ‘Well done!’ ” Directing additional remarks to Delta Launch Team at Cape Canaveral, Dr. Newell said: “You have turned out the most cost-effective launch vehicle in the nasa stable. It has given us the highest return on the investment of any vehicle we have, and that is of fundamental interest to us. “About 26% of all nasa attempts to place a satellite of any kind in orbit have been made with Delta, and 45% of our successful earth satellites placed in orbit have been put there by Delta. At this point in time, as new as we are in our space effort, that is an impressive record . . . .” (nasa Release 63-39; Text)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced that Soviet scientists had successfully bounced first radar signals off planet Mercury. Performed last summer when Mercury was 52-54 million mi. from earth, experiment was credited with confirming value of the Astronomical Unit calculated in 1961 by U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. using Venus as radar target. Eberhardt Rechtin of jpl called Soviet Mercurv achievement “another significant step in radar exploration of the solar system.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, A3; San Francisco Chronicle, 1/5/63)
Ernest J. Sternglass, physicist at Westinghouse Research Laboratories, proposed theory at American Physical Society in New York that would offer a unified concept of nuclear and electrical forces, heretofore considered separate phenomena, and would reduce all matter to two particles—electron and positron. Sternglass hypothesized that all other particles found in atom (30 or more in recent years) are merely combinations and variations of negatively-charged electron and positively-charged positron. Simplest such grouping is single electron-positron pair, whirling near speed of light, which exhibits same properties as elementary particle known as neutral pi meson. Two such electron pairs, Sternglass said, exhibit properties of elementary particles K meson and Rho meson; other systems similarly account for all heavy mesons “within a few per cent of their observed values.” Combinations of electron-positron pairs with proton can explain other elementary particles classed as hyperons. Sternglass had assumed that Einstein’s special theory of relativity, which states that an object’s mass increases with its velocity, governs particles’ behavior; thus, if charged particles move fast enough and close enough in their orbits, they will generate sufficient force to hold atomic nucleus together. (Wash. Post, 1/25/63, A6)	_	,
usaf launched Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight some 5,000 mi. down Pacific Missile Range, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/31/63; M&R, 9/9/63,13)
A City of Los Angeles Commendation award was presented to Air Force Space Systems Division by Los Angeles mayor, The Honorable Samuel Yorty. The citation, in recognition of ssd’s contribution to the national space effort, was accepted by General Ben I. Funk, Commander. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan., 1964)
Use of helium-neon gas laser for transmitting television pictures was demonstrated by scientists of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. Terming the development a “breakthrough,” scientists said new system using one-inch-cube, four-pound modulator could send TV pictures from deep in space and its pictures could not be tapped by outsiders, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
dod announced Dr. Theodore von Karman had been selected to receive the second annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award, established in 1962 by Air Force Association to be conferred on U.S. citizen for outstanding contribution to national defense, (dod Release 420-63)
General B. A. Schriever (usaf) told Central Florida Medical Meeting, Orlando: “The successful development of space technology required major contributions from aerospace medicine. These contributions are twofold: first, an increased knowledge of the biological problems that wTill be encountered in space flight; and second, the development of equipment and techniques that will enable man not only to survive, but also to operate effectively in space. We ha ve already made great progress through the Air Force high altitude research, through simulation of the space environment, and through the Mercury program. But additional knowledge and experience will be required to conduct extensive manned operations in space. . . . “One of the major problems to be encountered in manned space flight is radiation, which may actually become a limiting factor on the duration of flights in a given orbit. This may come from several sources—from solar flares, from space-ambient radiation such as found in the Van Allen belts, or from nuclear devices that may be exploded in the earth’s atmosphere. There are two approaches which are being taken to the solution of this problem, and they may be used in conjunction. The first is shielding, which is the current means of protection against radiation. But in space systems, where weight is of critical importance, conventional shielding methods are likely to be out of the question. “The second method seeks to make use of a drug with antiradiation properties. Some 1,800 potential antiradiation drugs are currently being evaluated, and a number of them appear to hold great promise. Several interesting facts have already emerged from these studies. For example, cells with less than the normal supply of oxygen are protected from radiation damage. Stimulating the production of white blood cells and slowing the metabolism also protect the cells to some degree against radiation damage. Ideally, we would like to discover an antiradiation drug that can be administered orally without toxic side effects . . . .” (Text)
Youth Science Congress, sponsored by nasa and the National Science Teachers Association, was held at gsfc. Feature event was presentation of 25 award-winning research papers by high school students from Washington, D.C., Md., Del., Pa., and N.J. (gsfc Release G-20-63)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in address at Annual Dinner Meeting of Pittsburgh Post, Society of American Military Engineers: “Space science and technology require research and development at the frontiers of almost every branch of science and technology. Any industrial nation which refuses to devote substantial effort to space exploration is incurring the hazard of future technological obsolescence of its industries, the hazard of potential loss of leadership, and the hazard of military surprise by potential enemies .... “While the new technological developments offer the earliest contributions to economic development, m the long run the scientific knowledge obtained in the great unknown environment of the celestial bodies and interplanetary space may bring much greater returns. For, judging from past experience, advances in scientific knowledge are the foundation of advances in technology, which are a key factor in economic development .... “We live, in the language of the old cliche, at a great moment in history. Man has begun to lift himself above the restrictions of his planet into a new and strange environment and to expand his intellectual horizons. This is no visionary activity but one essential to the strength and security of our nation and to the future of man in the universe.” (Text)
Life editorial said: “Now the United States can be foremost in another and greater adventure [than Columbus’]—or abdicate its own national greatness by not doing enough. Unfortunately the argument about whether space is worth it has been muddied by an increasing popular tendency to talk only about the race to the moon. . . . “The issue is much bigger than a moon race, although of course we plan to land on the moon. The U.S. commitment td space seems a natural undertaking for the American people, who are a venturesome lot. Indeed it makes sense for military, technology, and prestige reasons. . . .” (Life, 5/17/63, CR, 5/20/63, A3160)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified satellite and a hitchhiker radiation monitoring satellite that separated in orbit on July 1,1963. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1/27/64)
nasa launched an Aerobee rocket to an altitude of 123.5 mi. over White Sands Missile Range, N.M., with a 245-lb. payload to study solar radiation. Three telescopes with automatic camera attached to each took x-ray photos of sun at exposures ranging from 3/io sec. to 100 sec. Equipment was designed to obtain an optical image of the sun from its own low-energy x-rays and would be used in future scientific satellites, gsfc cooperated with American Science and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., in the experiment. The payload was recovered 55 mi. downrange. (Wash. Post. 10/16/63; AP, NYT, 10/16/63, 2; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 11/14/63)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, wrote a letter to nasa Administrator James E. Webb asking for an explanation of the statements made at the summary conference on Project Mercury that there had been poor workmanship on the Mercury spacecraft, according to William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star. He was also reported to have inquired about a remark attributed to Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc, that industrial shortcomings included outright falsification, citing an instance where a component used “ ‘black iron where there Should have been stainless steel.’ ” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/63) October 4: Atlas F icbm was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb, but blew up during liftoff, (upi, PfYT, 10/8/63, 28)
msc awarded $100,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for a study of what modifications would be necessary to the Apollo spacecraft to use it as a space science laboratory in orbital flights lasting up to one year. (Houston Post, 10/15/63)
A statement from the American Meteorological Society expressed the hope that the U.S. would continue to provide leadership in the challenging new field of meteorological rockets and urged support on an expanded and more enduring basis. The ams recommended that the national program should pursue three objectives: (1)	A U.S. Meteorological Rocket Network based on the existing network should be established and cooperative programs with other countries should be arranged. (2)	A first-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and at least 60 km. to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height should be produced. (3)	A second-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and 100 km. or higher, to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height, and electron density above 60 km. should be established. (Bulletin of the AMS, May 1963)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, addressing Cleveland-Akron sections of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme), stated “a few of the social and moral responsibilities of scientists working in this field [of space science and technology]: “(1) To search for knowledge of the facts and to conduct our work with devotion to intellectual honesty and objectivity. “(2) To carry out our part of the national program of space exploration in such a manner as to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of tlie nation and all mankind. “(3) As citizens to lend our influence to the establishment of societies of free men in a peaceful world providing not only material benefits but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth and accomplishment. “(4) To realize in our job and daily contacts the highest moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” (Text)
National Academy of Sciences named a panel of scientists to advise the Federal Government on astronomy’s role in space exploration during the coming decade. Headed by Dr. Albert E. Whitford, Director of Lick Observatory, nas panel was soliciting comment from all of U.S. astronomers on astronomy’s manpower and equipment needs. It hoped to compile full report this year and offer guidelines for the future of astronomy. (San Francisco Chronicle,2/W/OA)
President Kennedy sent FY 1964 Budget Request to Congress, recommending nasa appropriation of $5,712 billion. Of this sum, $3.19 billion was for manned space flight, with Project Apollo receiving largest single increase in nasa budget—from $435 million in FY 1963 to $1.2 billion in FY 1964. nasa Administrator James E. Webb characterized the budget request as “austere”—it would neither speed up nor slow down the National effort to land an American on the moon in this decade. Total FY 1964 space budget, was estimated at $7,614 billion— nasa, $5,664 billion; dod $1,668 billion; aec, $254.3 million; Weather Bureau, $26.2 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.3 million, (nasa Budget Briefing FY 1964; Wash. Post, 1/18/63, A12; M&R, 1/21/63,13)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Walter L. Lingle, Jr., reviewed nasa procurement policies before National Capitol Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) : “It is our objective in nasa to have one overriding objective in all of our procurement policies; and that is so to make our contracts that we will achieve the highest standards in reliability and systems performance . . . .” (Text)
Reported that Soviet cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov had been promoted from major to lieutenant colonel, (upi, NYT, 4/9/63, 15) April 10: faa announced award of contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., an affiliate of Cornell Univ., to conduct systems analysis in supersonic transport research program. Under contract, Cornell would perform intensive effort in direct support of .Joint Systems Analysis Group, composed of representatives of nasa, dod, faa, and the commercial airlines, (faa Release 63-41)
Dr. Lyman J. Briggs (1874-1963), Director Emeritus of the Bureau of Standards and a former member of the naca (1933-45), died in Washington, D.C. He began his government career in 1896 as a physicist in the Department of Agriculture, originating the centrifuge method of classifying soils, organizing the biophysical lab in 1906. He joined the Bureau of Standards in 1917 and became its Director in 1933; his early research resulted in improvement in the accuracy of large naval guns, the invention with Dr. Paul R. Heyl of the earth inductor compass (used by Lindbergh) , and air viscosity experiments leading to improved propeller designs, naca Report No. 207 by Briggs, G. F. Hall, and Hugh L. Dryden (on “Aerodynamic Characteristics of Airfoils at High Speeds,”) issued in 1924 was considered a major contribution on airfoils at near supersonic speeds. In 1939, the White House named Dr. Briggs as chairman of the original Uranium Committee to study the military use of atomic energy, which led to the Manhattan Project and Hiroshima. For his work on the proximity fuse during World War II, he was awarded the Medal of Merit by President Truman. Dr. Briggs retired in 1945, but continued research including confirmation in 1959 that pitched baseballs could curve as much as 17 inches in 60 feet. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/63, A5)
Ma]. Robert M. White (usaf) received 1962 General Thomas D. White usaf Space Trophy from Secretary of Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert for his outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace research through piloting X-15 rocket research aircraft, usaf Space Trophy is presented annually by National Geographic Society. ( dod Release 789-63) Jime 3-11: Sixth annual meeting of 18-nation cospar (Committee or. Space Research, International Council of Scientific Unions) held in Warsaw. U.S. scientists, headed by Dr. Richard W. Porter and participating through nas Space Science Board, delivered 70 papers at Fourth International Space Science Symposium held in con j unction with cospar meeting, (nas Release) Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of U.S. delegation, summarized U.S. space activities from approximately Jan. 1 to Dec. 31,1962: more than 100 high-altitude research balloons; approximately' 846 synoptic rockets (by Meteorological Rocket Network from six North American sites); and more than 100 scientific sounding rockets. U.S. had announced launching of 19 scientific and scientific-applications satellites and space probes. (Porter, Report to oospar) Head of Soviet delegation A. A. Blagonravov summarized Soviet space activities of 1962: launching of interplanetary probe mars i; 71 geophysical and meteorological sounding rockets; 12 unmanned (Cosmos) satellites; and two manned spacecraft. Elaborating on mars i, he said that at 106,000,000 kilometers from the earth “a defect in the probe’s orientation system resulted in a violation of the directionality of the probe’s antenna to earth, making it impossible to maintain further radio contact with the probe.” (NTT, 6/4/63,10) Soviet scientist S. V. Vemov reported on June 4 that cosmic-ray bombardment of earth from outside the solar system had doubled in last five years. Findings were based on more than 4,000 Soviet scientific balloon flights since 1957. (Underwood, NYT, 6/5/63) On June 5, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center offered world scientists the design of small rocket payload and ground telemetry station suitable for ionospheric research, gsfc scientists Siegfried J. Bauer and John E. Jackson said payload’s “versatility, simplicity and relatively low cost should make it an ideal tool for the investigation of the many problems of the ionosphere by the international scientific community, especially during the iqsy [International Year of the Quiet Sim].” (gsfc Release) Prof. Anatoli Blagonravov, head of Soviet delegation, announced U.S.S.R. would conduct unspecified number of manned space flights in 1963, would launch two unmanned probes toward Venus and Mars, and would continue orbiting satellites in Cosmos series, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/6/63) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, Chief of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center Theoretical Div., said that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion July 9, 1962, as well as Soviet high-altitude nuclear explosions Oct. 22, Oct. 28, and Nov. 1, added temporarily to radiation particles in Van Allen belts. Lifetime of electrons and protons trapped by earth’s magnetic field had been “one of the most important and perplexing problems in radiation belt work for several years . . . [and] for the first time, this past year we have obtained definite information on trapped electron lifetimes . . . .” (gsfc Release; AP, Wash. Eve Star, 6/6/63) U.S. and U.S.S.R. delegations on June 6 announced readiness of their countries to cooperate in iqsy space experiments. Also at cospar, Japanese scientists reported plans to use U.S. Relay communications satellites for television broadcasts of Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964. (upi, Wash. Post, 6/7/63) Dr. W. R. Adey of ucla Brain Research Institute on June 7 challenged Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s report that he sighted smoke rising from individual houses in Tibet during his MA—9 orbital space flight. Dr. Adey asserted weightlessness produces feeling of euphoria: “Under such conditions one is inclined to make judgments that are not critical, because normal controls on judgment are not operative .... Unrecognized disorders of visual perception and of judgments arising therefrom may be of considerable importance in space research.” Dr. George T. Hauty of faa Civil Aeronautics Research Institute reported on experiments showing that marked reduction of sensory stimuli could induce slowing of subject’s thought processes and even hallucinations. (NYT, 6/8/63, 26; Electronic News, 6/10/63) B. E. Welch of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reported that results of six experiments showed oxygen toxicity would not be problem with pure-oxygen atmosphere in 17-day manned space flights, (nas Release) Dr. William F. Neumann of Univ. of Rochester Medical Center said astronauts under weightlessness up to two weeks could be expected to lose some calcium from their bones, probably equivalent to calcium loss of bedridden patient over 6-7 weeks: “For flights longer than two weeks, particularly space-capsule flights of indefinite length, grave questions of the continued normalcy of bone structure and bone development arise.” (NYT, 6/8/63, 26) Soviet scientist V. V. Sharnov reported that moon was covered with slag-like material, confirmed by Soviet radioastronomical observations. Speculating on surfaces of Mercury and Mars, he said former should resemble that of moon and latter was “mostly covered with dust. The fact that this material remains uncemented is a result of humidity.” Radar contact with planet Mercury was made at distance of 54 million mi. Radar contact with planet Venus permitted refinement of value of astronomical unit obtained in 1961 and estimate of Venus rotational period. (Underwood, NYT, 7/9/63,81; Av. Wk., 6/10/63, 31) Dr. D. E. Graveline of usaf School of Aerospace Medicine reEorted provision of artificial gravity in manned spacecraft was eing considered for prolonged manned space flights. Artificial gravity may be required because re-entry after a month or more of weightlessness could be dangerous to human beings—in prolonged weightlessness, natural processes which attune the circulatory system to gravity forces would decay, and body could not make necessary readjustment to g forces encountered in re-entry (NYT, 6/8/63,26; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/9/63) R. S. Young of nasa Ames Research Center reported June 8 on experiments providing evidence that certain earth organisms survive and grow under simulated Martian environment. Experiment simulated equatorial summer day-night cycle on Mars with presence.of water; further experiments were being conducted to determine minimum water and nutritional requirements for these organisms and to find their shortest growing period. If experiments show terrestrial organisms can survive “under the most rigorous laboratory simulation” of Martian environment, there would be “decisive evidence” of need for spacecraft sterilization. (nas Release) Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. Observatory said June 9 that astronomer on Mars, using most advanced equipment known today, would probably be unable to prove existence of life on earth. Of 80,000 photographs of earth taken from “an American Tiros satellite, only one could be interpreted as showing biological life on earth.” (AP, NYT, 6/10/63)
Dr. Richard Sharp of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. told American Geophysical Union meeting in Boulder, Colo., that a polar-orbiting satellite had discovered last May that most of the Aurora Borealis is invisible to the naked eye. The seemingly thin sheets of shimmering light actually are several hundred miles thick. The satellite studies also confirmed that auroral light is produced by electrons. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 12/31/63,20)
aec announced Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer would be recipient of Enrico Fermi Award, aec’s highest honor, in recognition of his leadership in development of the atomic bomb and of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Dr. Oppenheimer has headed Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, since 1947. {NTT, 4/6/63,1,5)	_
Air Force Association presented Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper the David C. Schilling trophy for the year’s most significant aerospace achievement m field of flight—his 22-orbit Project Mercury space flight MA-9.	(msc Space News Roundup, 9/18/63,8)
Dr. J. N. Bahcall of Cal Tech’s Kellog Radiation Laboratory outlined at American Physical Society meeting in Pasadena a proposed experiment to determine temperature of sun’s interior. A tank the size of an Olympic-size swimming pool, sunk at bottom of 5,000-ft. shaft drilled into the earth to screen cosmic rays, would be filled with 100,000 gals, of chlorine-37 isotopes. Neutrinos from sun bombarding the pool would change chlorine37 into argon-37. Measuring rate of change would help physicists determine solar temperature as well as sun’s structure and composition. (Becker, NTT, 12/20/63,31)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, speaking before American Editorial Cartoonists’ meeting in Washington, referred to complaints that excessive costs of Project Apollo and other U.S. efforts would “undermine the dollar .... But we are not told what would happen to the dollar—or to America—if space were defaulted to the Communist . . . .” “The question is which kind of philosophy, democratic or Communist, will dominate outer space ? “I, for one, don’t want to go to bed by the light of a Communist moon.” {Wash. Post, 5/12/63; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/12/63)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster, (mi, Wash. Post, 10/30/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
usaf accepted the first two F^C tactical fighter aircraft into the Air Force inventory in ceremonies at MacDill afb, Fla. The F—4C is the Air Force version of the Navy’s F^B, combines into one aircraft the capability for close air support, interdiction, and air superiority, (dod Release 1496-63)
Titan I missile successfully launched from Vandenberg afb by sac crew in routine training exercise, usaf announced. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/30/63, Al)
$9,847,000 contract for electrical and mechanical equipment for three launcher umbilical towers for Saturn V launch vehicle was awarded by John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa, to two-company team of Paul Smith Construction Co. and E. C. Ernst Co., Inc. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/20/63, 432)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted re-entry target vehicle launched by Atlas icbm in recent test. Nike-Zeus was fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, Atlas from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 858-63)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “. . . if we were to draft every scientist and engineer in the country into weapons development work, we could still develop only a fraction of the systems that are proposed .... This process of choice must begin with a requirement for solid indications that a proposed system would really add something to our national security . . . . “Development costs alone on typical major weapons systems today average upward of $1 billion. Over a billion dollars was spent on the atomic airplane, which was little closer to being a useful weapon when we canceled it, shortly after taking office, than it had been half a dozen years earlier. Eighty million was spent on the Goose decoy missile, essentially a pilotless aircraft that the enemy would confuse with our B-52’s .... “The RS-70 is an example of a weapon which, it seems to me, fails to meet the basic requirement for a major systems development: a solid indication that the weapon, if developed, would add significantly to our national security. It happens to be a particularly expensive weapon: to develop, procure, and operate a modest force of these planes would cost us at least $10 billion. Yet considering the weapons we already have, or will have by the time the RS-70 could be operational, it is very hard to see how this weapon would add to our national security .... “As weapons systems grow more complex, more expensive, and more difficult to maintain in a high state of military readiness, it is essential that we limit as far as possible the number of new systems that we bring into operation; for we want to be as sure as possible that wTe can depend on every system to operate when it is really needed. A basic fact of life is that under the chaotic conditions of combat you do not get anything like the efficiency of weapons systems that you get on a test range. Relative simplicity is a most desirable characteristic of a weapons system, or of a combination of systems . . . .” (Text, in CR. 4/24/63, 6580-83)
Humorous columnist Arthur Hoppe commented on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that Russia was not competing to land a man on the moon, said this marked the beginning of a new weapon in Soviet diplomacy—“Competitive unresistance.” “Oh, it strikes at the one weakness in the American character. For while we are imbued with the will to win, we can’t stand licking somebody who isn’t trying. Competitive unresistance, let me warn you, will sap our will to resist. “. . . Of course we could do some things for other reasons. Like maybe feeding people because they’re hungry. Or reaching for the moon because we believe the future of our race lies in the stars. But would Congress buy that? Nonsense. It’s unrealistic-“So I say we must meet this new Soviet threat head-on. We # must abolish our moon program, knock off foreign aid and do our utmost, fellow Americans, to make our Nation a second-rate power. But cheer up. I’m certain we can count on Congress.” (Hoppe, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/2/63, 5)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said that spectacular “ ‘firsts’ in space are not truly accurate measurements of technical and scientific progress. The question of who is first in space will be decided by the total accomplishment and the total ability of each nation to sail this uncharted sea. Dramatic events, such as the first flight of a man in orbit, or the first landing on the moon, make up only a part of this assessment . . . .” Holmes was addressing Sidwell Friends School Forum, Washington, D.C. (Text)
First flight test of inflatable meteoroid probe (paraglider), using Aerobee 150 launch vehicle, was conducted from White Sands Missile Range. Objective of experiment was to develop technique for determining penetration rates in thin structural materials. Preliminary results indicated Aerobee 150 followed nominal flight trajectory, but paraglider did not accomplish flight because canister in which it was contained failed to eject. Experiment was joint project of nasa Langley Research Center (paraglider) and Goddard Space Flight Center (vehicle) under direction of nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 63-102; nasa OAirr/Levine)
usaf launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the 20th of the solid-fueled missiles launched from the West Coast base. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star. 11/3/63)
At meeting of American Institute of Biological Scientists in Amherst, Mass., Max D. Lechtman of Magna Corp. presented report by team of researchers predicting use of certain bacteria in life-support, systems of future manned spacecraft. One means of supplying oxygen to astronauts on long-duration flights would be electrolysis of water—breaking down water into its oxygen and hydrogen components by electric current. Microbes such as H. eutropha and H. ruhladi which absorb hydrogen would be valuable in removing the hydrogen. (Wash. Post, 8/30/63, All)
Titan II icbm launched from Vandenberg afb concrete silo site in successful usaf test flight. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/21/63)
usaf announced orbiting on June 27 of 176-lb. hitchhiker satellite to measure distribution and energies of radiation particles in earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. Ejected from another satellite (unidentified) launched from Vandenberg afb June 27, hitchhiker was propelled by its own engine into elliptical orbit July 1:208-mi. perigee, 2,568-mi. apogee, 132-min. period, 82° inclination to the equator, (dod Release 1042-63)
Two sounding rockets launched at 'White Sands Missile Range in U.S.-Sweden coordinated study of ion and electron concentrations in D-region of the ionosphere. Areas sounding rocket carrying Sweden’s scientific experiment was fired to 60-mi. altitude, its 12-lbs. of instruments to obtain measurements of ion densities from peak altitude down to 25 mi. At apogee, parachute was deployed and instrumentation exposed. Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched 62 min. later, carried U.S. experiments in 100-lb. payload of instrumentation designed to measure ion and electron densities, ultraviolet radiation in the upper atmosphere, and a camera supplied by Univ. of Leicester, England, to photograph x-ray emission; payload did not achieve desired altitude (about 110 mi.) because of malfunction in the launch vehicle. Cause of malfunction was not yet known. U.S.-Sweden experiments were part of program sponsored by Swedish Committee for Space Research and nasa, whose Goddard Space Flight Center has responsibility for U.S. coordination. Both firings were conducted by Physical Science Laboratory of New Mexico State Univ. under U.S. Army contract, (nasa Release 63-277)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Banquet in Hollywood, Calif., the Timers Aero Club of naa awarded “Elder Statesmen of Aviation” awards to John K. Northrop, Floyd B. Odium, and (posthumously) James Kindelberger. Also fai medals were presented to Paul F. Bikle, glider pilot and Director of nasa’s Flight Research Center, and Joseph A. Walker, nasa X-15 pilot. General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, said in address to Wright Memorial Dinner: “. . . When Orville and Wilbur Wright made their historic flights, 60 years ago, little did they know that their effort would have such an impact on the nation’s strategy and on its military forces. “We should learn a lesson from this. “We cannot in today’s world stop our search for new sources of national strength. Further, if this Nation ever finds itself falling behind in the technological race—and lacking men possessing the vision and courage of the Wright Brothers, and the great Aerospace flyers who followed them, then in my opinion our days at a great Nation will be numbered and so will the days of freedom.” (Air Force and Space Digest, 1/64, 84; Text, dod Release 1572-63)
Brig. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Vice Commander of Air Force Ballistic Systems Div., was appointed Deputy Director of Project Apollo in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 15. General Phillips would assume major responsibility for management and administration of Apollo, while Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight and Director of the Office of Manned Space Flight, would continue having major responsibility for technical direction of Project Apollo, (nasa Release 63-287; dod Release 160563)
Air Force said that “an improved Thor booster combination of liquid and solid propellants,” launched with unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb, was deliberately destroyed when it veered off course. Improved Thor had increased thrust from 170,000-lbs. to about 330,000-lbs.—almost double its earlier power and almost equal to the early Atlas, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/63)
Atlas icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb in routine training launch for sac missile crews, (dod Release 105-63)
ComSatCorp incorporator George J. Feldman said at Conference on Space Science and Space Law, Univ. of Oklahoma: “The reality of a viable [satellite] communication system remains to be accomplished with the accompaniment of hard work, hard and yet imaginative intelligence, and cooperation, nationally and internationally .... “The choice of system ... in turn is of importance to the international users. How do they participate? Do they own stations? Do they furnish personnel? What about their own research and development? And in addition to the economics there is the political national interest and national pride in participation . . . “The communication satellite has arrived of experimental age. It will be brought into being as a working system. The United States has no monopoly on its creation. There are others who are capable of doing it. There is strong worldwide interest. The corporation is beginning to tackle the formidable problems in earnest enthusiasm, and I may say in the spirit of the kind of dedication that accompanies a pioneering effort of responsibility. The expert group being assembled can make a substantial contribution of national benefit, as it researches and develops its program. It is time to give this effort the understanding required, for much is at stake for all . . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/63, A4188-89) Jv/rue 19: tiros vn (A-52) meteorological satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Delta launch vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral. Initial orbital data: 405-mi. apogee, 388-mi. perigee, 97-min. period, 58.2° inclination to equator. On satellite’s first orbit, Command and Data Acquisition Station at Wallops Island, Va., obtained direct pictures from Camera 2 showing cloud vortex over Newfoundland and set Camera 1 to read out pictures on next orbit. First pictures were transmitted within an hour to Cape Canaveral, Fla.; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.; and National Weather Satellite Center, Suitland, Md. In addition to two wide-angle TV cameras, tiros vn carried infrared sensors and electron temperature probe. Orbiting marked 18th straight successful satellite-orbiting by Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (nasa Release; Wallops Release 63-59; upi, NTT, 6/20/63, 3)
An aircraft somewhat similar to the U-2 reconnaissance plane was seen by reporters on the flight line at Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards apb, Calif. Air Force officials identified the aircraft as an RB-57F, a drastically modified version of the British Canberra jet light bomber. Chief modifications visible were two extremely long tapered wings similar to those of the U-2, with two very large engines mounted on them. Two smaller J-60 engines were mounted on the fuselage. The aircraft is used in Project Peewee, an environmental study of navigation and weather equipment at high altitude. (AP, NYT, 10/6/63) 63-22*1)"'" ^
General Curtis LeMay (c/s usaf) said in address to Air Force Association, Washington, that usaf was “making a concerted effort to maintain a mixed force of manned aircraft and missiles and, for the longer term, vehicles that could operate in space. The Secretary of Defense . . . has directed that we continue our studies of follow-on manned, strategic vehicles that can counter threats and survive in the varied plateaus of aerospace operations . . . .” (Text)	. General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said that during the next “ten to fifteen years aircraft technology promises to make major advances which will provide significant improvements in range, speed, and versatility.” As examples, he cited use of laminar flow control which “promises to make possible a significant increase in the subsonic range and endurance of large aircraft”; technical progress in such areas as “aircraft configuration, high temperature structural materials, and propulsion systems” which will “make feasible the development of a great variety of advanced types of aircraft, ranging from conventional design to V/Stol, variable geometry, and paraglider configurations.” (Text, A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,18) Lt. Gen. T. P. Gerrity (usaf) told afa Industrial Associates’ Luncheon that “there is a recognition of our future mixed force needs and new manned strategic systems are currently under consideration” and spoke of threat of a “manned aircraft gap.” (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,19)
T„	f_•_______£___________t>___:j__i. T':__l_____ ' Alt ' '<f! ’ll u l/y	t. r /If /<*/ a { .11 lull' 1U1U1C1 j- rroiucill riinniiimwni “Let us turn to the space exploration program, which I publicly have called downright spongy. Now clearly the strong competitive spirit of the American people has been aroused by the so-called space race. But let us step back for a moment from emotion and be objective. This is what my scientific advisers and I tried to do when we started space work back in 1955 and thereafter enlarged it into a comprehensive program. We didn’t and don’t want to be a second-best nation, not in any important field, and certainly not in total accomplishment. But can we best maintain our overall leadership by launching wildly into crash programs on many fronts? This is where we seem to have got out of focus. “Let me make it perfectly clear that we should have an aggressive program of research and exploration, so broadly based that in the long run there will be no question of our space leadership; but we should pursue it in an orderly, step-by-step way to enlarge systematically our knowledge of the scientific, military, and industrial potentials in space. This sort of a program would be a strong, steady push from the known into the unknowns of space 741-023 O—64--------14 science, accumulating along the way the techniques and skills to put our astronauts on the moon, among other developments. The annual cost would not include money for stunts and unnecessary contests. “Most of the scientists who advised me on space matters—all men of great knowledge and integrity—believed in this step-bystep program as most effective for the long pull, pointing out that the things we need to learn in space are almost as endless as space itself. Proud as we may be of our astronauts and, our Venus probe and other accomplishments in space, this racing to the Moon, unavoidably wasting vast sums and deepening our debt, is the wrong way to go about it, as I see it. Because it has been stated that the country’s prestige is at stake in this race, the average citizen may be loath to question the huge sums now being requested. But he should . . . .” (Sat. Eve. Post, 5/18/63, 1519; CR, 5/15/63, 8111)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced series of sounding rocket tests had confirmed association of Sporadic-E disturbances with presence of wind shears in altitude regions measured Nov. 7, Nov. 30, and Dec. 5,1962. Linder nasa contract, Geophysics Corp. of America scientists measured velocity of wind movements (using Nik6-A_p&clie rockets witli sodium vapor trails) and iguo-spheric phenomena (using Nike-Cajun with Langmuir probe electrical equipment) at nearly the same time. Experiments confirmed theory of Australian scientist J. D. Whitehead that action of upper atmosphere wind pulls electrons from above and below into thin cloud-like layers, causing Sporadic-E layers that often interfere with radio signals’ being reflected off higher F layer of ionosphere, (gsfc Release)
In address at Virginia Polytechnic Institute at Blacksburg, Secretary of Commerce Luther Hodges said: “Of the nearly $17 billion we in the United States are spending on research and development, only about $4 billion is spent by American industry for non-military, non-space work. And of that $4 billion, only about $1.5 billion is aimed at increasing the productivity of our economy. “The countries of Western Europe are spending twice as large a proportion of their gross national product for civilian research and development. . . . Japan, which many people still think of as an imitator and copier of western scientific and technical developments, actually has as high a ratio of scientists and engineers working on its civilian technology as we have. . . . “American industry must be much more alive to the need for more research and development work in the civilian sector of our economy. There must be a wider diffusion of this work throughout industry, and there must be greater industry support for the training of people capable of doing this work. “Some 80 per cent of all our industry sponsored research is done by 300 companies, and 73 per cent in only 5 industries. “Two of these industries, aerospace and electronics, account for 25 per cent of the industry sponsored research, but their products account for only 3i/2 per cent of the total production of goods and services in this country. . . .” (Text, (JR, 4/25/63, 2444-2445)	_
Soviet Cosmonaut Major Andrian Nikolayev, speaking over Radio Moscow in a “Cosmonautics Day” broadcast, called U.S. Project Mercuiy spacecraft sigma 7 an “unreliable American contraption. . . . To be frank, I would not like to find myself in his [Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s] place. You have no idea how cramped and uncomfortable this capsule looks in comparison with the cabins of our remarkable Vostok cosmic ships.” Nikolayev had seen sigma 7 during his recent visit to Sao Paulo, Brazil, where the spacecraft was on display. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/13/63)
Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter addressing the usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Texas, said: “The main goal of Project Mercury is to prove the design and engineering concept and the usefulness of Man in space, but the capabilities of the Mercury system can be streched only so far. I had hoped that the flight of “Aurora Seven” would be a humble beginning in the gathering of scientific data from space about . the universe in which we live. In the three short months that preceded the flight, we developed many special instruments for this purpose. . . . There is untold wealth of information to be gained as a result of space flight if we turn our talents and curiosities in that direction. “I have worked closely with scientists from many fields, but perhaps most closely with those in medicine. “There have been some wonderful intangibles I attach to working with these men. They are more than vein probers, brain pickers and pulse takers. I am continually challenged by their curiosity and insight, and fascinated by their research. I respect their intelligence and I treasure their friendships. “It is this intelligence, this special education and innate curiosity scientists of all types have in common that demands they be included in future space flights. “Perhaps one day the astronaut will be the least important person aboard as he ferries a cargo of astronomers, geologists, biologists, and flight surgeons to Mars.” (Text)
X-15 No. 2, being remodeled under usaf contract by North American Aviation, Inc., would have as one of its most important research objectives the testing of a ramjet engine modified to bum liquid hydrogen. Using the basic configuration of the Navy’s Typhon missile engine, the ramjet would slow the supersonic airstream of the X-15 to subsonic speed for burning in the engine. Theoretically the ramjet flying at 4,600 mph should be twice as efficient as a jet engine. (Clark, NTT, 11/10/63, 88)
dod announced that the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile had scored another successful interception against an icbm. This 10th successful Nike-Zeus interception was from Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific, the target a Titan I icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, dod refused to state the date on which the interception took place, (dod Release 1519-63; Wash. Post, 11/30/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Director of Manned Space Flight, discussed the manned space flight program before Yale Chapter of Sigma Xi, New Haven, Conn., and said: “In two centuries, the United States has grown from a small collection of settlements here along the Atlantic seaboard to a great nation of almost 200 million people spread across a continent. We have dug canals, dammed rivers, built railroads, launched ships, constructed highways, and flown aircraft. We bave constructed buildings, bridges, and a nationwide grid of electrical power. We have developed a system of industry, agriculture and distribution by which our people are provided with food, clothing, automotive transportation, and other necessities and conveniences in such volume that the United States has assumed an unprecedented position of wealth and power in the world. “Some historians explain this growth in terms of challenge and response. Under this interpretation, which appeals to me, the frontier and external danger have provided stimuli for growth. Now, however, with the frontier gone and the external danger, we hope, decreasing, we are entering a new period of change. What will now spur us to further growth ? “Exploring space can provide such a challenge. Here is an endeavor, clearly in the American tradition, which will unleash again the urges to build and explore—and which will employ for a great national purpose the tremendous productive capacity of our economy.” (Text)
Demonstration of transatlantic typesetting was conducted between Chicago and Groonhilly Downs, England, via ground computer and relax i communications satellite. Originating from Chicago conference of American Newspaper Publishers Association Research Institute, dispatch was received in final typeset form. In second phase of demonstration, articles were similarly sent from London and Rio de Janeiro and were received in Chicago. (Wehrwein, NTT, 6/11/63) nasa announced selection of Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., for negotiation of contract for design and fabrication of four Pioneer interplanetary space probes. First launching in series was scheduled for early 1965 with Delta launch vehicle, (nasa Release 63-131; Ames Research 63-24)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) officially came into existence, a merger, after more than a year of study and debate, of the American Rocket Society (ars) and of the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias). aiaa is thus the leading technical society keyed to the dynamic developments of the space age. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, became the aiaa’s first President. {Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, February 1963,19)
usaf launched unidentified satellite using Thor-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/30/63, 4)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, in cooperation with nbc and rca, accomplished 'first known transmission of television in color via relay i communications satellite. 15-min. sequence of movie Kidnapped was relayed by relay from 4,000-mi. high orbit, and was scheduled to be shown on Walt Disney's program on March 24. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/22/63, A5)
nasa announced first television experiments via stncom ii communications satellite had been conducted. Test pattern signals sent Sept. 23 were followed by TV pictures Sept. 24 and 25; because of bandwidth limitations, no audio was sent. Officials of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center said transmissions were of good quality. Transmissions originated at Fort Dix, N.J., ground station, were sent to syncom n 22,300 mi. above the earth, and retransmitted to at&t ground station at Andover, Me. (nasa Release 63-216)
Symposium on exploration of Mars would be held in Denver June 6-7, cosponsored by nasa, American Astronomical Society, American Institute of Biological Sciences, and American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, nasa announced, (nasa Release 63-68)
Senator Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) introduced jointly sponsored resolution in the Senate to authorize presentation of an Air Force medal of recognition to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (ret.). General Foulois learned to fly from Wilbur Wright in 1909 and was Chief of the Army Air Corps when he retired in December 1935. In 1907, he wrote a thesis on “Tactical and Strategic Value of Aerodynamic Flying Machines,” using Jules Verne, the Bible, and Army Field Service Regulations as sources, one of the pioneering concepts of the military application of aeronautics. General Foulois served on the naca (1929-30, 1932-35), and is currently President of the Air Force Historical Foundation. (CR, 2/28/63, 2975) During February: nasa Goddard Space Flight Center plans for second-generation Oso satellite—known as Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory, or Helios—were outlined at Philadelphia technical meeting by Goddard’s A090 Project Manager A. J. Cervenka. (Av. Wk., 3/4/63,48)
Unidentified usn satellite placed in orbit with Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle launched from Vandenberg afb. Satellite was first to be completely powered by nuclear generator, a 27-lb. Snap-9A (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) which will produce 25 watts of power continuously for five years. Press sources unofficially identified the satellite as transit v-b. The Navy later disclosed that a second satellite weighing 120 lbs. had been launched pickaback style along with the 160-lb. nuclear-powered satellite. This sun-powered satellite carried several radiation detectors and six transistors in a test of means of protecting these devices from radiation damage. (Finney, NYT, 9/15/63, 75; Hill, NYT, 10/1/63, 1, 76; Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 37; Wash. Post, 1/10/64) September 1S8: Article by commentator Stanislav Kondrashov, first published mention in U.S.S.R. of President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in lunar exploration, appeared in Soviet magazine Za Rubezhom. Article said: “American propaganda ... is pushing to the forefront the President’s idea of sending a joint Soviet-U.S. team to the moon. “In lavish headlines American newspapers describe the grandiose character of the project, although it seems it is somewhat premature.... “Leaving aside judgment of the President’s lunar project, it should be noticed that the hard emphasis on it is hardly worthwhile. “It distracts attention from joint earthly exploits directed at attaining peace and reduction of world tension. . . .” (upi, Wash. Post, 9/29/63)
Ernie Smith, who made first civilian airplane flight to Hawaii from Oakland, Calif., on July 15, 1927, died in San Francisco. 2,393-mile flight took 25-hrs. 26-min. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/27/63)
usaf Titan II successfully launched from silo at Vandenberg afb in test flight down pmr. (M&R, 5/20/63,16)
In formal statement of policy, Air Force Association declared Senate ratification of nuclear test ban treaty would entail “unacceptable” risks to security of U.S. and Free World. Statement also said: “One area of military technological potential in which this nation obviously is making less than a maximum effort is military space .... We must exploit military space to extend and preserve our deterrent strength, to control and inhibit those who would use their power aggressively to dominate life on earth. All of our national space efforts, including purely scientific exploratory programs, must be measured first against this yardstick. The national interest must be the prime purpose of every national program . . . .” (afa Statement)
U.S.-Australian experiment to obtain data on the ionosphere conducted at nasa Wallops Station, with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carrying 144-lb. payload of radio instruments 1,253 mi. high during eight-minute flight. Experiment was designed to measure intensity and spectrum of vlf radio waves above “E” region of the ionosphere. This was third U.S.-Australian attempt of the space experiment and first success, the previous two having failed to reach desired altitude because of vehicle structural failure. Scientific payload was provided by Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. Technical facilities, telemetry recording, and the two-stage rocket were provided by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-39)
In interview during annual meeting of American Geophysical Union, Dr. Lewis B. Kaplan of jpl, said mariner ii’s discovery of 800° temperatures of Venutian surface indicated possibility that atmosphere of Venus and clouds surrounding that planet contained organic compounds—including formaldehyde, oily hydrocarbons, and certain methyl compounds. Although large quantities of carbon dioxide were present in Venutian atmosphere, carbon dioxide alone would not account for the “greenhouse effect.” Other substances—probably organic compounds—existed in Venutian atmosphere to absorb heat and radiation from planet and reflect it back to surface. (Carey, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/63)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in letter to Air Force Association President J. B. Montgomery regarding afa’s Statement of Policy on nuclear test ban treaty: “. . . I recognize the right of the Association to express itself but the resolution is so immoderate and based on such misinformation as to disregard completely the best interests of the United States, as well as of the Air Force . . . .” He also canceled his appearance at afa reception in his honor. (Letter/DOD Release)
usaf launched Atlas E icbm on successful 4,000-mi. test-flight from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 810-63)
usaf launched Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb in “routine training launch.” (dod Release 220-63)
Areas rocket instrumented to measure electrical characteristics of lower ionosphere launched from Birdling’s Flat on the Canterbury Plains, New Zealand. First sounding rocket launched in cooperative U.S.-New Zealand program, Areas with its launcher was supplied by nasa ; payload was designed and built by Univ. of Canterbury staff; rocket was assembled and launched by Royal New Zealand Air Force. Two more Areas rockets would be launched in the joint Univ. of Canterbury-NASA project, sponsored by National Space Research Committee of the Royal Society of New Zealand, (nasa Release 63-110)
Representative George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) submitted article by A. A. Mikhailov, Director of the U.S.S.R.’s Pulkovo Observatory on the American astronomer, William Wallace Campbell (18621938) in the Congressional Record. Appearing in Soviet journal called Nature, article reviewed work of Dr. Campbell at the Lick Observatory in San Francisco, where he pioneered in stellar photography and the determination of stellar motions (18901923). (CR, 3/1/63,1086-87)
Eight professors of physics and geology at mit, Harvard, and Princeton signed statement urging public to support U.S. nuclear disarmament position: “Our future depends on controlling the spread of weapons of mass destruction. The U.S. proposal includes both detection stations and on-site inspections. These together can identify almost all nuclear explosions. Only some small underground tests might go unidentified. “We believe that nothing canbe learned from these small underground tests which can upset the balance of power.	‘ “In the long run, a ‘no-test, ban’ policy would result in a great loss of national security. By contrast the U.S. proposal realistically offers us a practical first step forward.” (AP, Wash. Post. 2/13/63, A19) February IS: Herbert D. Rochen’s appointment as nasa Deputy to Program Manager of joint aec-dod-nasa Snap-50 Program Office was announced by nasa. In this capacity Rochen would provide liaison between nasa programs and Snap-50/Spur (nuclear electric power plant) program. Rochen was formerly assigned to nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, Nuclear Systems Directorate, where he was nasa program manager for Snap-8 project. ( nasa Release 63-28)
Sen. Barry Goldwater, speaking before Air Force Historical Foundation at Maxwell afb, criticized U.S. space policies: “By choice of official policy, so far, we. are choosing to relegate the military function of space to a secondary position. We have delayed and debated to the point where it must be said that the United States today has no fully defined and effective military space program at all. “. . . We have, in fact, policy declarations stating that we will not orbit weapons of .mass destruction in space unless forced to do so by the hostile action of others. In short we say that we will not utilize the military potential of space until such time as it may be too late. . . . “Just what is this race in space ? By our actions we are clearly saying that it’s a race for the Moon. We are moonstruck. And, to be sure, the Moon is most romantic .... But, while our eyes are fixed upon it, we could lose the Earth or be buried in it . . . .” (Text)
Columnist William S. White, writing in the Washington Evening Star, charged that Premier Nikita Khrushchev was being supported in his efforts to slow down the U.S. space program by “one of the strangest coalitions we have ever known” in Congress, made up of conservatives who want to save money and liberals who want to spend the money on welfare. “The conservatives . . . ought to ponder what they are about here. For apart from the almost indescribable strategic and scientific significance of this program, there is the bottom fact that it is already nearly indispensible to the American economy and may later become indispensible in the absolute sense. “Automation, when fully launched, will create huge pools of unemployables. Politically, these must and will be cared for, under any forseeable regime, Republican or Democratic. Is it not better to spend the money for space than to speed the day when all this money and more will have to be thrown about for the most gigantic—and also permanent—leaf-raking schemes in the world’s history ? “The space program is the precise opposite of economic crack-potism. It is sensible conservatism’s greatest future weapon against just such crackpotism.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/1/63)
nasa Director of Meteorological Systems Morris Tepper told House Committee on Scieiice and Astronautics that tiros v and tiros vi (launched in June and Sept. 1962 respectively) were still providing good data. Tiros data “continue to be used by the Weather Bureau for weather analysis and forecasting, storm tracking, hurricane reconnaissance, etc. The Weather Bureau disseminates its analyses and warnings widely .... “The Meteorological Soundings project has continued throughout the year as planned. The project at Goddard Space Flight Center which utilizes the larger meteorological sounding rockets continues as it has in past years with excellent results. In addition, we have initiated at the Langley Research Center a project which will develop and utilize the smaller meteorological sounding rockets. We expect to have this well underway by the end of this Fiscal Year . . . .” (Testimony)
Announced that the Air Force launched six research rockets designed to study the structure of the earth’s atmosphere by photographing chemical trails released by the rockets. The flights, launched from Eglin afb, Florida, on May 15, 17 and 21, reached the ionosphere, 60-90 mi. above the earth. Each rocket was fired between sunset and sunrise. Luminescent chemicals were released and photographed by ground-based cameras. The high altitude studies are being made of turbulence and wind shears, (oar Release #6-63-5)
Charles Michels, lrc scientist, described Lewis work with a “coaxial plasma-gun,” being studied as a method to propel future interplanetary spacecraft. Michels spoke before the American Physical Society in Cleveland, (lro Release 63-44, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Speaking at American Institute of Chemical Engineers meeting in Buffalo, N.Y., engineers of Linde Co. described new process for making liquid hydrogen that would reduce its cost from $2 per pound to 35 or 40 cents per pound. (AP, NYT, 5/7/63, 11)
Resignation of Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator since 1961, announced by Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Mr. Dixon had joined nasa Sept. 1961, when he was named Director of Office of Launch Vehicles. Before that, he had been Vice President for Research and Engineering of North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. He was resigning to return to North American as assistant to the president. (nasa Release 63—42; naa sais Skywriter, 3/8/63,1)
Report on laser research presented at meeting of American Physical Society by Robert W. Terhune, Ford Motor Co. physicist. Ford scientists had succeeded in altering laser’s ultraviolet-ray frequency to other frequencies, an achievement hailed as breakthrough toward using lasers for communications. {NYT, 4/24/63,18)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that Goldstone Tracking Station nau uiaue nrst rauar contact o an. zL wnn pianet itiars in a Az-hour per day experiment which would end early in March. 25-billion watt signal made 125-million mi. round trip Jan. 21 (the return signal being only one-billionth of one-trillionth of a watt) and indicated Mars has both rough and smooth surfaces, (jpi. Release; Wash. Are. Star, 2/22/63, A2; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A10) February 21: Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified to the House Armed Services Committee: “In recognition of the increased impact of space programs on our national resources and their direct effect on our future national security, Air Force space activities are closely coordinated with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. One example is the recent agreement between the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on the Gemini program. The intent is to insure that the scientific and operational experiments undertaken as a part of the Gemini program will be directed towards satisfying both military and nasa requirements and objectives .... “Our forward space development program integrates the rad work of many years into a cohesive space program. Funding for all facets of the program is not included m the FY 1964 budget, but the program will provide for Air Force space activities for the near future. “The Air Force has developed a solid foundation of space on which military capabilities can be built. These efforts have brought us to a point where significant military space possibilities are (dearly apparent. Utilizing the technological base so far established, the Air Force must translate these technical capabilities into actual defense systems. The time required to move from a development state to operational systems is measured in years. Yet, it is the ready military capability, not the technological base, that accomplishes deterrence. Accordingly, the Air Force proposes to begin some of these conversions at once. “The forward program aims at two basic objectives: “first, to enhance the general military posture of the United States by building a defense capability in space. Space is not only a new area of vulnerability to attack, but also affords important means of supporting the terrestrial forces of the U.S. in relation to a military threat posed by a hostile power. “second, to provide a capability within the space region for the purpose of denying to a hostile power the uninhibited military exploitation of space, and to provide a system of protection for U.S. scientific activities in space . . . .” (Text; A-N-AF J oumal and Regi ster, 3/2/63,17,37)
Dr. Max Tishler, President of Merck, Sharp & Dohme Research Laboratories, received the 1963 Chemical Industry Medal of the American Section, Society of Chemical Industry, in Houston. In his acceptance speech Dr. Tishler discussed growth of Federal support of basic research, concluded: “Industrial research—once devoted exclusively to the promotion of economic growth—has become predominantly a Government-dominated institution for protecting the Nation’s security and exploring the solar system. “The question is being asked with increasing persistence whether we are devoting a disproportionate amount of our scientific and technical resources to the Government’s objectives. It has been pointed out that between 1954 and 1961 three-quarters of the increase in scientists and engineers engaged in research and development was absorbed by the defense and space programs, and that the programs on the drawing boards of these same agencies will require as many scientists during the next decade as all our institutions of higher learning will graduate during the same period .... How far and how long can this situation progress without damaging our country’s capacity to maintain its broad leadership in research ? “The Defense Department and the space agency have countered these concerns with predictions of spinoffs for the civilian economy from developments financed by them. So far, the evidence for this contention is unpersuasive. Whether or not the prophecy will come true does not alter the unrelenting fact that too little attention is being paid to the long-range effect on the civilian economy and to the manner in which we have been using tax money to divert our scarce scientific and technical resources into such crash projects as the race to the moon. Our Government has been prone to act as if these resources are either unlimited or can be expanded indefinitely by appropriating dollars. Neither proposition is correct . . . .” (Text, CR, 1/15/64, A143-145)
Hook-up of three global satellite tracking networks into a single central console at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was announced. Console allows combinations of operators at 51 communications points around the world in the satellite tracking and data acquisition network, the manned space flight tracking network, and the deep space instrumentation facilities. (AP, NTT, 12/11/63)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director, Procurement and Supply, at the NASA-Industry Programs Plans Conference, Washington, D.C., explained the role of small business in nasa contracting. “During fiscal year 1962 small business companies received 66 percent of the total number of contractual actions, large and small, placed by nasa. This small business share of nasa procurement amounted to approximately $125 million, or 12 percent of the total nasa procurement placed with all business firms . . . They are able to compete successfully for many of nasa’s contracts, particularly in furnishing components and supplies. During fiscal year 1962, of the hundred contractors who received the largest dollar value of nasa prime contracts, 24 were small business concerns. In those procurements where small business concerns submitted bids, they were successful in receiving 57 percent of the dollar value of the awards.” (Proceedings, nasa SP-29; Text)
usaf launched Titan icbm in routine training test from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 1018-63)
nasa Argo D-8 (Journeyman) rocket launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif., the four-stage sounding rocket carrying 104-lb. instrumented payload to probe hazards of the radiation belts. Designed by Univ. of Minnesota scientists, payload reached 990-mi. altitude and relayed valuable information during its 27-min. flight, then impacted in Pacific Ocean 1,250-mi. south of Pt. Arguello. Launch was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with support by nasa Wallops Station personnel. (Wallops Release 63-12; AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 2/12/63)
usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1188-63)
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell L. Gilpatric discussed management of military r&d at Chemical Engineering Achievement Awards Dinner, New York City: “Ten years ago, expenditures for defense research and development were at a level of about $2 billion or about 5% of the U.S. military budget. Today the comparable figure is over $7 billion, or nearly 14% of the current Defense budget. Half of this total is for system development, a good deal of which represents prototype hardware. The other half represents the dollars that buy brain-power at the drawing board and in the labs—and nowadays I should add computer time .... “There are indications that we are seeing the beginning of a K'od of increasing Congressional concern and interest that may to even tighter controls over r&d expenditures. This change in Congressional attitude is more than an expression of growing concern over deficit spending. It reflects an increased awareness of the national importance of r&d .... “Today, fortunately, there can be no question about the sufficiency of American military power, either now or for the foreseeable future. The 100% increase of strategic alert force megatonnage in the past three years and the large and unquestioned U.S. lead in both bombers and missiles provide us with the kind of strength that permits us to go forward with our r&d effort in a more orderly way . . . .” (Text, dod Release 1527-63)
If we do not make these efforts we will not be first on the moon, we will not be first in space and one day soon we will not be the first on earth.’ ” {Av. Wk., 4/29/63,17) April£9: aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, speaking at Centennial Charter Day Convocation, Univ. of Massachusetts, said: “If we look back a number of centuries to the Middle Ages, we find that man and society in the Western World were dominated by rather static concepts. The individual was born into a world that was essentially unchanging by our standards. He was not very important. Poverty, disease, toil, and natural calamities were simply an inevitable part of life. He accepted the proffered explanations of the world and the universe, and his curiosity was not encouraged. Man was a fearful and superstitious plaything of his environment. The concept that man might improve his lot was not widely considered. Nor were the tools at hand for such a task. “The beginning of the changes in this outlook are generally identified with the Renaissance and the Reformation. The questioning and inquisitive human spirit could not be stifled forever. Men began to question old forms and beliefs—in religion, politics, and the law; in art and literature; and in science and philosophy.	* “The process of breaking out of a closed world and liberating the mind was a slow one, and it is by no means complete. There were many landmarks, established by many brave men in all walks of life, on the route to liberation. An example was the overthrow, by the evidence produced by Copernicus and Galileo, of the dogmatic concept that the earth is the center of the universe. It is difficult for us today to estimate the impact, on a closed system of thought, of the knowledge that the earth and the other planets revolve around the sun. If such an important belief could fall, were not others vulnerable ? While science was opening man’s eyes to the truth of his surroundings, a change was m the making concerning the concept of nian himself. The themes of individual rights ana freedom were being developed in the period of the enlightenment and the first crystallization of these revolutionary ideas was in the American Revolution—the first revolution of which I am to speak to you today. Beginning with the Declaration of Independence and culminating with the adoption of the Constitution, the place of the State was confined to protecting the rights of the individual and becoming the instrument for man’s self-government .... “The freedom to embrace new ideas, the concept that men need not accept miserable conditions of life, and the hope inherent in science, unleashed as never before the economic energies of man. Our second revolution, the industrial revolution, and the rise of science and technology, saw a beginning of the realization of . . . a huge increase in industrial and agricultural production at a cost of less total labor, the conquest of many diseases, the lengthening of life, the improvement of health .... “As we now enter the early stages of the scientific revolution— our third revolution—the full flower of creative evolution is bursting upon us. Yet ‘powerful as the forces of science and technology have already demonstrated themselves to be, relatively speaking we are only beginning to feel their influence. Our Nation and the world are committed to an accelerating cycle of knowledge-gathering and knowledge-exploitation. We cannot visualize in detail the consequences for the future. We can, however, clearly see that we can, if we have the wisdom, create an environment essentially of our own choosing. The scientific revolution can provide for the essential needs of men around the globe. Our small world will grow smaller. At the same time our perspective will be broadened unimaginably by the exploration of space. We can only guess at the distant impact of this dynamism on man, his institutions, the content of thought and the quality of life. We can be sure, however, that successful adaptation to the changing environment can be achieved, in an atmosphere of freedom, only through advancement of men generally to higher 1 eve's of education . . . .” (Text, in CR, 4/29/63, 6847—49) April 29: Addressing the Senate space committee, Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric summed up dod’s philosophy on space: “The United States has a single national space program. . . . Space, like other mediums, affords useful and often unique ways for achieving defense objectives. Some of these are by no means uniquely military . . . similar remarks would apply to machines and devices used in the air, on land and on sea, and space is no exception. ... As a corollary to these observations, the totality of our military space efforts, assessed from a national rather than a departmental standpoint, greatly exceeds the efforts of the Department of Defense alone. Space systems and devices are not simply military or non-military merely because they are developed by one agency or another.” (M&R, 5/6/63) April H9: General Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, testifying before the House Science and Astronautics Committee, said that the Air Force was reviewing its space program, at the request of Defense Secretary McNamara, to determine how the Air Force might better achieve its military mission capabilities. Stressing the importance of both the Military Orbital Development Station (mods) and Aerospace Plane (asp), he said that mods was “of fundamental importance to achieving various military capabilities in space, both manned and unmanned.” (M&R, 5/6/63)
U.S. and Japan exchanged notes summing up agreement to increase missile defenses in Japan. (Okie. Trib., 4/27/63) April 27; nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in interview at Princeton Univ. alumni meeting in Washington that first manned flight in Project Gemini would not be made for at least a year. He attributed the slippage to “some difficulty with the utilization of Titan II” and “some problems” with Gemini spacecraft. “No one can forecast now when we will fly Gemini.” On subject of Soviet space competition, Mr. Webb said: “With their existing rockets, they will probably be able to do a multimanned flight around the earth a year before we will do that.” (Hines, Wash. Sum.. Star, 4/28/63)
Maj. Harold W. Dietz (usaf) of Vandenberg afb told aerospace medicine conference at sam that it was “practically impossible” for a single commanding officer of an icbm site, even if he lost self-control in a nervous breakdown, to start a nuclear war. Major Dietz reviewed the safeguards built into the complex procedure for preparing and firing icbm’s. (Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A6)
Physicist S. Fred Singer, Director of National Weather Satellite Center, said at American Geophysical Union meeting that the millions of tiny copper dipoles to be placed in orbit in usaf Project West Ford could remain aloft for as long as a century. Dr. Singer added that he did not regard the orbiting copper dipoles as threat to scientific observations, but he criticized secrecy surrounding first attempted West Ford launching. He urged freer and earlier public discussion of proposed space projects and suggested that U.S. invite scientists from other nations to discuss proposed U.S. scientific experiments with possible global consequences. (Wash. Post, 4/19/63; AP, Balt. Sim, 4/19/63)
Senate unanimously passed a joint resolution authorizing a special medal to be struck in honor of Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (Ret.), one of the first military pilots in the U.S., chief of the Air Service of the American Expeditionary Force in World War I, and Chief of the Air Corps from 1931 to 1935. (CR, 6/27/63, 11203) June 28: nasa concurred in Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. selection of Radio Corp. of America as subcontractor for Lunar Excursion Module (lem) electronic subsystems and engineering support. ( nasa Release 63-143)
New York City honored Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper with tickertape parade. At city luncheon honoring Major Cooper, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and the entire Project Mercury team, Mayor Robert Wagner presented Major Cooper and Mr. Webb with city’s Medal of Honor and scroll acclaiming MA-9 space flight. Mayor Wagner said: “. . . It is remarkable how such a feat not only unites our own country in prideful pleasure, but also gives satisfaction to the rest of the world—to friend and foe alike. This is not man against man, but man against the elements, man against the forces of nature, man armed with the power of knowledge . . . .” {NYT, 5/23/63; CR, 5/29/63, A3487)
usaf launched three Atlases from Vandenberg afb: Atlas D fired down the Pacific Missile Range in Abres (advanced ballistic reentry system) test; Atlas-Agena D booster rocket combination launched an unidentified satellite; and Atlas F fired down the pmr with mock nuclear warhead. (NYT, 12/19/63, 18)
Nike-Apache sounding rockef launched at Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 94-mi. altitude in experiment to obtain measurements of electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in ionosphere. Test was part of continuing nasa program conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center to study ionosphere. (Wallops Release 63-20)
usaf conducted routine training launching of Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 844-63)
Sixth Annual Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, sponsored by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. In address, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson paid tribute to the “father of modern rocketry,” and said that those today who “understand the stakes of space” must help “the public to understand these stakes.” He urged that communications barriers among scientists, engineers, and politicians be abolished so that public support for public policy can be obtained. “Unless and until this is done,” said the Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, “the technological community cannot justifiably be impatient with those who are chosen to represent and express the public’s own will.” In addition to honoring Mrs. Goddard, the National Rocket Club presented its annual awards: the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, its premiere award, to John H. Glenn, Jr., in recognition of the first U.S. manned orbital space flight; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for development and operation of telstar i; the National Rocket Club Award to the Radio-Television Industry (abc, cbs, mbs, and nbc) for “pioneering private enterprise efforts” under the U.S. open information coverage of the space program; the Astronautics Engineer Award to Jack Norval James of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Technical Director of mariner ii. The First Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was given to R. Cargill Hall of San Jose, Calif., for his prize essay on “World-Circling Spaceships—Satellite Studies in the U.S. During the 1940’s”; Honorable Mentions going to Wilfrid J. Mayo-Wells of Washington, D.C. (“Origins of Space Telemetry”) and Robert D. Roach of Buffalo, N.Y. (“The First Man-Rocket Belt”). The Robert H. Goddard Scholarship was awarded to Miss Marcia S. Miner, physics major at the American University. (Program)
Rainer Berger, senior research scienti^. at Lockheed-Califomia, Co., predicted man would probably encounter some form of extraterrestrial life within 10 years. Speaking at ninth annual meeting of American Astronautical Society, Los Angeles, Berger also suggested “greenhouse effect” of planet Jupiter might make possible the existence of warm oceans hospitable to life on that planet. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,6)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and nasa cosponsored second Manned Space Flight Meeting, in Dallas, Tex. (Advance Program) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter described flight experiences in Project Mercury at the aiaa Second Manned Space Flight Meeting, Dallas, and concluded: “I think this philosophy sums up our attitude toward manned space flight. It is the increasing importance of man in the system that is going to characterize our space flights of the future. We will need skilled pilots to fly these missions, and we are in the process of developing those skills now. “The era of manned space flight is just beginning, however, and Project Mercury is only the first step. We are convinced that it has been a very profitable step and that succeeding programs in manned space flight will continue to expand our knowledge of the universe, hopefully for the benefit of all mankind.” (Text)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., with nuclear emulsion payload to study very-low-energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Payload reached 150-mi. altitude, was recovered from an inland lake approximately 90 mi. from launch site. Instrumentation and nuclear emulsions were in excellent condition, but analysis of nuclear emulsions would require considerable time. Experiment was project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
usaf launched a Minuteman icbm from an underground silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (Wash. Post, 11/30/63) November SO: gsfc announced negotiations with the Marine Engineering Dept, of Northrop-Nortronics on a contract for design and construction of a huge 230-ton test chamber to simulate the launch phase of space flight for test of unmanned spacecraft and their components. The chamber would duplicate as nearly as possible the environmental conditions and the separate or combined conditions of acceleration, noise, vibration, and vacuum. The Launch Phase Simulator was expected to cost approximately $1.9 million. (gsfc Release G-27-63)
Plans for orbiting 18 unhatched chicken eggs in Biosatellite were described at aaas meeting by Dr. G. N. Hoover, Chief of Life Sciences, North American Aviation, Inc. One of several Biosatellite experiments planned for life specimens, the experiment was expected to yield data on effects of weightlessness on incubating eggs. (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/30/63)
usaf announced Titan II missile had been test-fired while locked in its 155-ft.-deep silo at Vandenberg afb. Firing of “brief” duration was to test the missile’s resistance to noise and vibration. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate extension to existing contract with Control Data Corp. for procurement of computers and associated equipment for Apollo spacecraft Pre-Flight Acceptance Checkout Equipment (pace) stations. Cost of the equipment for the nine stations was expected to exceed $25 million. General Electric Co. would receive the equipment as government-furnished equipment, would deliver first two pace systems to North American Aviation, Inc., for checkout of Apollo command and service modules. Four systems would be delivered to John F. Kennedy Space Center, two to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., and one to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 63-286) ....	.
J. A. MacTaggart, managing director of Niagara Falls, Ontario, wax museum, said wax image of Astronaut John Glenn was not on display because of “astronomical” $3,000 it would cost to purchase space suit from American manufacturer. Wax figure of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was on display, Soviet Government having supplied copy of his space suit after request through British Aeronautical Board. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63)
Stratoscope II balloon was launched from Palestine, Tex., landed near Kosciusko, Miss., some 18 hrs. later, having lifted a 3^-ton 36-in. telescope some 80,000 ft. where the telescope, viewing space from a point above 95% of the earth’s interfering atmosphere, photographed the infrared light coming from Jupiter, the moon, and two giant red stars. Dr. Marvin Schwarzchild, of Princeton Univ. and head of the scientific team, said they were hopeful that the photographs would provide another piece of evidence on the life cycle of stars, nsf, which has sponsored the series of Stratoscope balloon flights along with onr and nasa, termed the flight “very successful.” (Wasli. Post, 11/28/63, L5; NYT, 12/3/63, 46)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was successfully launched from Vandenberg afb in routine launch, (dod Release 997-63)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, addressing American Meteorological Society in New York, said: “A global system of weather services and atmospheric research requires much more than the sum of separate national programs, much more than traditional cooperation or coordination. Its success depends upon a world-wide joint effort benefiting a world-wide task . . . .” (ams Release)
A. Scott Crossfield, first pilot of the X-15 and now an executive with North American Aviation, Inc., said in an interview that he thought the X-15 “can fly twice as high as its present record and probably can go several hundred miles faster than it has been flown . . . .” The increased altitude “. . . would be more difficult than the extra speed and it would create re-entry problems too.” (Tulsa Daily World, 10/11/63)
In address at a space exploration symposium at New York University, Dr. Eugene M. Emme, nasa Historian, reviewed the birth of the space age and its first half decade. Referring to the impact of space exploration upon society, he said: “Space exploration—with all of its novelty and drama and future potential for society—continues to jar the intellect, stir the emotions, and stimulate actions among peoples everywhere .... Our children, of course, have no doubt whatever that man will soon set foot on the surface of the moon, and then the nearby planets; it is only a question of exactly how soon. The rest of us old folks, conditioned as we are to the scientific and technological realities of the recent past, have a little difficulty comprehending either the reality or the significance concerning the mobility or mankind in space today and tomorrow .... “To the historian, the closing of the present kindergarten era of astronautics, with its tender philosophy, offers the germ for a new renaissance in the mind and spirit of mankind. It could well be a renaissance for mankind as was sparked with the new geography of Columbus and Magellan and the new astronomy of Copernicus and Galileo which helped loosen Europe from the Dark Ages; or when the new biology of Darwin for the physical organism, the challenges of Marx and the new psychology of Bergson and Freud for the conscious man assisted the great intellectual stimulus of the late nineteenth century as well as the humanitarianism and the technological boom of the twentieth century . . . .” (Text; Airpower Historian, 1/64,6-10) November 1: Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory was dedicated by akpa and usaf in Arecibo, Puerto Rico. Largest radar-radio telescope of its kind in the world, aio is a l,000-ft.-diameter bowl constructed in a natural bowl formed by several mountain peaks. As a radiotelescope, it should detect radiation from galactic sources considerably more distant than any yet detected. As a radar, it would be the most sensitive instrument yet built for ionospheric research. Dr. Thomas Gold, head of the astronomy department of Cornell Univ., which built and would operate the new facility, predicted that it would help make clear “the grand architecture of the Universe.” (dod Release 1358-63; Schmeck, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Atlas missile was launched from Cape Canaveral in test of new slimsilhouette warhead intended to present less image on enemy radar screens. Atlas went out of control 2% min. after launch and fell into the Atlantic far short of its intended goal. This was the sixth successive failure of Atlas missiles, the previous five at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/63)
afsc announced awarding two six-month study contracts for operations analyses and preliminary design of long-range, low-level supersonic air-to-surface missile designated the Chemical Low Altitude Missile (clam). Recipients of the two $300,000 contracts were North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Division and Lockheed California Co. (afsc Release 39-107-104)
usaf launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in successful routine training launch, (dod Release 987-63)
Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal for his achievements as pilot of X-15 rocket research aircraft. Presentation was made by Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert in ceremony at Edwards afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/63)
usaf successfully fired Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, a routine training launch by sac crew, (dod Release 1142-63)
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo in successful flight, (dod Release 767-63)
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb down the Pacific Missile Range in routine training launch, (non Release 987-63)
Thomas F. Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa, told American Rocket Society Solid Propellant Rocket Conference in Philadelphia: “From the programs of the past two years has come conclusive evidence that large segmented [solid propellant] motors are not only feasible but highly reliable .... “Also clear is the quality that is perhaps the greatest virtue of solid rockets: the relative speed with which major advances in performance can be achieved. In a brief period, the technologies of weight, thrust, bum time, and thrust vector control have moved forward rapidly .... “The new dod-nasa program carried out by the U.S. Air Force will give us a great deal of information on the technology and logistics associated with these very large high-thrust engines .... “As we move deeper and deeper into space, it seems likely that we will come to rely upon solids for an increasing variety of missions for the same reasons that we have called upon them in the past—reliability, storability, ruggedness, low cost of development, and instant readiness, to mention a few . . . .” (Text)
Link Div. of General Precision, Inc., awarded $9.5-million contract to develop two Apollo mission simulators for training astronauts at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center and Cape Canaveral. Contract was awarded by North American Aviation, Inc., prime Apollo spacecraft contractors. {Av. Wk:., 5/6/63,25)
Communist China’s press agency Hsinhua announced that more than 1,000 Chinese and. foreign scientists met in Peking to celebrate establishment of center for the World Federation of Scientific Workers devoted to the “advancement of science in Asian, African and Latin American countries.” (NYT, 9/26/63, 5)
With launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Kronogard Range, Sweden and U.S. completed series of sounding rocket experiments to study noctilucent clouds near Arctic Circle. Sponsored by nasa and Swedish Committee for Space Research, program included launchings of Areas rockets with payloads to measure winds and Nike-Cajun rockets with payloads to make direct cloud samplings during 1961 and 1962. Four Nike-Cajun rockets with rocket grenade payloads were successfully launched during summer 1963, these experiments measuring upper atmosphere temperatures, winds, pressure, and density and measuring changes in size of artificial cloud particles created by smoke puffs from the payloads. Experimenters were scientists from Institute of Meteorology, Univ. of Stockholm; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had responsibility for U.S. coordination in the project. (nasa Release 63-179)
Hanson W. Baldwin reported in New York Times that during latest Soviet nuclear tests “one high-altitude explosion destroyed two incoming missiles. In one American high-altitude test in the Pacific, a fairly small nuclear detonation high above the earth caused fission—an atomic chain reaction—in a nose cone 150 miles above the earth and 800 miles from the explosion. “This phenomenon, called neutron flux, travels great distances in a virtual vacuum. Thus it may be able to neutralize fissionable material in incoming warheads. This is a technique about which the Russians are believed to know more than American scientists . . . .” (Baldwin, NYT, 7/26/63)
Air Force biomedical support of Projects Gemini and Apollo included: at School of Aerospace Med’cine. Brooks afb. Tex., studies of physiological effects of exposure to various atmospheric pressures and gases, special medical examinations of flight candidates, and thermal balance and water requirements for wearing the Apollo spacesuit; at Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, studies of effect on men of predicted impact velocities for Apollo landing, nutrient requirements, weightless orientation flights for astronauts, and thermal evaluation of prototype Gemini spacesuit; at Aeromedical Research Laboratory, Holloman afb, N.M., studies on effects of deceleration forces on Apollo pilots during recovery. (Space Bus. Daily. 10/18/63,108)	_
fcc Chairman E. William Henry predicted in address to American Bar Association’s Committee on Communications, meeting in Chicago, that a single communications satellite eventually may equal carrying capacity of all telephone cable circuits between U.S. and rest of the world. Last year 5 million telephone calls were made from U.S. to 176 countries. Existing facilities probably will be used to capacity by 1965, he said, and $500-million international communications system will be in operation by 1970. New transistorized cable, with capacity of almost six times present capacity, will be available. (Wolters, Chic. Trib., 8/15/63) August 15: stncom ii communications satellite was successfully maneuvered into synchronous position 55° west longitude, over Brazil and South Atlantic Ocean. The satellite was slowed from westward drift speed of 1.2° per day to nearly zero drift by firing of onboard nitrogen jets. Previous firings of hydrogen peroxide jets occurred Aug. 11, when syncom ii was slowed from 7° drift per day to 2.7° drift per day, and Aug. 12. when satellite was reduced to 1.2° drift. Firings were directed by engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and actual command was executed from ground station at Lakehurst, N.J. stncom n was now stationed about 22,300-mi. altitude and traveling at speed of about 6,800 mph, matching earth’s rotation speed of 1,040 mph at equator to keep it on station. It was hovering in figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator, nasa Administrator James E. Webb called completion of the positioning maneuvers the culmination of “one of the outstanding feats in the history of space flight.” (nasa “stncom n Fact Sheet”; nasa Release 63-185)
nasa and dod negotiation of agreement giving nasa authority to purchase its own Atlas-Agena launch vehicles was reported by Missites and Rockets, nasa had signed agreement, and dod approval was “expected shortly.” (M&R, 6/24/63,9) Jv/ne %4: John Stack, pioneer of aircraft development over 34 years with naca and nasa, now director of engineering for Republic Aviation Corp., interviewed on supersonic transport development in U.S. News and World Report. Asked how much had been done on U.S. supersonic transport to date, he said: “. . . You could almost take it off the shelf today. The technology is there. It’s just a matter of pulling it together and putting it into the airplane you want. We were doing research on the problems of supersonic transport down at Langley Research Center all through the late 1950’s. We knew then that it was feasible. There was no fundamental scientific obstacle. “In December of 1959, at the request of E. R. Quesada who was head of the Federal Aviation Agency and President Eisenhower’s aviation adviser, we made a presentation on development of a supersonic transport. Mr. Quesada recommended that work get underway. He didn’t get the money he asked for, but supersonic-transport development was established as a national policy. “The Kennedy administration came in, in 1961, and Najeeb Halaby replaced Mr. Quesada at the faa. He pushed ahead with the development program. Congress appropriated a total of $31 million for the project in 1961 and 1962. This year, 1963, was to be the prototype year. “. . . as you know, the day after Pan American Airways announced that it was placing an order for six of the British-French Concorde supersonic transports President Kennedy said there will be a supersonic transport program. “. . . If we wait another year [for Congressional appropriations], we will be in a serious position in this competition. . . .” _ (U.S. News, 6/24/63j/7?, 7/9/63,11621-22)
usaf announced launching unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, NYT, 9/25/63, 14)
usaf announced launching Titan II icbm from underground silo in test flight from Vandenberg afb. (AP, NYT, 9/25/63,14)
Satellite Symposium, held by nasa in Washington, D.C., Dr. Van Allen said data from injun iii and explorer xiv satellites showed intensity at center of artificial belt had decreased only by a factor of two. As recently as last December, Dr. Van Allen had reiterated his view that the bulk of artificial radiation would disappear by summer 1963. However, based on newly available data, Dr. Van Allen said artificial radiation would decrease in intensity by factor of three or four until period of increased solar activity (around 1967) when decay rate should increase. He also said electrons in artificial belt have higher energies (up to a few mev) than natural space electrons, making them easier for scientists to study. {Av. Wk. 3/25/63, 27; Wash. Post, 3/16/63; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/16/63)
Dr. George L. Simpson, Jr., nasa Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition: “nasa is committed to a hard, driving effort to transfer the useful fruits of our research and development effort to the private sector of the economy in as quick and as useful a way as possible. “We are committed, first, because the Space Act requires it. nasa is directed to ‘Provide for the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning its activities and the results thereof.’ “We are also committed because we are mindful that a large part of the Nation’s r&d effort is occupied by the Federal agencies; and that it is essential that the maximum value be wrung out of this part of the total effort. “The requirements for space exploration begin in the field of anatomy and run through virtually the whole gamut of scientific and technological interest, through new power sources to zero gravity. Further, those things which are made for space travel receive no compromises from that harsh environment. Which is to say that a very large part of the total space work is at the very leading edge of the state-of-the-art; and that in another large part of the state-of-the-art must be extended. “It is reasonable to think that an effort of such size, range and sophistication, extending over a number of years, cannot fail to have major scientific and economic consequences: consequences that begin as scientific and technological advances and then are converted into new techniques of manufacture, new systems of organization, and new products and services. The space effort will be, we think, altogether comparable in its effect on the American economy to that of World War II. Our objective is to maximize, to facilitate, to speed up this effect. . . . “We are aware that past experience indicates severe problems in the transfer of government research and development efforts to private use. However, we feel that the Nation’s well being requires a major effect to determine whether these problems can be solved.” (Testimony)
X-15 No. 2, damaged in a landing accident in Nov. 1962, would be returned to flight status early in 1964 with a number of improvements, nasa announced. Under a usaf contract with North American Aviation, Inc., the damaged X-15 was being modified to take another 13,500 lbs. of propellants. This would increase the rocket engine burning time from 86 sec. to 145 sec., which theoretically would add some 1,300 mph to maximum speed capability. There were no plans for extending altitude capability because it would increase re-entry stresses. Other modifications included strengthened nose wheel and landing skids, dropable wing tanks, provision for installation of two 50-gal. liquid-hydrogen tanks in the fuselage midsection, to be used for advanced propulsion experiments, and windshield changes and ablative material additions to cope with the higher heat accompanying higher speed, (frc Release 27-63)
Minuteman icbm successfully launched from underground silo, Vandenberg afb, by sac crew, seventh of series of Minuteman launchings down Pacific Missile Range. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/63)
Washington (D.C.) Academy of Sciences presented its 1962 scientific achievement awards to: the Rev. Francis J. Hey den, Professor of Astronomy and Director of the S. J. Observatory, Georgetown Univ., winner for science teaching because “by combining teaching and research, he leads others to join his adventures in science”; Dr. Marshall Nirenberg, National Institutes of Health, winner in biological sciences; Lindell E. Steele, Naval Research Laboratory, winner in engineering sciences; Dr. Bruce L. Reinhart, Univ. of Maryland and Research Institute for Advanced Study, Baltimore, winner in mathematics; and Dr. Edward A. Mason, Univ. of Maryland, winner in physical sciences. (Wash. Sum,. Star, 2/17/63)
Titan II missile launched for first time from underground silo, in usaf test from Vandenberg afb. Re-entry vehicle landed in preselected target area and flight was described as a complete success. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/63, Al)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/8/63, Al) center could acquire' management responsibility for all or part of these planetary projects, study having been initiated at request of nasa Hq. Unnamed Hq. spokesman pointed out that jpl is now responsible for all nasa unmanned lunar and planetaiy programs and has heavy workload with Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner R projects; Goddard may be asked to perform major subsystem work in Mariner B and Voyager, perhaps leading to eventual overall direction of the projects. (MdkR, 1/7/63,14)
By this date, engineering design work on the Apollo spacecraft was more than 75 per cent complete and work had begun on fabrication of the stainless steel skin and molding of honeycomb aluminum inner walls of the command module at the North American Aviation plant at Downey, Calif. (Finney, NYT, 10/13/63, 80)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center issued $49,000 contract amendment to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for extension of study on Apollo spacecraft modifications for manned space sciences laboratory. Amendment called for studies and concepts of linking two or more modified Apollo spacecraft. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/4/63,338)
Second Town Meeting of the World telecast by cbs-TV via telstar u satellite. The subject was “The Christian Revolution” and linked in a discussion church leaders in New York, London, and Rome. Program was only a partial technical success, since the audio signal for the speakers in Rome was missing for most of the program. (cbs-TV) October 16; Twin Vela Hotel satellites were launched by dod from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas-Agena vehicle, according to newspaper reports. The two satellites, designed to detect nuclear explosions m space to a distance of 100,000,000 mi., were launched mto an elliptical orbit of 57,000-mi. apogee, 230-mi. perigee. Some 18 hours after launch, one of the two satellites received a signal from Vandenberg afb which activated a rocket motor at apogee to kick the satellite into circular orbit at 57,000 mi. On Oct. 19, the same was done for the second satellite, so that both would orbit at 57,000 mi. but always be on opposite sides of the earth. Reports also indicated that a third satellite, known as “Pygmy” and weighing 2^2 llis., was included in the launch, would remain in elliptical orbit returning radiation readings across the depth of the Van Allen Belt. This function was said to be completely independent of the purpose of the twin Vela Hotel satellites. (Witkin, NYT, 10/18/63, 13; Wash. Post, 10/18/63; N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/18/63; dod Release 1396-63)
dod announced the transfer of the Naval Missile Facility at Point Arguello, Calif., and Navy tracking stations in the Pacific to the usaf and the establishment within the usaf of a central authority to act as single manager for icbm and space tracking activities, including amr, icbm and space activities at Point Arguello and Vandenberg afb, Calif., and the Air Force Satellite Control Facility, Sunnyvale, Calif, usaf also acquired on-orbit control of dod satellites except Navy navigational satellites and militaiy communications satellites, (dod Release 1494—63)
Dr. Frank J. Malina, U.S. astronautics pioneer, elected by International Academy of Astronautics to succeed the late Dr. Theodore von Karman as Director of theAcademy until its annual meeting next autumn. Dr. Malina had served as Academy’s Deputy Director since 1961. (iaa Release No. 14) During May: Paul D. Lowman, Jr., geologist in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Theoretical Div., asked whether lunar base, permanent manned space station, or manned Mars exploration would “give the greatest scientific return in the shortest possible time,” replied: “A lunar base, very definitely. The moon will be more useful scientifically than Mars because it has no atmosphere, and because, being much closer, we can send back information and samples at a much higher rate. Compared with the space station, the moon has the advantage of providing a large, stable platform with usable raw materials; in addition, the moon has a stratigraphic record of its history and of meteoritic material which has accumulated on it. These advantages are in a sense a one-way street. We can make many of the observations proposed for the space station from the moon as well, because the moon has essentially a space environment. But we cannot examine the lunar rocks from a space station; we must get down on the surface for that. . . .” (Goddard Release) During May: nasa awarded $115-million contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for continued development of F-l engine. New contract was follow-on to letter contract which had initiated F-l development. {M&R, 5/6/63,13)
usaf announced routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 1080-63) ■July 27: Eastward drifting of stncom n communications satellite was reversed by ground command firing of hydrogen peroxide jet controls onboard the satellite, stncom ii was now drifting westward at rate of 5° per day. After drifting into desired position, satellite would be stopped by onboard control jets so that it would be in synchronous position of 24-hour orbit. Command signals to stncom n were sent by U.S. Army Satellite Communications Agency station aboard usns Kingsport in Lagos Harbor, Nigeria, (nasa Release; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/28/63; AP, Wash. Post, 7/28/63)
WTright Brothers Day. Events commemorating the 60th anniversary of powered flight were highlighted by dedication of First Flight Airport at Kitty Hawk, N.C., the 3,000-ft. l iinwriy parallel ing flight path of Wright Flyer. Airport was built by State of North Carolina, fa a, and National Park Service. Dedication speeches were made by Governor Terry Sanford and Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges. Other participants in ceremony included Sen. A. S. Monroney (D.-Okla.), cab Chairman Alan Boyd, tac Commander Gen. Walter C. Sweeney, Jr. (usaf), and Park Service Director Conrad L. Wirth. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine, and Coast Guard joined for first time in display of air power, with more than 70 airplanes flying over the site. (NYT, 12/16/63; NYT, 12/18/63, 30)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at Patrick afb :	. . about our future in space, let me establish two bench marks. The first is that the Air Force needs everything it can get from nasa. nasa needs us, too, as the record of how nasa puts things into space indicates, but if there weren’t a nasa, the same facility and capability would have to be created some other way.	... “There is reassuring precedent for the principle of having an outside-of-defense civilian agency provide the type of support we need. The case at point is the Atomic Energy Commission. Our own nuclear weapon flexibility as well as the Polaris-carrying submarine is sufficient testimony. “The clear lesson for us in the space field is that we must put requirements on nasa to meet whatever part of our needs can be met in this way. We must utilize every possible resource to build the necessary military capability and I can assure you that nasa is ready to respond. Jim Webb, the nasa Administrator, harbors no illusions about nasa’s responsibilities in support of national defense requirements. “The second bench mark is that there is no such thing as peaceful space or military space. There is just space. The new and massive space program in a civilian agency was launched nearly five years ago, with—for reasons which seemed not unreasonable at the time—a great hullabaloo about peaceful objectives .... “We have a lot to learn. The recent agreement with nasa for joint participation in the Gemini program is one way. That agreement represents an answer from both dod and nasa to critics wbo said there was no place in space for military man. Our own activity directed toward manned space vehicles will increase, and with nasa’s back-up, we’ll attain the needed capability earlier than we would otherwise. “A term you hear around Washington to denote the areas of cooperation between government agencies is ‘interface.’ Here at Patrick is one of the primary ‘nasa—Air Force interfaces.’ Such terms usually leave me pretty cold but this one does have some descriptive value. “There will be plenty of problems between the Air Force and nasa, but not by any means all at the ‘interface’ points such as the Cape. We wouldn’t either one be true to trust or tradition if there weren’t. Any machine as big as the national space effort is bound to have some kind of friction. But just remember, a clutch is a friction interface. Its purpose is to join two shafts for the transmission of power. “The power we can get will provide protection for the free world in space. This was my third point—to make sure that no aggressor can exploit space, either for expansionism on earth or interference in space with the peaceful pursuits of the free world. . . .” (Text)
Goddard Space Flight Center engineers directed radio signal sent from Lakehurst, N.J., to stncom ii communications satellite 22,000 mi. in space, signaling hydrogen peroxide jets onboard to fire and slow satellite’s drift westward from rate of about 7° to about 2° per day. With aid of additional maneuvers signaled from ground, syncom ii was expected to attain synchronous orbit within three days, appearing to hover over 55° west position and prescribing figure-8 pattern 33° north and south of equator. (AP, AFT7, 8/12/63)
usaf announced $500,000 study contracts awarded to General Dynamics/Astronautics, North American Aviation, and Douglas Aircraft Co. for investigation of Aerospace Plane (Asp) concepts. Powered by air-breathing ramjet-like engine, Asp would take off from conventional runway, then travel through space propelled by liquid-oxygen/liquid-hydrogen rocket engine, orbit, and return to land at conventional airfield, (non Release 891 63; M&R, 7/1/63,9)	...
Definitive contract for research and development of a paraglider system for landing of Project Gemini spacecraft was awarded by MSC to Space and Information Systems Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. The contract set paraglider r&d at $20,015,100, of which $10.8 million had already been spent under a letter contract issued about one year ago. The other landing system being developed for Gemini is by parachute, similar to the one used in Project Mercury. Paraglider would be designed for land landings, parachute, for water landings, although both systems have eventual capability for land and water landings, (msc Release 63—159)
Addressing Washington, D.C., meeting of American Red Cross, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Project Apollo offers us our greatest opportunity to overcome the lead in manned space exploration now held by the Soviet Union. It gives us assurance that if an American is not first on the Moon, he certainly will not be far behind. And most important of all, it demonstrates to all the world that we in the United States have the capability and the determination to carry on those things which we have declared seriously that we intend to do.” (Text)
A $3.5-million spaceship simulator to train crews for space flight, space intercepts, and orbital rendezvous at afftc, Edwards afb, has been ordered by afsc, the command revealed at the Air Force Association meeting, Washington, D.C. (AFSC Operational Highlights, 13)
In its first few days of operation, explorer xvii satellite had obtained data that more than tripled all previous direct measurements of the neutral gases in earth’s upper atmosphere, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Satellite was traveling. in elliptical orbit (578-mi. apogee, 153-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period) and was transmitting data of excellent quality and quantity. It had been commanded more than 75 times, and each time it responded with approximately four min. of data on density, pressure, composition, and temperature of upper atmosphere gases. New communications system, utilizing special data readout station at gsfc, was providing scientific and technical data from the satellite within minutes of its transmission, (gsfc Release)
Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo on 5,000-mi. flight down Pacific Missile Range. Launching wTas conducted by sac crew. (M&R, 9/9/63.13)
Maj. Robert A. Rushworth (usaf), X-15 pilot, was presented military astronaut wings by Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Curtis E. LeMay. (Wash. Post, 72663)
Dr. Michael J. Lipschutz, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center astrochemist, reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington that 2,900-1'b. iron meteorite Navititas found in Mexico in 1872 had been on earth for 800,000 years. In addition, meteorite may have traveled through space for 300 million years in asteroid belt before impacting on earth. Age was measured by examination of radioactive age of certain of meteorite’s chemical elements. (Goddard Release)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling (usaf) said in address before Fifth Annual usaf—Industry Conservation Conference: “Department of Defense procurement from the aerospace industries for air weapon systems, and research and development, is now running about $20 billion a year .... “The Air Force share . . . totals $10.6 billion a year, which is more than half the dod total .... “With expenditures of this magnitude, both the dod and Air Force have reason to be concerned that conservation, cost reduction, and value engineering be practiced	(Text, afsc Release 36-R—47) Jwne 19-Jitiy 7: First nationwide display of space research innovations with possibilities for industrial applications was held at 1963 Chicago International Trade Fair. Exhibit was sponsored by nasa Office of Technology Utilization and presented by Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (iitri). (nasa Release 63-122) JwrveW: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in speech before Conference on Space Science and Space Law at the University of Oklahoma: “The impact of the space budget ... is greater than its size wnnlH inHipnfo For ovorrmlo q moinr norfinn of if (topg for
President Kennedy announced that he had appointed Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Chairman of the Chemistry Department at Princeton Univ., to succeed Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner as the President’s science adviser and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. Dr. Hornig has previously been a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. The President also announced that Robert H. Charles, a special assistant to the nasa Administrator, would succeed Joseph S. Imirie as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Materiel. (Wash. Post, 11/8/63)
Based on net value of awards, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded almost one third of nasa’s FY 1963 contracts to industry ($949.8 million). Second highest was Manned Spacecraft Center ($737.2 million), followed by Western Operations Office ($412.3 million) and Goddard Space Flight Center ($303.5 million). (M&R, 1/20/64, 9)
nasa and the Air Force began a test of a 5-psi 100% oxygen environment in a 42-day experiment with four airmen at Brooks afb, Tex. It would include 7 days in the chamber in a normal atmosphere to f ather base-line data, 30 days in the test atmosphere, one half day or detailed lung and eye examinations outside the chamber, and then 5 more days in the test atmosphere for ‘‘follow-up” observations. Conducted jointly with nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, the experiment should lay to rest fears about the debilitating effects of pure oxygen on lungs, blood, and other organs. A&AE, December 1963, 91)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Leo D. Welch and President Joseph V. Charyk left Washington, D.C., for 10 days of discussions with Canadian and European communications officials. (Wash. Post, 5/24/63) Development of new helium isotope, Helium 2, was reported by Dr. 'f	and Tlr< T?ivlrvlFr\ _T SIaIvi. drian of Argentine Atomic Energy Commission. Finding opened “whole new vistas for the possibility of holding other experiments of this kind,” Dr. Bilamuk said. (AP, NYT, 5/16/63, 18)
White House announced that Leo D. Welch, retiring board chairman of Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, and Joseph V.	Charyk, Under Secretary of the Air Force, were being nominated by the President as incorporators of the Communications Satellite Corporation (esc). The esc announced that Welch had been selected to be chairman and chief executive while Charyk would become president and principal operating officer. Dr. Charyk became Chief Scientist of the usaf in 1959, was appointed in June 1959 as Ass’t Sec’y of usaf for r&d, and in January 1960 as Under Secretary. (AP, Wash, Post. 3/1/63, A8)
Biweekly Satellite Situation Report, by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, initiated practice of reporting only those objects launched by nasa, with no coverage in future of launchings by dod agencies or U.S.S.R. (Sat. Sit. Rpt., 1/16/63)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched 248-lb. instrumented payload to 123-mi. altitude in experiment to map night sky sources which emit photons (radiant energy) in specific wavelength interval. Impact occurred 62-mi. downrange from launch site at Wallops Station. Flight was joint project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Lockheed Missile and Space Co. (Wallops Release 63-28)
President Johnson delivered a personal Thanksgiving Day message to the American people via TV and radio, less than one week after he assumed the duties of the Presidency upon the assassination of President Kennedy. “All of us have lived through seven days that none of us will ever forget .... “A great leader is dead; a great nation must move on. Yesterday is not ours to recover, but tomorrow is ours to win or lose .... “And to honor his memory and the future of the works he started, I have today determined that Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range and a nasa launch operations center in Florida shall hereafter be known as the John F. Kennedy Space Center. “I have also acted today with the understanding and the support of my friend, the Governor of Florida, Farris Bryant, to change the name of Cape Canaveral. It shall be known hereafter as Cape Kennedy.” (AP, Was A. Post, 11/29/63)
Gordon M. Bain, faa Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport, suggested at meeting of Society of American Travel Writers in New York that he believed the U.S. supersonic transport aircraft could be economically used on routes as short as “perhaps 1,200 miles.” Maximum range of the U.S. sst would be around 4,000 mi. (Clark, NYT, 12/21/63)
Revolutionary new helicopter, called XH-51A, was described in paper by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineers W. H. Statler, R. R. Heppe, and E. S. Cruz delivered at meeting of American Helicopter Society, Washington. Built for Army and Navy, experimental craft was said to be first helicopter to fly with ease and stability of an airplane because it employed rigid mounting of rotor blades to shaft and three-armed gyroscopes linking pilot control sticks with rotor. {NTT, 5/4/63, 38)
Large fireball streaked across San Francisco Bay area sky, landing in the Pacific Ocean several miles off-shore, and witnessed by thousands of residents. Fireball was presumed to be a meteor. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/8/63, A3)
25th Minuteman icbm fired by usaf from Vandenberg afb made routine training flight downPMR. (M&R, 12/6/63,10)
Howard M. Weiss, nasa Director of Quality Assurance and Reliability, said total cost of the two Mariner shots, the second of which brought U.S. several firsts in knowledge of planet Venus, was $47 million. Weiss was addressing American Society of Quality Control, Southern Connecticut Section, in Bridgeport. (Bridgeport Post, 3/18/63)
George Low, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking at an aiaa-nasa symposium on interplanetary exploration in Palo Alto, Calif., spoke of two areas of possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar flight: (1) a series of jointly programed space probes to survey the lunar surface prior to a manned flight; and (2) exchange of information on problems of re-entering the earth’s atmosphere at 25,000 mph. (San Francisco Chronicle, 10/2/63)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Production and Procurement, said in address to American Ordnance Association meeting in Washington: “The fact that we will buy [for usaf] more than eight billion dollars worth of weapon systems, supplies, and services this fiscal year and will administer approximately 70,000 contracts for government purchases, which are administered by 57 field organizations, provides some idea of the sheer magnitude of afsc’s procurement management task. “A large majority of our funds is involved in weapon system acquisition contracts .... For the past two years the Air Force has undertaken a program of surveying certain selected contractors and related weapon systems. Two types of surveys are conducted. One type—called the Industrial Management Assistance Survey—looks at a particular contractor’s internal organization, management and operating practices as they affect all the Air Force contracts bemg performed. Nine of these surveys have now been completed. The second type is called the Systems Program Management Survey and looks at all aspects of a particular aerospace system at a given point in time, including an examination, as appropriate, of the prime, associate prime and major subcontractors involved. We have now completed 20 of .u;™ ----j UI19 DOAIllU vy pb VA 9U1 V xyy .	#	•	• “Altogether, we have identified some 37 prominent deficiencies in major areas of contractor management . . . .” (Text)
nasa launched two-stage Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 185-lb. payload of U.S.-Japanese instrumentation to measure electron density and temperature in the ionosphere. Payload was lofted to 139-mi. altitude and no recovery operation was involved. Purpose of experiment was to compare simultaneous measurements made by two different methods: instruments supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and radio-frequency resonance probe developed by Japan’s Radio Research Laboratory. (Wallops Release 63-85; nasa Release 63-211)
Sermon by Dr. Duncan Howlett, Washington Unitarian minister, was quoted in Washington Post. On June 18,1961, Dr. Howlett said: “Why can we not boldly propose now a cooperative moon-shot, built and manned by Russian and American scientists ? Why can we not send a capsule to the moon with a Russian and an American inside it; and when they get there let them claim the moon— not for Russia, not for the United States, but for humanity ? ... “We can claim space for humanity or we can make it a battle ground to which to extend the ancient quarrels of earth. Which shall it be? There is but one choice before us. We can try to make the exploration of space a cooperative venture. We cannot succeed unless we try . . . .” (Glaser, Wash. Post, 9/28/63)
In speech to American Psychological Association, Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysical Laboratory and editor of Science, repeated his view that there were no predictable economic advantages to the exploration of the moon or possible subsequent flights to Mars. Much of the justification for manned lunar program was national prestige, ne said, but “the half of the world that is undernourished could scarcely the expected to place a higher value on landing on the moon than on filling their stomachs.” (Barbour, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/2/63)
Fifth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, explorer i. Also fifth anniversary of activation of U.S. tracking network to track explorer i: at the time, network included Vanguard’s Minitrack stations located primarily in Western Hemisphere. Since that time, other networks were added to form truly worldwide tracking network and data acquisition system for satellites and space probes launched by U.S.: Minitrack network; Deep Space Instrumentation Facilities; Manned Space Flight Network; Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Baker-Nunn Telescope-Camera Network. Ceremonies at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center featured talks by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, and Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. Radio transmissions from vanguard i, second U.S. satellite and oldest U.S. satellite still transmitting, were heard during tour of Goddard facilities following formal ceremonies. Highlighting occasion was presentation of scrolls of appreciation to ambassadors of 16 nations that have cooperated with U.S. in establishing the international tracking networks. Field reports indicated that in at least 12 countries related special events and ceremonies were held on the same day as Goddard observances. Countries reporting special activities included Argentina, Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Ecuador, Great Britain, India, Iran, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, and Spain, (nasa Release 63-10; upi, Wash. Post, 1/27/63, A6; State Dept., usia Field Reports—per AI/Robinson) January 31: At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, Chairman of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in remarks delivered by nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh: “. . . I would like to quote briefly from the report drafted by the Senate Committee [on Aeronautics and Space Sciences] before the passage of the [National Aeronautics and Space] Act: “. . .‘Space neither invites nor necessitates any re-definition of American goals and aims. Throughout our history, it has been the goal of peace and liberty that has led Americans to explore the dimensions of challenging frontiers. Our goal now remains unchanged.’ “I have chosen this paragraph to quote because it is basic to our national philosophy. In space activitieSj the lines of demarcation that so often separate nations in their purposes would seem to be petty. Interchange and cooperation in the exploration of a realm as vast as the solar system—indeed, the universe—should lead to better understanding among nations . . . .” (Text)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 195-lb. instrumented payload to 125-mi. altitude in 7V2-min. flight. Conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, experiment was designed to measure electron densities in ionosphere by several methods and to yield information necessary to further development of direct measurement techniques. (Wallops Release 63-42)
January 22: nasa Administrator James E. Webb and dod Secretary Robert S. McNamara announced nasa-dod agreement establishing Gemini Program Planning Board, with Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (Associate Administrator for nasa) and Dr. Brockway McMillan (Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d) as cochairmen. Planning Board would delineate nasa and dod scientific and technological requirements and monitor the Gemini program to ensure that the requirements are met. Agreement supplemented nasa-usaf Gemini management agreement in effect since spring 1962; nasa would continue to be responsible for Project Gemini management, dod would participate in development, pilot training, pre-flight check-out, launch operations, and flight operations “to assist nasa and to meet the dod objectives.” dod also would assist in funding Gemini, (nasa Release 63-12; nasa-dod Agreement; dod Release 8A-63)
President Johnson signed the Executive Order establishing the John F. Kennedy Space Center: “whereas President John F. Kennedy lighted the imagination of our people when he set the moon as our target and man as the means to reach it; and “whereas the installations now to be renamed are a center and a symbol of our country’s peaceful assault on space; and “whereas it is in the nature of this assault that it should test the limits of our youth and grace, our strength and wit, our vigor and perseverance—qualities fitting to the memory of John F. Kennedy: “now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, I hereby designate the facilities of the Launch Operations Center of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the facilities of Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range, in the State of Florida, as the John F. Kennedy Space Center; and such facilities shall be hereafter known and referred to by that name.” (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, „ 2)
First issue of Astronautics a/nd Aerospace Engineering, publication of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa), featured series of articles on manned orbital operations by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center personnel. (A&AE, 2/63)
Five men entered Boeing Co. space chamber, simulating quarters in manned space station or manned lunar base, for 30-day engineering test of integrated life-support system. Designed and built for nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology, system included all elements of life support necessary for 150 man-day space mission. Associated with life-support equipment were specific crew tests simulating problems of space flight. Members of test crew: R. H. Lowry, Boeing Chief of Bioastronautics; Maj. Edward Westlake (usaf) of Air Force Systems Cmd.; Roger Barnicki, nasa Flight Research Center X-15 personnel equipment specialist; Charles Proctor, Boeing biochemist and food specialist; and Richard Farrell, Boeing psychologist. ( nasa Release 63-155)
In hearings on U.S. space program, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony of Dr. Philip Abelson, Carnegie Institution of Washington’s Geophysical Laboratory; Dr. C. S. Pittendrigh, Princeton Univ. biology dept.; Dr. Simon Ramo, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc.; Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of Calif, prof, of chemistry; and Dr. Polycarp Kusch, Columbia Univ. physicist. Dr. Abelson charged Project Apollo was harming future expansion of scientific knowledge and ‘‘taking away from our national security”; he declared that “manned space exploration has limited scientific value and has been accorded an importance which is quite unrealistic . . . .” Dr. Pittendrigh testified he approved of lunar exploration program chiefly because of its value toward eventual exploration of Mars. He cautioned that manned Mars landing should be made only after it is assured there would be no contamination by terrestrial organisms. Dr. Ramo expressed his approval of Project Apollo, but advised a “calm watch” to assure such a project would not begin to “dominate” U.S. technology and economy. Dr. Urey, taking issue with Dr. Abelson’s suggestion that Apollo costs were hindering U.S. science and education, said that “if we should decide not to do the space program we will probably do less for education than we would otherwise . . . .” Dr. Kusch testified he opposed high priority for Project Apollo because “we have great national needs that far outweigh the exploration of space.” He cited such necessities as conservation of natural resources, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/86; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/11/63) Jwne 10: usaf decision to recover manned spacecraft at Edwards, Holloman, and Wendover Air Force Bases was reported in Missiles and. Rochets. All mission command and control would be exercised by Satellite Test Center, Sunnyvale, Calif. Unnamed usaf spokesmen said first program operating under this arrangement would be X-20 (Dyna Soar) in its air-launched phases. (M&R, 6/10/63,34)
Dr. Simon Ramo, Vice Chairman of Board of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, Inc., said in Air Force and Space Digest article: “The landing of men on the moon needs to be understood by the American people merely as a specific framework on which is built a broad research program to explore many areas of science. Space is new and special; it is only now that we have the ability to enter a region of the universe previously denied to us, except for viewing from a distance through the insulation of our atmosphere. Nevertheless, without a definite task, a broad space pro-741-623 O—64------22 gram of this size would be very inefficient, would wander and become redundant, unwieldy, and confused. We need to agree that what counts most is advancing science on a broad front .... “. . . the addition of a human passenger and observer to a total space effort is a necessary ingredient. An ideally laid-out program . . . requires emphasizing broad research aims in all of the sciences .... How can we justify a large national space-research program whose true objective is scientific discovery across all the spectrum of science if we are going to leave out the life sciences .... “It is essential then that the public should understand that the program they are buying is not just a man-on-the-moon program. Like an iceberg, the greater part of the program will be unseen. Space exploration will be lengthy and continuing, requiring patient backing as a long-term venture . . . .” {AF & Space Digest, 8/63, 49f) During August: Peak power output of 50w from pulsed gas laser demonstrated by Orlando Div. of Martin-Marietta Corp. At higher power levels the company predicted application of the laser in optical radar system. {Av. Wk., 8/19/63, 34)
President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress, his first major speech since assuming the Presidency on Nov. 22 following the assassination of President Kennedy: “The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our time .... “The dream of conquering the vastness of space—the dream of partnership across the Atlantic and across the Pacific as well— the dream of a Peace Corps in less developed nations—the dream of education for all of our children—the dream of jobs for all who seek them and need them—the dream of care for our elderly—the dream of an all-out attack on mental illness—and above all, the dream of equal rights for all Americans, whatever their race or color—these and other American dreams have been vitalized by his drive and by his dedication . . . .” (OR, 11/27/63, 21734)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced selection of American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., and Radio Corp. of America to study multiple access techniques for communications satellites. Each company would study different ------- -1, „ _ J _: dppiuacil clilU. piOviut; uumoaiwip Willi	uata vn cAioung types of equipment for engineering information so that ComSatCorp could choose design of first operational commercial comsat system. (ComSatCorp Release)
Radio and optical astronomers of the Mount Wilson and Palomar observatories announced the discovery of what probably are the brightest objects in the universe observed so far. Their brilliance, they believe, may make it possible to penetrate two to three times deeper into space than was considered possible with present-day telescopes. Five of these super-bright celestial bodies have so far been recognized. Radio astronomers detected them by their radiations of energy in the longer wavelengths, at radio frequencies. They were identified in the third Cambridge (England) Catalogue of Radio Sources as 3C—48,3C-196,3C—286, 3C-147, and 3C-273. The objects are so bright that they had been thought to be nearby stars in our own Milky Way Galaxy, but there is now growing evidence that they are very distant galaxies involved in titanic explosions. The study of such distant objects is vital to cosmologists in determining the kind of universe we live in—whether it will continue expanding, stop expanding, or will eventually contract. {NYT, Western Edition, 3/26/63, Wm. L. Laurence) During March: nasa scientists discovered a new “hot spot in the sky” over Wallops Island, Va., where in winter the temperatures 34 to 60 mi. above the earth reach more than 75° F and winds blow at speeds approaching 400 mph. Currently there is no existing scientific theorv to account for the super-high-altitude, jet-streamlike wind and hot air that seems to blow over Washington, Baltimore, and Annapolis during the winter. Details of the discovery were distributed this month in a nasa technical note entitled “Preliminary Measurements of Temperatures and Winds Above 50 KM (31 mi.) over Wallops Island.” Authors of the pamphlet are Dr. William Nordberg and Wendell Smith, of the Goddard Space Flight Center. (Balt. Sun, 3/31/63)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from nasa Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite as “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wash. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., 6/30/63)
D. Brainerd Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said in address to American Ordnance Association, Washington: “The Department of Defense has not fully defined the role man should play in its space activities. However, under an agreement between Secretary McNamara and Mr. Webb, reached in January 1963, nasa will manage the Gemini program to assure the fulfillment of both dod and nasa requirements, and the dod will contribute funding, in an amount to be determined later .... “Although manned flight is more expensive than unmanned flight in the development phase, the increased reliability of a manned vehicle will ultimately enable us to carry out complex tasks in space more effectively and, very possibly, at less expense than with automatic equipment. “Thirteen years ago, the late William Faulkner made a comment that may apply to the present discussion:
nasa announced its first contract to study overall systems requirements for Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) had been awarded to Republic Aviation Corp. Administered by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, contract called for four-month study to determine “technical systems needed for 24-hour surveillance of the earth’s cloud cover and to identify the major scientific and engineering advances required for the ground stations.” (nasa Release 63-18)
usaf successfully launched a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the eighth successful Minuteman launch from the West Coast base. (NYT, 6/29/63, 8)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Science Advisor to the President, said in speech before Federation of American Scientists in Washington that the field of education was “probably the most backward field in our modem society” and that scientists were largely to blame. Pointing to “widespread lack of understanding” about science and technology, he said: “It is surprising that we scientists and technologists in universities who, in a sense, have made major contributions to the great revolution through which we are living, have failed to apply our methods to our own profession. “Modem teaching aids have been rarely employed, either in Seneral education or in the universities. The process of invention as been almost ignored. The most highly developed devices in common use are still the old-fashioned textbooks, the blackboard, the written examination . . . .” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)	_	_	'
The ships Rose Knot and Coastal Sentry, two mainstays of the world-wide Mercury tracking network operated by Goddard Space Flight Center, have undergone modifications for the MA-9 mission and are ready for sea duty again. (Space News Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, scored its ninth “intercept” of Atlas icbm target fired from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (MocR, 9/9/63,13)
msfc awarded Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation an $8,441,956 contract to extend the duration run of the J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine from 250 sec. to 500 sec. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/7/63, 218)
nasa launched 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude at exact moment explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite passed over the Wallops Island, Va., launch site, an unusual “first” in nasa sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral particle densities. Data from this experiment would be compared with similar data obtained from explorer xvn as it passed over Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th orbit of earth. Miss distance was 35,000 yards. Preliminary evaluation by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientists indicated data were of excellent quality. (Wallops Release 63-40; Av. Wk., 5/6/63, 21)
William G. Bade, associate mathematics prof, at Univ. of Calif., said at meeting preceding joint convention of American Mathe-rnatical Society * Mathematical Association of America, and Association of Symbolic Logic in Berkeley, Calif., that U.S. needs “perhaps three times as many [mathematics] graduates as the 250 now being produced each year.” (Oakland, Calif., Tnb., 1/24/63)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station in continuing series of upper atmosphere studies, the vehicle carrying payload that ejected and detonated 12 explosive charges at intervals from 22- to 51-mi. altitude. A similar experiment was launched from Ft. Chilrchill, Canada, at about the same time to obtain high altitude wind and temperature data. Both shots were considered successful. Experiments were being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-22; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/5/63 and 3/11/63)
Thomas J. Watson, Jr., chairman of the board of International Business Machines Corp., speaking at the 46th annual meeting of the American Council on Education in Washington, D.C., expressed concern about the current course of education. “That concern has its origin just 6 years ago tomorrow. It was the day that the Soviet Union put Sputnik I in orbit. Do you remember the thoughts which flooded in on us that day? Thoughts of embarrassmefit—dismay—concern. ... We could even try to say that satellites were just stunts, that Sputnik was a silly hunk of iron. But try as we would to whistle m the dark, Americans finally had to reach the conclusion that the Russians had outdistanced us at least temporarily in the exploration of space, a pursuit which in our century might well become as important as the exploration of the oceans had been in the time of Columbus and Magellan.” Mr. Watson pointed out that the impact of sputnik on education “has thrown the sciences and the humanities badly out of balance. ... In the fiscal year of 1961, of all Federal funds for basic research, the physical and biological sciences got 97 percent. “There are many traditional reasons for reemphasizing the humanities—which today are more important than ever. “In the first place, a thorough grounding in the humanities is vital training for many leaders who can wisely manage people as well as sufficiently manage machines. This need exists in universities, in public service, and in business. “Secondly, as our planet continues to shrink, we will more and more have to become citizens of the world. We must acquire a better understanding of the language, history, and culture of people of other lands. With present day mass-destruction weapons, this understanding is not just desirable—it’s vital. “Finally, the greater our skills in the humanities—in literature and the arts—the greater our capacity for a constructive use of leisure time, which is bound to increase as machines lift old burdens from men’s shoulders and minds. “On this sixth anniversary of the flight of sputnik, we can be sure of one thing; no second sputnik will come along to jolt us into action, and do for American education in the humanities what the first Sputnik did for American education in the sciences.” {CR, 11/12/63, A7010-A7012)
usaf launched an Abres (advanced ballistic re-entry system) vehicle on an Atlas booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Like the two previous launches in the series from amr, Abres carried scientific experiments designed to advance the state of the art in re-entry systems. No attempt was made to recover the payload. (Space Bus. Doily, 11/5/63,202)
Conclusions on where the armed forces “are going” in the rest of this decade were outlined recently by Gen. William F. McKee, usaf Vice Chief of Staff. “. . . we must watch our own and the Soviet’s space programs carefully. This is probably the area of greatest demand on our vision as a nation. For it is here that one of us, probably, will find the key to the strategic superiority of the 1970’s. Secretary McNamara says, ‘I think there is no clear requirement for military purposes for manned operations in space as we look at the future today.’ However, Mr. McNamara said more: ‘. . . But, should one develop it could come so suddenly in a field in which the leadtime for the developmental technology is so long that I believe we must anticipate that possibility today . . .’. “I, too, think we must anticipate that today. While this is a national effort, it is also an absolute obligation of those of us responsible for our national security.” {Air Force Information Policy Letter, June 1963)
First college program to train usaf astronauts nad been established at Purdue Univ., u6af announced. Fourteen June graduates of Air Force Academy had been selected to begin the specialized program in Purdue’s School of Aeronautical and Engineering Sciences, their studies leading to newly created Master’s degree in astronautics. (Chicago Trib., 4/10/63)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, spoke at American Nobel Memorial Foundation dinner, New York: “Because of the nasa policy of no exchange of funds, and of insisting on a mutuality of interest in entering into . . . cooperative programs, various national programs grow up with a viability that they might otherwise not have. They are not little nasa programs implanted on foreign soil. They are genuinely national programs, with strong national support, and vigorous national participation. They serve to strengthen the science and technology of the cooperating country in a way that only such direct involvement can. Moreover, in the case of scientific programs, since a universal element of these efforts is an agreement that scientific results will be made generally available to the scientific literature, the entire world community of nations benefits.” (Space Quotes, 9/15/63)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson said at Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner, Oklahoma City: “Space . . . has gained the lion’s share of publicity—and justifiably so. “When we talk of space and space research, there are those who raise the question that our efforts cost too much. Certainly American leadership in space is not cheap. We are now spending 20 cents per week per capita on our national space program. “Other Americans ask if our space efforts are worthwhile. “I can answer in terms we can all understand. While the space age is not yet 5 years old, more than 5,000 companies and research organizations have been or are now involved in our space effort. We have produced more than 3,200 space-related products, many of which are already being put to use. “But, many prominent Republicans are questioning the value of the program. A former Republican President has referred to our moon project as a ‘stunt.’ “I can answer that simply: I do not believe that this generation of Americans is willing to resign itself to going to bed each night by the light of a Communist moon . . . .” (Text, CR, 5/23/63, A3243-44)
afsc announced installation of 100-in. centrifuge at Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility, Air Force Missile Development Center (afmdc), Holloman afb. Intended primarily for calibration, testing, and evaluation of high-precision inertial accelerometer, centrifuge was capable of providing acceleration forces up to 25 g’s, giving usaf “a laboratory capability for simulating accelerations common to actual missile flight.” (afsc Release 31-53-18)
afsc announced it launched more than 60 space experiments in FY 1963, encompassing following areas of study: aurora borealis; infrared spectrum of Agena engine plume; variations in earth’s magnetic field; effect of space environment on materials; impedance of near space; air density at satellite altitudes; earth’s albedo (whiteness) ; altitude of ozone layer; radio waves from outside solar system; emissions from upper atmosphere; thermal electricity; and space radiation. Spacecraft were launched with Atlas-Agena and Thor-Agena launch vehicles from Vandenberg afb and usaf facilities at Pt. Arguello. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/17/63, 400) _	.....
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1963 American Citizenship Award at 11th annual German-American Day festival, North Bergen, N.J. {MarshallStar, 5/29/63,7)
Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, prof, of biology at Princeton Univ., urged at National Academy of Sciences meeting in Washington that President Kennedy proclaim U.S. opposition to contamination of Mars by landing probes on that planet. He added that U.S. should make available its research on decontamination to U.S.S.R. Dr. Pittendrigh emphasized he approved decision to relax sterilization of lunar probes but declared his opposition to landing spacecraft on Mars where possibility of life exists. (NTT, 4/25/63)
French President Charles de Gaulle, speaking in press conference in Paris, referred to President Kennedy’s offer of Polaris missiles as joint defensive weapons for nato: “Nobody in the world, especially nobody in America, can say, if, where, when, how, and to what degree American atomic armaments will be employed to defend Europe. Therefore we will construct and if need be will employ our atomic force ourselves. “Of course, this does not exclude the combined action of our force with an analogous allied force of the same kind, but for us integration is unthinkable in this case. ... “We have neither the submarines to launch them [Polaris missiles] nor the nuclear warheads to arm them. By the time we have them, what good will the Polaris be? Without doubt, by then we will have our own missiles. For us, this matter has no present application. . . .”	(Wash. Post, 1/15/63, Al, A7)
In his 'Washington Post column, Walter Lippmann said: “The President has made his suggestion of collaboration in going to the moon at a time when there is some improvement in U.S.S.R.-U.S.A. relations. It happens also to be a time when there is a growing doubt among American scientists and among the people generally about the commitment to put an American man on the moon by the year 1970. “The President’s proposal at the U.N. is, it seems to me, excellent even if the joint effort proves to be technically and politically impracticable. It is excellent because it may offer an honorable way to correct the mistakes of our original commitments about going to the moon. “There were two big mistakes. One was the commitment to put a man, a living person rather than instruments, on the moon. The other mistake was to set a deadline—1970—when the man > was to land on the moon . . . .” {Wash. Post, 9/24/63)
Sixth Apollo spacecraft impact test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., Downey, Calif. Highly instrumented capsule fell from 10-ft. height at vertical speed of 18 mph into test tank containing 300,000 gals, of water. (cbs-TV “Newsnight,” 4/5/63; L.A. Herald-Examiner, 4/4/63)	_
usaf Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine for having “formulated new scientific concepts and performed original research of great national and international significance.” Award was made during ceremonies in which President Kennedy dedicated the school’s new facilities at Brooks afb, Tex. (Air Force Magazine, 1/63, 84)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/30/63; M&R, 9/9/63, 13; Pres. R-pt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) , addressing Waco Chamber of Commerce, referred generally to aerospace activities in Texas and specifically referred to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston: “Although the buildings are not yet completed, the Center has been operating for some time. Many nasa personnel are temporarily working in facilities at Ellington Air Force Base, and an air base group has been established to provide support for personnel at the Center. This is just one illustration of the fact that Air Force and nasa efforts in space are cooperative, not conflicting. They are complementary not competitive . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 32-R-19)
usaf Atlas E icbm was launched by sac crew from Operational Systems Test Facility at Vandenberg afb in successful flight test, (dod Release 585-63)
usaf announced Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb exploded shortly after liftoff. Cause of explosion was not determined. (dod Release 414—63)
In Interstellar Communication, anthology of articles on man’s search for intelligent extraterrestrial life published by W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Dr. Freeman J. Dyson proposed that highly advanced civilization elsewhere in Milky Way galaxy may be using gravity machines instead of sunlight as principal power source. If a civilization on planet which orbits twin stars fired vehicle from planet toward twin stars so as to circle approaching star, vehicle would return with far more energy than initially; vehicle could then be recovered in manner exploiting the energy. Dr. Dyson is theoretical physicist at. Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/9/63)
R. W. Gillespie, systems engineer of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., said in Los Angeles press conference: “America’s giant program for a [manned] lunar landing should be reoriented to allow for a manned landing on Mars and a manned capture [orbital flyby] of Venus by 1973. Most of the talent now working on the lunar landing would have to be diverted for the Mars and Venus flights.” He said he was “one of those who thinks there is some form of life on Mars” and that a landing there would be of more value than one on the moon; scientists already have a pretty good idea of what man would find on the moon. Gillespie was in Los Angeles for 9th annual meeting of American Astronautical Society. (L.A. Times to Wash. Post, 1/16/63, A7)
L/Gen. Thomas P. G. Gerrity (usaf), dc/s for Systems and Logistics, told American Ordnance Association in Washington that “the worst blot on the Air Force-Industry image is inaccurate estimating of costs and schedules. In these areas we simply have to do abetter job at the outset of each program and we have to conduct accurate and timely reviews to be sure that program growth and cost overruns are anticipated and separately identified . . . .” (A-N-AF Journal <& Register, 5/18/63, 38)
Speaking before a dinner of the American Association for Contamination Control in Boston, Mass., Franklyn W. Phillips, director of nasa neo, spoke of the proposed electronics research center: “We have seen nothing to date that would alter our original proposal to place the [electronics] center in the greater Boston area. The reasons we made the choice in the first place are as valid now as they were then. “Greater Boston represents the greatest concentration of electronics know-how in the country and is the logical place for this center.” (Boston Herald, 5/3/63)
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
usaf announced Atlas F icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, its re-entry vehicle impacting on predetermined area more than 4,000 miles down the Pacific Missile Range, (dod Release 399-63)
In press conference, President Kennedy was asked: “By when do you think we will be first in space, and in view of Russia’s current lunar probe [lunik iv], do you think we will beat the Russians with a man to the moon ?” He replied: “I don’t know. We started well behind. Quite obviously they had a tremendous advantage in big boosters and we are still behind, because obviously we haven’t gotten our new boosters yet, which we won’t get until 1964, ’65 and ’66. We will have to wait and see but I can assure you it is an uphill race at best, because we started behind, and I am sure the Russians are making a major effort. Today’s indication of what they are doing makes me feel that their program is a major one, and it is not spongy, and I think that we would have to make the same ourselves. “So I would say we are behind now, and we will continue to be behind, but if we make a major effort we have a chance, I believe, to be ahead at the end of this decade, and that is where I think we ought to be.” Questioned about his reaction to General Eisenhower’s charge that the national budget could be reduced by billions of dollars and that enormous sums were being wTasted in the space program (letter to Congressman Charles A. Halleck made public March 291, President Kennedy said: “. . . The United States Congress almost unanimously made a decision that the United States would not continue to be second in space. We are second in space today because we started late. It requires a large sum of money. I don’t think we should look with equanimity upon the prospect that we will be second all through the sixties and possibly the seventies. We have the potential not to be. I think having made the decision last year, that we should make a major effort to be first in space. I think we should continue to do so. “President Eisenhower—this is not a new position for him. He has disagreed with this at least a year or year and a half ago when the Congress took a different position. It is the position I think he took from the time of Sputnik on. But it is a matter on which we disagree. It may be that there is waste in the space budget. If there is waste, then I think it ought to be cut by the Congress, and I am sure it will be. But if we are going to get into the question of whether we should reconcile ourselves to a slow pace in space, I don’t think so. “This Administration has concentrated its attention since it came into office on strengthening our military. That is one of the reasons why you could not possibly put in the cut which has been recommended, nine or ten billion dollars, without cutting the heart out of the military budget. The fact of the matter is when we came into office, we had 11 combat-ready divisions and we now have 16. We increased the scheduling on Polaris, nearly double per year. We increased the number of planes on the 15-minute alert from 33 per cent of our strategic air force to 50 per cent. In a whole variety of ways—in the Navy we have added about 46 vessels, and strengthened ourselves in defense and space . . . .” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 4/4/63)
Selection of Lockheed California Co. and Boeing Co./North American Aviation, Inc., as contractors to conduct airframe research in supersonic transport program was announced by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby. Lockheed would perform research in three study areas under $950,000 contract; Boeing/North American, operating as a joint venture, would perform research in six areas under $850,000 contract. Under the cost-sharing agreement, government was providing $1.8 million and industries $1.6 million toward total program costs, (faa Release 63-35)
Leonard Jaffe, nasa Director of Communications Systems, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition: “nasa program objectives in this area . . . [communications satellite systems] are first, to insure the full development and realization of communications satellite potentials through continued research, development and flight test and second, to assist in the early establishment of operational communications satellite systems. The fact that communications satellites are feasible has certainly been demonstrated with the Echo, Telstar, and Relay satellites. Much information and experience has been gained as a result of the last year’s experiments with regard to the satellites, the space environment, and with the earth-based elements of such systems. Much remains, however, to be done before economically practical systems can be established, but a sound foundation has been laid and all of the established interests are cooperating to the fullest extent in the research and developmental programs. “In all areas of satellite applications, nasa has many interactions with other organizations. Typical interactions already in existence in the area of communications satellites are those with the Department of Defense, and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. Shortly, a continuing liaison will be initiated with the new Communications Satellite Corporation . . . .” (Testimony)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.), forwarded to President Johnson an appeal to preserve the name of Cape Canaveral, asking the President to clarify his executive order and make it clear that it applied only to the launch operations center and missile range station. Residents of nearby Florida communities writing to their Congressional delegation largely favored naming the John F. Kennedy Space Center as a tribute to the late President but preferred retaining 400-year-old name of Cape Canaveral. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/9/63; Av. Wk., 12/9/63, 25)
usaf launched a Thor-Agena D booster carrying an unidentified satellite, from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Also launched that day was a Minuteman icbm in what was termed a routine training launch. (AP, W ash. E ve. S tar, 11/28/63)
Titan I icbm exploded during attempted launching at Vandenberg afb. usaf spokesman said no one was injured and damage to silo launch facility appeared slight. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/2/63; dod Release 624-63)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in address before Milwaukee Press Club Gridiron Dinner: “From the results of the past five years of effort, it is apparent that, if we are to achieve mastery of space, we must add substantially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is moving forward on both of these fronts. Essentially, our efforts in the Gemini and Apollo programs, leading to exploration of the moon, will provide us with an understanding of the limiting factors in space utilization, and the skills which will be needed to meet such future requirements in the space environment as our nation decides to undertake .... “All of these skills are needed not only in the pursuit of peaceful rewards for mankind from space exploration, but for the development of any space missions wbich may become necessary to our national defense, to insure that space will not be used as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. As these skills increase, a growing close relationship between the nation’s best experts in the underlying technologies is utilized to make the best decisions on new operat ional systems, whether civilian or military. “It is also recognized that our space program must be broad enoughj including considerable basic research, to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. Our broad and varied space effort permits us to lead from our great national strengths—the remarkable flexibility of our economic, social and political systems, the great variety of our talents, and the vast resources of our university-industry-government complex. “Accordingly, we have not allowed ourselves to be trapped in a narrow competition, but have developed a national space program which embraces a wide range of activities . . . .” (Text) April 17: Soviet declaration of 11 basicprinciples of space activity presented to Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. U.S. sources said proposals were virtually unchanged from those offered last year. {NTT, 4/18/63, 22) Discovery of planet (“Barnard’s Star B”) in constellation Ophiu-chus was reported to astronomers at Tucson, Ariz., by Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Swarthmore College’s Sproul Observatory, Swarthmore, Pa. Six light years from earth, planet is one-and-a-half times mass of planet Jupiter or nearly 500 times mass of earth. Dr. van de Kamp’s measurements of amount of wobble it produced in motion of its sun, Barnard, determined object to be a planet. Barnard’s Star B was third planet discovered outside our solar system but the most nearly planet-sized one of all. (Wash. Daily News, 4/18/63; NTT, 4/19/63, 4) usaf announced selection of three contractors to begin development work on large solid-fuel rocket motors: Aerojet General Corp., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and Lockheed Propulsion Co. Thiokol and Aerojet would conduct parallel programs leading to demonstration static firing of half-length 260-m. motor of about 3 million-lb. thrust; depending upon results of this work, usaf would select one of the companies to proceed with development aimed at demonstration of 6-million-lb. thrust motor. In addition, Thiokol would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diam-eter motor of 3-million-lb. thrust, using two segments in solid-fuel motor; Thiokol would work toward demonstration static fipirwv 1	r\ Tia-TOilUstTt.lk flimcf in oinrrlo llilllg VA Il/U'AAA.“VAAlilllOtCl lAAV/VVl VA VliV AiAAAllVAA IV, Ulll	AAA UAAAj^AV/ segment, steerable through use of movable nozzles; Lockheed would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diame-ter motor of one-million-lb. thrust, in single segment, steerable through use of deflectors, usaf was managing the solid-propellant rocket motor development under nasa-dod agreement, (dod Release 493-63) Draft report on two bills (S. 132 and S. 152) “to create the National Weather Council and to provide coordination and central direction for an accelerated program of weather research, basic and applied,” sent to Bureau <3 the Budget for consideration and advice prior to submission to the Congress. Proposed council “would coordinate and centrally direct meteorological and weather research and experimental programs” of represented agencies and would consist of: Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau (Council Chairman), Director of nsf, Administrator of nasa, Secretaries of Agriculture, Interior, Army, Navy, and Air Force or their respective designees. S. 132 would also include Administrator of faa. ( nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/55 and 56; Itr, nasa administrator to Hon. Warren G. Magnuson, 4/17/63)
usaf announced routine launching of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb. ( upi, Wash. Post, 9/12/63)
Trevor Gardner, former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d (1955-56) and advocate of increased funding for icbm development, died at his home in Washington. (AP, NTT, 9/30/63, 29)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., carried 63-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in test to measure ion concentration and composition in upper atmosphere. Flight was joint project of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63—47)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif., in successful flight down Pacific Missile Range. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10) ...
In Air Force Academy commencement address, President Kennedy said: “It is my judgment that this Government should immediately commence a new program in partnership with private industry to develop at the earliest practical date the prototype of a commercially successful supersonic transport superior to that being built in any other country of the world .... Neither the economics nor the politics of international competition permits us to stand still in this area.” ( Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
President Kennedy, speaking at a breakfast in Ft. Worth a few hours before his assassination, mentioned as part of the growing strength of the U.S. the development of the tfx aircraft: “There’s been a good deal of discussion about the long and hard-fought competition to win the tfx contract; but very little discussion about what this plane will do. “It will be the first operational aircraft ever produced that can literally spread its wings through the air. It will thus give us a single plane capable of carrying out missions of speed as well as distance; able to fly very far in one form, or very fast in another. “It can take off from rugged, short airstrips, enormously increasing the Air Force’s ability to participate in limited wars. The same basic plane will serve the Navy’s carriers, saving the taxpayers at least one billion dollars in costs if they built separate planes for the Navy and the Air Force.” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
usaf fired Minuteman icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb “with complete success,” fourth successful firing of Minute-man from West Coast in past four weeks, (dod Release 616-63; upi, Wash. Post, 5/1/63) During April: nasa Manned Spacecraft Center issued requests for proposals for preliminary study contracts on (1) rotating manned space station to house 18 crewmen; (2) non-rotating, zero-gravity station to house 25-30 crewmen; (3) reusable logistics vehicle. (M&R, 4/29/63, 18)	_
Stratoscope II tandem balloon system was launched from National Scientific Balloon Flight Station near Palestine, Tex., carrying 36-in. telescope to 15-mi. altitude to focus on planet Mars. Stratoscope II Project Manager, Dr. Martin Schwarzchild. called it “a beautiful launch.” First attempt to detect life-related substances on Mars from above earth’s atmosphere, project was conducted jointly by Princeton Univ. and Univ. of Calif, with Vitro Laboratories in charge of flight operations; it was sponsored by nasa, nsf, and onr. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/2/63)
In coordinating the military and civilian scientific and industrial efforts of the United States toward the development of aerospace weapon systems, afsc had managerial responsibility for some 40 per cent of the Air Force budget, or approximately 10 cents of each Federal dollar. (CR, 2/18/64, 2910) Through 1963: Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s ( apgc) Eglin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the “Project Firefly” program. The project involved intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and near space, (afsc Release, 312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 1)
Dr. Bruce Murray of Cal Tech reported Venus observations from Mt. Palomar Observatory during December had detected a Venus “storm” 1,000 mi. wide. The “hot spot” on Venus was observed with ultrasensitive heat detector mounted on 200-in. telescope. Dr. Murray was addressing session of American Geological Union, meeting in Washington. (Wash. Daily News, 4/17/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
Dr. Donald E. Gault of nasa Ames Research Center told American Geophysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons a day, was falling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters solar orbit; 40 per cent enters earth orbit; 3 per cent impacts earth directly soon after leaving moon; and 3 per cent hits earth after a month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for analysis: launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar regions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposited and trapped. (NYT, 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
Senator Clifford P. Case (R.-N.J.) announced he had requested Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert to investigate the reported usaf memorandum asserting nasa planned to construct facilities which would duplicate those of usaf, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/8/63)	...	.
At ceremonies commemorating Fifth Anniversary of Tracking at nasa Goddard Spa'ce Flight Center, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said: “We 17 nations have embarked on a cooperative effort to expand the knowledge of man to an unprecedented extent. We think we are creating a heritage for those who follow us in the coming generations in a great exploration for peaceful purposes .... “The world watches us in our success and our failures, the whole world will benefit from our discoveries. “Wc seek to publish all the knowledge we uncover.
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
Princeton-Pennsylvania Accelerator, a 3-bev proton synchrotron, dedicated at the James Forrestal Research Center of Princeton Univ. In his remarks at the dedication, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg pointed out that the accelerator “is unique among large proton accelerators in the unusually rapid pulsing of the magnet—19 cycles per second.” (aec Release S-37-63)
Luncheon in Wright brothers’ hometown, Dayton, 0., commemorated 60th anniversary of powered flight and 50tb anniversary of Air Force Silver Wings. General Mark Bradley, Commander of afcl, Wright-Patterson afb, made presentation to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) one of first military officers to fly an airplane. National Aviation Hall of Fame president, James Jacobs, announced four selections to Aviation Hall of Fame: Octave Chanute, General Foulois, Frank Purdy Lahm, and Samuel Pierpont Langley. Luncheon was sponsored by Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce and National Aviation Hall of Fame, Inc. (Cfi, 12/17/63, 23666-67)
A one-segment solid-propellant rocket engine of the type intended as the first-stage booster power for the Titan III-C space launch vehicle was static-fired by United Technology Center. Under Air Force contract, the company is developing a single engine consisting of five such segments. Two of these five-segment enfines would give Titan III-C a liftoff thrust of more than 9 x 10s g (2 x 106 lb). They would be the largest and most powerful solid-propellant engines ever developed. (SID, 4/15/63) February 24: Citing recent survey of 100 U.S. scientists who concluded top-priority scientific goal of U.S. space program should be “searching for and finding life on other planets,” Washington Post's Parade magazine said: “It would be interesting to note their answers were they asked what should be the nation’s overall scientific goal—not merely the goal of our space program.” (Parade, 2/24/63)
Transfer of Pacific Missile Range from usn to usaf would be accomplished in six months, Missiles and Rockets reported. usn would retain Pt. Mugu portion and continue to operate range instrumentation ships; Pt. Arguello would be merged with Vandenberg afb, which would be transferred from Strategic Air Command to AF Systems Command. New division to be created under afsc would operate pmr, amr, and Satellite Test Center (composed of Sunnyvale facilities and Hickam afb recovery group). (M&R, 8/12/63, 12)
aec announced that “signals from a Department of Defense Satellite launched recently from Vandenberg afb, by a Thor-Able-Star missile are being transmitted successfully with electricity from a nuclear power source developed by the aec.” The device, snap 9-A was boosted into space by a launch crew of the Air Force Space Systems Division’s 6595th Aerospace Test Wing. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan. 1964; AdcAE, Nov. 1963, 1!) ... . .
nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet held in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Aerospace Industries Association, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and Aviation/Space Writers Association. Dr. James Doolittle, last Chairman of the naca, served as Master of Ceremonies. After speaking of the tangible achievements of nasa, Dr. Doolittle said: “Just as well known, to this audience at least, are the less tangible achievements of nasa’s last five years. I think, however, that they bear reemphasizing. “I refer first of all to the rapidly growing competence and effectiveness of the Govemment-industry-university space team—an American space team that simply did not exist five years ago. Today, the team is a valuable source of national strength, prestige, and security.” Other factors mentioned were “openness of the nasa program,” “inspiration which the astronauts of our space program have given to our youth,” and that difficult achievement, “a balanced nmoTnm.” (OR. 10/9/63 A 63271 —	~~ r o	-	, Senator Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N.M.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, called on the banquet guests to assist in getting a $5-billion-plus budget passed by Congress. He added... . let’s remember that there would be no basis for the modest space research agreements the United States has with the Soviet Union if this country had not demonstrated to the Russians the great strength of our space program. We bargain—and must continue to bargain—from a position of strength and those who criticize space spending should not overlook this fundamental point.” (CR, 10/9/63, A6333) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, made five main points about the space program: “the space successes of this country have been truly remarkable”; “This is a national program”; “This is also an international program”; “This is a growing and permanent program”; and “This is no time for complacency about our space competence.” (Text) nasa Administrator James E. Webb took time in his remarks to comment on the impression that nasa was dissatisfied with industry in the space program. He suggested that it was faulty reporting to pick one page of criticism out of a 443-page report that essentially spoke of industry’s “ ‘great job.’ ” (Wash. Post, 10/6/63)
Invitation to European scientists to participate in ground experiments using lasers to track the nasa Polar Ionosphere Beacon Satellites (S-66) was made at Third International Symposium on Quantum Electronics, Paris, by representatives of nasa Hq. and Goddard Space Flight Center. Under proposed program, nasa would provide orbital prediction data to European participants, who would attempt to track the satellite by bouncing a laser beam from ground off comer reflectors on satellite, nasa would be conducting similar experiments in the U.S. Lasers were expected to provide useful supplement to existing radio and radar tracking systems by providing extremely precise range and bearing data. (Al, Robinson)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with Blue Scout rocket from Vandenberg afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/6/64)
nasa announced selection of 10 experimenters for Mariner spacecraft’s Mars fly-by mission, scheduled for 1964. Experiments for the probe, which would make measurements of interplanetary space as well as of vicinity of Mars, were: television, magnetometer, low-energy cosmic-ray experiment, cosmic-ray spectrum experiment, cosmic-ray ionization experiment, plasma probe, cosmic i -Ft*o nrl ormoIi*Amntn»* niff OpWtA VlllUtUi J Ulll U t 1U1UL pilwLl/lllUlUl Of and radio propagation, (nasa Release 63-71) Television broadcast of biweekly program narrated by Jacques Sallebert, French radio and TV correspondent in New York, sent direct from New York to Paris via relay i communications satellite for first time. Program consisted of views of lower New York City and of New York Harbor. Reception in Paris was described as considerably better than prerecorded broadcasts previously used and as comparing favorably with any TV program originating in Paris. (NYT, 4/12/63, 45) Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa Nuclear Systems Office and Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, testified before Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Advanced Research and Technology, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “The space nuclear systems program involves large amounts of funds, manpower, and facilities in nasa’s program and, in addition, involves substantial effort on the part of the Atomic Energy Commission. We are convinced that the high performance potential of these systems for space propulsion and electric power generation justifies the substantial effort that we are devoting toward the early development of such systems. It is 741-623 I clear that if we are to perform extensive space exploration missions beyond our first manned lunar landings, it will be necessary to have available to us nuclear propulsion systems and if we are to establish large space laboratories, lunar bases, and are to travel to distant planets, we will have to rely on the availability of large nuclear electric power generating systems . . . .” (Testimony)
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Tex. Within two hours of the President’s death, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had taken the oath as the 36th President of the U.S., aboard Air Force No. 1, the Presidential jet aircraft. (NYT, 11/24/63, El)
1963 Nobel Prize in Physics was announced in Stockholm to have been won jointly by American Prof. Maria Goeppert Mayer, of the Univ. of Calif. at La Jolla, and American Prof. Eugene Paul Wigner, of Princeton Univ., the former sharing her half of the Srize with German Prof. J. Hans D. Jensen, of the Univ. of [eidelberg. Mrs. Mayer and Prof. Jensen, working independently, devised nuclear models portraying the particles as arranged in levels or shelves which increase abruptly in number of particles at each level further out from the nucleus. Prof. Wigner was cited for devising symmetry principles explaining the interaction of the proton and neutron in accordance with the direction of their spinning motion. The prize in Chemistry was also announced, being awarded jointly to Italian Prof. Guilo Natta, of the Institute of Technology at Milan, and German Prof. Carl Ziegler, of the Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research in Mul-heim. They were cited for devising a system of controlling the polymerizing of simple hydrocarbons into large molecule substances. Their discovery had important commercial results, making possible the development of many kinds of plastics, synthetic detergents, antiknock mixtures for high-octane fuels, etc. {NYT, 11/6/63,1)
telstar n communications satellite brought live American television to the Soviet Union for the first time in the weekend of reporting on the assassination of President Kennedy and the mourning and funeral that followed. Izvestia devoted one whole page of its four pages to an analysis of the ironic events. Entitled “Texas and Telstar,” the article pointed out that Telstar, “the technical wonder of the 20th century, came into our lives with America’s mourning and brought us the cry of battle, a battle between light and darkness raging this week on the other side of the earth. “Only the darkest Spanish Inquisition could have produced the scenes that were flashed by the American satellite .... “We have seen the grief of the American nation and profoundly sympathize with it. We have seen a mad detective thriller and we reject it with contempt and anger.” (Shabad, NYT, 11/27/63, 17)
The Air Force accepted the first Titan III engines from AerojetGeneral Corporation in Sacramento. The engines were the first-and second-stage liquid-fuel engines for the Titan IIIA (core) of the Titan IIIC. Together they produce a combined thrust of 530,000 lbs. (A-N-AFJournal and Register, Jan., 1964)
Pan American World Airways President Juan T. Trippe announced Pan Am had ordered six Concorde supersonic airliners being developed jointly by British Aviation Corp. and Sud-Aviation of France, boac also reported ordering six of the 1,500-mph jetliners; Air France was believed to have ordered six, but report was unconfirmed. (Carter, NYT, 6/5/63,34)
Editorializing about possible cuts in Rover project, New Tork Times said: “. . . The effort to build a nuclear-powered rocket for eventual manned exploration beyond the moon is a longer-term project [than Project Apollo], one which might eventually be accomplished by joint work of Soviet and American scientists, or perhaps even by a broader international team. Any proposal to kill this program in its entirety appears to us unsound; while to continue it at a substantially reduced rate would retain the gains of past research and continue slowly to increase our capabilities in this field. Such a course of action would mean minimum loss for the nation’s near- and medium-term space goals, give us bargaining power in negotiations for a joint effort with the Soviet Union and still provide useful savings.” (NYT, 12/18/63, 40)
At annual dinner in New York, American Meteorological Society presented posthumously the Carl-Gustaf Rossby Award for Extraordinary Scientific Achievement to the late Dr. Harry Wex-ler, who had been head of U.S. Weather Bureau’s Office of Research ; Dr. Wexler was cited “for his contributions to knowledge of the atmospheric heat balance and dynamic anticyclogenesis, for his interdisciplinary studies in meteorology, oceanography, and glaciology, and for his outstanding leadership in international programs in the atmospheric sciences.” Other awards: Charles Franklin Brooks Award for Outstanding Service to the Society, presented to Dr. David M. Ludlum “for his continuing effort, on behalf of the Society, to popularize meteorology and to stimulate the interest of young people in the field, for establishing Weather-wise, and for his effective participation in Society affairs over many years”; Cleveland Abbe Award for Distinguished Service to Atmospheric Sciences by an Individual presented to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, President of Graduate Research Center, Dallas, Tex., for “his scientific work on the upper atmosphere and for the stimulation he provided to the field of meteorology by his work as Chairman of the Committee on Meteorology of the National Academy of Sciences”; the Meisinger Award, presented to Prof. Edward N. Lorenz of mit “for his introduction of concepts leading to a better understanding of the energetics of the general circulation, and for his recent work on low order systems indicating aperiodic vacillations from one regime of motion to another”; Award for Outstanding Services to Meteorology by a Corporation, presented to rca Astro-Electronics Div., “for contributions to meteorology through its role in producing the successful Tiros meteorological satellites”; ams Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Advance of Applied Meteorology, presented to Herbert C. S. Thom, Chief Climatologist, U.S. Weather Bureau, “for a quarter century of contributions to applied meteorology, including furnished climatological estimates to the armed forces during World War II, major contributions to the problems of statistical analysis of climatological data, development of wind design data, and development of a much improved formula for calculating annual and seasonal energy use for domestic heating”; Award for Outstanding Achievement in Bioclimatology, presented to Prof. Konrad J. K. Buettner, Dept, of Atmospheric Sciences, Univ. of Washington, “for his distinguished and continuing studies on the influence of the atmospheric environment on man.” (ams Release)
Aerobee 150A rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment to flight-test components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to measure propagation of vlf signals through ionosphere. Flight was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa Administrator. James E. Webb, testifying before the Select Committee on Government Research of the House of Representatives, said: “Something more than four billion dollars will be paid industry for work it will do under nasa contracts this year. About half of this will pay for the design of this advanced equipment and for its fabrication, using the latest methods and newest technologies in its production. . . . Just to make sure that the design is right, the fabrication is right, and the equipment sufficiently reliable, the other half of this four billion dollars will be paid to industry to test these machines and advanced systems of equipment once they have been fabricated. Thus American industry is moving into an entirely new period where the importance of very advanced design, manufacture, fabrication, and testing for utmost reliability will replace some of the practices of the past.” (Text)
usaf launched a Titan II icbm from an underground silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Test, sixth Titan II launch from Vandenberg, was to check operation of the total weapon system. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/63) During early November: usaf selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth, Boeing, and North American Aviation, Inc., to study feasibility of an Advanced Manned Penetrator (amp), revision of previous Low Altitude Manned Penetrator (lamp) . All three had proposed use of kerosene-type fuels in the engine. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63, 25)
Aviation executives criticized Government plans for the supersonic transport in testimony before the Senate Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Aviation. C. R. Smith, president of American Airlines, objected to the provision that industry pay one quarter of the development costs, wanted Government to pay all the costs and defer decision on how to recapture some of the costs until after the prototype had flown. John Stack, vice president and director of engineering of Republic Aviation Corp. and former nasa Director of Aeronautical Research, complained that competition with the British-French Concorde would force U.S. industry to set up management and assembly lines prematurely. Stack urged that a manufacturer be chosen to begin work on a prototype next spring and that the one-year-long second design phase be eliminated. He also supported the steel-and-titanium mach 3 concept as more efficient than an aluminum mach 2 + aircraft presently favored by faa. (Clark, NYT, 10/23/63, 9)
usaf announced routine training launch of Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A6)
D. Brainard Holmes, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator and Director of Manned Space Flight, said before Electronic Components Conference in Washington: “Today, the people of the United States are reappraising the commitment made in 1961. These discussions are natural and healthy. One of the fundamental elements of the strength of the American system is the forum of public debate. However, those of us who understand the long-term nature of major research and development programs have a duty to warn of the pitfalls involved in making frequent, drastic revisions in such programs unless it is demonstrated after thorough study that such changes are necessary. Such a course always results in excessive delays and increased costs. There is an efficient pace at which a program should proceed. To reduce this pace substantially or to pull out all stops and operate on a crash basis would result in increases in the total program costs in manpower and dollars. . . .” (Text)
Air Force Systems Command and Air Force Logistics Command announced a joint program of data management applicable to all Air Force contracts from the two commands. Program calls for tight data control by project officer, selection of minimum essential data, line-iteming each data point in the contract, (afsc Release 310-R-87)
usaf launched Scout vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/28/63)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before Subcommittee on Investigations of Senate Committee on Government Operations that his own personal study of General Dynamics and Boeing Co. contract proposals for tfx convinced him that General Dynamics provided the most practical design and the most realistic cost, estimate. (Testimony)
usaf announced the launch of an unidentified satellite with ThorAgena D vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post. 1/17/63, Al)
nasa launched kxpioher xvn (S-6) atmospheric structure satellite from Cape Canaveral, using Thor-Delta launch vehicle m (its 16th consecutive success in 17 attempts). Satellite attained orbit of 571-mi. apogee, 158.9-mi. perigee, 96.4-min. period, 57.6° inclination to the equator. The sphere-shaped satellite, measuring 35 inches in diameter and weighing 405 lbs., contained instruments (two neutral mass spectrometers, four pressure gauges, and two electrostatic probes) to measure density, composition, pressure, and temperature of the atmosphere; it was equipped to make direct samplings of atmospheric constituents such as helium, nitrogen, and oxygen. Under project management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xvii was the first scientific earth satellite to use new pulse-code-modulation telemetry system, a solid-state system providing output power of 500 milli-watts and capable of supplying 40 separate channels of information in digital form. LTseful lifetime of the satellite was estimated at two-three months. (nasa Release 63-59 ;nasa Project explorer xvii Prog. Rpt. No. 1)
nasa signed contract with North American Aviation for studies of Apollo spacecraft modifications to permit its being used as a space science laboratory for missions up to one year. Contract was awarded by Manned Spacecraft Center. (Space Bus. Doily, 10/14/63, 76)
In the speech which President Kennedy was on his way through Dallas to deliver when he was assassinated, the President had prepared a statement on U.S. preparedness. After reviewing the improvements in military readiness, the President would have said: “I have spoken of strength largely in terms of the deterrence and resistance of aggression and attack. But, in today’s world, freedom can be lost without a shot being fired, by ballots as well as bullets. The success of our leadership is dependent upon respect for our mission in the world as well as our missiles—on a clear recognition of the virtues of freedom as well as the evils of tyranny .... “And that is also why we have regained the initiative in the exploration of outer space—making an annual effort greater than the combined total of all space activities undertaken during the fifties—launching more than 130 vehicles into earth orbit—puttihg into actual operation valuable weather and communications satellites—and making it clear to all that the United States of America has no intention of finishing second in space. “This effort is expensive—but it pays its own way, for freedom and for America. For there is no longer any fear in the free world that a Communist lead in space will become a permanent assertion of supremacy and the basis of military superiority. There is no longer any doubt about the strength and skill of American science, American industry, American education and the American free enterprise system. In short, our national space effort represents a great gain in, and a great resource of, our national strength . . . .” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced Belgian astrophysicist, Dr. Francois V. Dossin, working at gsfc on a National Academy of Sciences fellowship, discovered faint comet about 5° from sun during July 20 solar eclipse. Dr. Dossin made seven camera-plate exposures of comet from Pleasant Pond, Me., during 60 sec. of total eclipse. He used blue-green filter to bring out the light of carbon molecules in the comet. Microscopic examination of developed plates showed a diffuse image emitting the light of molecular carbon, (gsfc Release)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasa Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, speaking before Tbe Harvard Business Club at Syracuse, New York, said: “today space communism versus space democracy goes deeper than the mere competition of dumping material into orbit or the planning of landing men on the moon, or dreaming of traveling to the planets. It involves the very survival of our American way of life. The eyes of the world are upon the space race, and the Soviets using our own brand of Fifth Avenue public relations have gained a psychological advantage. Our national space objective is pre-eminence in space and not just landing a man on the moon. Although desirable and psychologically reassuring, the overriding issue is not who put the first man in orbit or who will put the first man on the moon, but which nation has been able to develop the overall research, technology, and manufacturing capability to not only explore but exploit space. . . . “The curtain of ignorance is thicker and more dangerous than the iron curtain.” (Text)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara sent telegram of congratulations to Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) : “Your Air Force leaders, Secretary Zuckert and General LeMay, and the entire Defense Department, join me in congratulating you on your record breaking achievement in behalf of our national space effort. “The scientific data that you have obtained will add tremendously to our store of knowledge about space. “You have earned the highest esteem of all Americans for your historic exploit.” (dod Release 710-63)
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch from Vandenberg afb. Cause of explosion was not announced, (dod Release 341-63; urn, Wash. Post, 3/10/63)
aec announced second U.S. satellite wholly powered by nuclear energy was launched into orbit recently by a Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb, and signals from the satellite were being transmitted sucessfully with electricity from the Snap-9A isotopic power generator. Designed to provide 25 watts of direct electrical current, the Snap-9n. was the same type of generator as that providing power for a satellite launched from Vandenberg earlier this year. The two Snap-9A’s are designed for operating lifetime of five years. However, they are in orbits of at least 900 years so that by the time they re-enter earth’s atmosphere they will be almost completely decayed. At that time they are designed to bum into minute particles which will be widely dispersed in the atmosphere, thus increasing radioactivity in the atmosphere negligibly, (aec Release F-250)
In American Univ. commencement address stressing action for world peace, President Kennedy said: “. . . Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts. It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of each generation. For peace is a process—a way of solving problems . . . .” He announced his agreement with Prime Minister Macmillan and Chairman Khrushchev that “high-level discussions will shortly begin in Moscow looking toward early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty,” and declared that U.S. “does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other States do not do so. We will not be the first to resume . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/10/63,9870)
Results from alouette i topside sounder satellite were discussed at Goddard Scientific Satellite Symposium, held by nasa in Washington, D.C., Data from alouette showed that ionosphere is usually rough in high latitudes and smooth in lower latitudes, and that electron temperature of ionosphere increases with latitude. This evidence indicated Van Allen radiation belts, which extend to lower altitudes at higher latitudes, possibly are secondary heat source for ionosphere. Where ionospheric and radiation particles collide, ionospheric temperatures rise and F layers of ionosphere become more spread apart—causing radio waves to scatter. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/14/63; Av. Wk., 3/25/63, 26)
Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from nasa Wallops Station with scientific experiments designed to measure atmospheric temperatures, winds and diffusion rates at high altitudes. Nike-Apache’s payload ejected sodium vapor trail from 25-mi. altitude to 100-mi. altitude, the vapor clouds visible for several hundred miles. Nike-Cajun’s payload consisted of 12 special explosive charges ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 55-mi. altitudes. Experiments were part of continuing program by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center to study characteristics and composition of the upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 63-17)
Lt. Col. Robert E. Warren (U.S. Army), nasa Deputy Director of Communications Systems, reviewed launching and performance of syncom i communications satellite before Senate Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Communications. After syncom was successfully launched by Delta vehicle, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had determined apogee of syncom’s elliptical transfer orbit would occur at 21,700-mi. altitude, about 600-mi. short of synchronous altitude but well within allowable error. So that more nearly synchronous orbit could be achieved, signal was sent from usns Kingsport in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, commanding satellite’s apogee motor to fire 10 min. earlier (at 5:42 a.m.) than firing time set on onboard timer, syncom received and stored signal, and at 5:42 a.m. signal was sent from Kingsport to execute the command. 20.1 sec. later, ground reception of satellite telemetry abruptly ceased. Because apogee motor was to have fired for 21.2 sec., Colonel Warren said it was “difficult to imagine that these two events are unrelated .... “So, what can we make of all this ? First we know that synoom is in orbit. If the apogee motor did not fire, it is still in the elliptical orbit and will eventually be found, either by optics or by radar. If the apogee motor did fire, syncom is in a very high altitude orbit, and without telemetry, there is only a slim chance that it will be found. A search has been organized which will continue until such time as it is found, or until further search seems unwarranted. If it is found, we will have another chance to try out the command system, and if it works, we could again be in business. “Secondly, we know that one of the communications transponders worked well in the transfer ellipse. “Thirdly, we have shown once more that the Delta launch vehicle is a reliable booster, this being its 15th successive flight with performance well within acceptable error.” (Testimony) • Bill to create Commission on Science and Technology (S. 816) introduced in Congress by Senator John McClellan (D.-Ark.). Commission would be charged with bringing about more economy and efficiency in scientific programs carried out and funded by Federal Government. (Space Bits. Daily, 2/20/63, 224)
usaf successfully launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight down the Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 12/23/63, 10.) . ...
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and nasa Administrator James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for three women accorded national recognition for space age accomplishments—Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Program and 1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award. ( nasa Release 63-94)
An editorial in the Washington Daily News supported the idea that a slower program would not save money in the long run. “. . . today the moon and space programs are in high gear and almost $5 billion in prime contracts have been placed with American industry. Plants are tooled up, scientists are on the job, research centers are going up and near Houston even a new city is being built. “We are inclined to agree with Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Director James Webb and others that a major slash in space funds at this stage would not save money in the long run because a stretched-out lunar landing program would come to an even greater total cost. Mr. Webb, for example, estimates an extra $3 billion for the additional overhead costs alone of a three-year stretch-out. “It was judged two years ago by the President and Congress to be in the national interest to place a man on the moon—and before the Russians, if possible. If the reasons were valid then, and we think they were, they are valid today.” (Text)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced sodium-vapor cloud experiments by Goddard during past two years had shown wind behavior 44—50 mi. above earth becomes erratic and unpredictable. Below that altitude, winds generally follow global pattern, regularly reversing with the seasons. Region between 56- and 68-mi. altitudes is characterized by “remarkable wind sheers”—within altitude span of less than three miles, wind speed was observed to increase swiftly by more than 250 mph and even to reverse direction. Immediately above this band of maximum wind velocity, wind diminishes almost to zero. Above 70 mi., research indicated region of “strong but more uniform winds” with velocities of about 200 mph. Goddard experiments, launched on sounding rockets from nasa Wallops Station, did not extend beyond 105-mi. altitude. (Goddard Release; AP, Wash. Post, 1/13/63, A16)
Interview by Howard Simons of Dr. Donald F. Hornig appeared in the Washington Post, Chairman of the Chemistry Dept, at Princeton Univ., Dr. Hornig was appointed Science Adviser to the President on November 7, accompanied President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson on a tour of military and space installations in November, and was recently reaffirmed as Science Adviser by President Johnson. Dr. Hornig has been one of the 18 members of the President’s Science Advisory Committee since 1960. Dr. Hornig was reported as saying that the place of basic research was distorted by the legacy of World War II when concentrated scientists were able to convert the most abstract scientific notions into impressive useful devices: “The days of pie-in-the-sky promises of basic research are over. The mood 20 years ago was one that suggested by turning loose great numbers of scientists miracles happened. Well they did happen, and I suppose it was logical that after the war the same notion would carry over. “Only it doesn’t work that way today. Miracles of the kind performed during the war are a little harder to find. Scientists are no longer concentrated nor are their efforts. They do come, of course, but over periods of years .... “The meaning of Sputnik,” Hornig said, “was that it demonstrated the Soviets were capable of big-time technology; capable, if you will, of playing in the big leagues.” He declined to label the American attempt to send men to the moon as a “race.” “The moon is, after all, the first important object beyond the earth. . . . There are valid scientific objectives to be pursued on the moon’s surface all linked to gaining new insights into cosmology and to providing clues to man’s destiny. That is, where we came from. ... (H. Simons, Wash. Post, 12/15/63, E3) December 15: dod decision to develop military communications satellite system, probably beginning operation in 1966, reported in New York Times. Funds were contained in proposed dod budget for FY 1965, recently presented to the White House. Plans called for 24—30 satellites in random polar orbits with altitudes ranging from 5,000-12,000 ini., linking military forces around the world. No contracts would be awarded, however, until discussions with ComSatCorp resolve question of whether dod should use commercial facilities for its military purposes. (Finney, NYT, 12/16/63,1)
You now face a new world, a world of change. The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres, and missiles marks a beginning of another epoch in the long story of mankind. In the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken to form the earth, in the three or more billion years of development of the human race, there has never been a more abrupt or staggering evolution.’ ” General LeMay went on to say that the “trained man, whether in a manned space vehicle or in a ground surveillance control point, will be one of our most valuable assets in our national space effort—and for our survival .... “We must remember that any medium . . . can be a region of danger to peace and security. In this new medium of space I believe that the military defenses of the western world must be objective, applicable and evident. “The Air Force will use, to the benefit of military space capabilities, all scientific advances and acquisition of knowledge achieved by nasa. We don’t plan to wait for a program of fallout—if we can hasten advancement or increase its utilization through collateral efforts. This we are doing, in national interest, toward advancing our considerable space testing and development of approved space programs.” {A-N-AF Journal and, Register, 2/9/63, 15; Text, CR, 4/6/63, A1202-1203)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carried 153-lb. instrumented payload to 139-mi. altitude in experiment from Wallops Island to study spectra] emission lines in upper atmosphere and measure their intensity as function of altitude, thus determining distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in upper atmosphere. Experiment was designed by The Johns Hopkins Univ. under nasa research grant administered by Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-46)
Article on “The Test Ban” by Stefan T. Possony of the Hoover Institute, Stanford University, printed in the Congressional Record, said: “. . . Currently there is no feasible method of verifying [nuclear] explosions in space. If the Soviets were to launch a space vehicle and explode a nuclear device, at not too great a distance, the United States might gain a good notion of what was going on. But we would not possess the type of evidence which ‘would stand up in court,’ assuming that we could make public use of the evidence we have. Hence, we would be reluctant to move, just as during the Cuban crisis, Washington did not move before there was clear photographic evidence of the presence of Soviet missiles .... “Few people realize that though we are entrusting our security to icbm’s, we never have tested a full assembly of such a missile, i.e., we have not launched an icbm together with its warhead, nor destroyed a target with an icBM-launched warhead .... “Testing also has a bearing on space propulsion. It is generally agreed that the Orion project—which is designed to use small nuclear ‘bombs’ to propel a space vehicle—would allow the lifting of maximal payloads mto orbit and permit the deepest penetration into the solar system. Of all propulsion systems it would nmiri/lo -fr\r* flia mocf offhpfnra nfilwafmTl nf Qnapp. TTnWftVPf. SH *-**'-' ~ ------------------------~------------ ----—• —7 far it seems impractical, because of radioactivity, to launch an Orion assembly from the ground; unfortunately, by using Orion propulsion only from orbit, much of the system’s utility would be lost. An all-fusion technology would eliminate the radioactivity and thereby open the road to getting really important payloads into space. “Should the Soviets decide to move into space as a decisive military medium, they may employ Orion techniques even before they are able to eliminate radioactivity .... The brutal twin facts which we cannot circumvent are that space utilization requires maximum energy releases and that nuclear explosions are the method through which maximum energy releases can be produced— produced most cheaply .... “Plowshare explosions may be required for the building of stations on the moon . . . .” {CR, 3/21/63,4365,4367,4368)
Dr. William M. Helvey, Chief of Space Environment and Life Sciences Laboratory, Republic Aviation Corp., told American Medical Association in Los Angeles that test volunteers exposed to pure oxygen in altitude chamber during four two-week periods had developed anemia but remained otherwise healthy. ^Science Service, Wash. Daily News, 5/1/63)
usaf launched Titan I icbm with dummy nuclear warhead from Vandenberg afb. {M&R, 9/23/63,10)
Edmond E. Bisson, Lewis scientist, installed as president of American Socity of Lubrication Engineers, (lrc Release 63-45, Lewis Chronology, 5)
The Air Force accepted the first Gemini Launch Vehicle from the Martin Company. The booster, a specially modified Titan II, would be used in the nasa Gemini program. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan. 1964; afsc Release 312-114, Atch. 2, 1/1/64, 2)
nasa Administrator James Webb spoke in Washington before the American Council on Education on the relationship of university activity to the space effort: “Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences and head of the Department of Physics at the University of Illinois, noted recently that he could ‘think of no aspect of university activity relating to science or technology which is not involved in a fundamental way in the space effort’ .... “nasa [sponsors] a pre-doctoral training program with the ultimate objective of assisting in the production of 1,000 Ph. D.’s a year ...	..... “I think I can say categorically that the universities with which nasa works are not becoming so reliant on federal research funds that it is interfering with their traditional role of undergraduate instruction. Although the ratio of graduate to undergraduate effort in many universities may be increasing, those with which we work are not reducing their undergraduate instruction role. In fact, we know that all the major schools are most concerned about keeping up with the undergraduate demand. “It is worth emphasizing that nasa is attempting to foster a broader base of competence in graduate research by awarding training grants to institutions rather than to individual scholars. Thus the university as an institution is given the opportunity to select its own candidates for instruction on its own campus.” (Text)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites using Thor-Able-Star launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/6/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963. 12764)
Medical investigation of the 4,565 general aviation accidents in the U.S. in 1961 was inadequate, a group of usaf doctors reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Physicians should autopsy the dead and examine survivors with the aim of making flying safer, the medical officers asserted, but this is done only for military and commercial airline accidents—not for general aviation, where often only a single investigator from faa or cab visited the crash. (NYT, 5/24/63,6) June 24-July 10: Fourth Annual Aviation Education Workshop, sponsored by Mississippi State Dept, of Education, various aviation interests, military services, and nasa, was held at Univ. of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg. Robert F. Thompson, Head of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Recovery Branch, was principal speaker June 26, with addresses on “Tracking, Search and Rescue Procedures” and “Past and Future Programs of Manned Space Flight.” (msc Release 63-104)
