frc test-flew modified X—15 No. 2 with Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) as pilot, the aircraft remaining attached to B-52 mother craft for airborne checkout of the aircraft systems. Flight was first for this X-15 since Nov. 1962 landing accident. Modifications, completed by North American Aviation, included four astronomical cameras mounted on fuselage, designed to take stellar photographs above ozone layer of earth’s atmosphere, and external propellant tanks which would enable engine to increase top speed by at least 1,000 mph, to a maximum speed over 5,000 mph. (fro Release 15-64; NASA Release 64-138)
NASA explorer xxi scientific earth satellite (imp b) was launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. Onboard instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33°53' inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-space path which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of explorer xviii (imf a), the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X—258, to give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary tracking data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust. Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xxi contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC researchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of California, NASA Ames Research Center, and mit respectively. (nasa Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/64; upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64; M&R, 10/12/64, 24)
Paraglider landing system definitely would not be used for the scheduled Project Gemini space flights, msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney announced. Development of paraglider system was too far behind for the 12 scheduled flights. After many rumors and much speculation, this statement was first official announcement of decision not to use the paraglider. It followed by three days the first manned free-flight test of the system, which was unsuccessful. Development and testing of paraglider by North American Aviation would continue, Haney said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/11/64)
Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) said in the House: “Atlas has more scheduled launches during the 1960’s than ever before for missions of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA, a demand so great that a new standardized Atlas space launch vehicle called SLV-3 or Atlas-3 has been designed. This standardized vehicle will produce lower long-term costa while increasing flexibility and flight reliability. Development of this standardized vehicle is an excellent example of how existing space systems can be improved to satisfy new requirements. Improvement of a flight proven system such as Atlas is inherently more efficient and economical than designing new vehicles for new missions. Research and development costs are already expended and Atlas has certainly proven its reliability. . . .” (CR, 3/4/64, All 15)
Gov. Nelson Rockefeller said in speech at Johns Hopkins Univ.: “I believe strongly that it is time for the American people to take a long, hard look at the political, military and scientific merit of the ‘one-shot,’ crash program to place a man on the moon by 1970. “I think we ought to put a man on the moon. But we must make sure that our program is sound, that our priorities are proper—that we are, in short, taking maximum advantage of the virtually unlimited opportunities which the scientific and technological revolution of our times presents us—that we are not warping our entire scientific effort for this one purpose. “I fear that the present moon-shot program of the Democratic administration in Washington does not meet the criteria for a soundly conceived program of scientific research and development in the national interest. . . .” (Text)
usaf launched final Minuteman I test icbm from Cape Kennedy. First-stage flight was satisfactory, but second stage veered out of control and had to be destroyed by range safety officer 165 sec. after launch. In launches from Cape Kennedy, the missile scored 38 successes, 8 partial successes, and 8 failures. From Vandenberg afb, it scored 60 successes, 4 partial successes, and 2 failures. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/30/64; M&R, 10/5/64, 11)
Eleanor Pressly, head of Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding Rocket Div. at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and winner of a 1963 Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson’s White House luncheon for “women-doers.” (Wash. Post, 3/17/64)
Nasa conducted two successful test-flights of paraglider vehicles at Edwards AFB, Calif. In the first test, a simulated Gemini spacecraft manned by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot E. P. Hetzel was towed aloft beneath a pre-inflated paraglider landing system. The tow test vehicle (ttv) was towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by CH—46C helicopter. While airborne, Hetzel manually controlled the ttv through preplanned maneuvers to its landing. In the second test, a similar but unmanned system was dropped from a C—130 aircraft at 32,000-ft. altitude. The paraglider was automatically deployed and remotely controlled in flight from 22,000-ft. to 12,500-ft. altitude, where it was separated from the Gemini test vehicle. The tests were part of NASA’s continuing evaluation of the paraglider system as a means of landing and recovering manned spacecraft (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that Gen. John Paul McConnell would be nominated to replace Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, who would retire as Air Force Chief of Staff on Jan. 31,1965, after 35 years in the armed forces. Gen. McConnell would assume his new position Feb. 1. (NYT, 12/23/64, 11; Barrett, htns, Wash. Post, 12/23/64, 2) December 23: NASA announced realignment of its manned space flight organization, designed to (1) provide a central organizational element with the overall operations responsibility for manned space flight programs, and (2) make a single organization responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the total Apollo space vehicle in manned space flight programs at Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) . Key organizational changes would be effective Jan. 1,1965: (1) appointment of E. E. Christensen to a new position, Mission Operations Director, in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, supported by two Mission Directors with overall responsibility for the individual mission to which they were assigned; (2) creation of an Operations Support Requirements Office, headed by Porter Brown and staffed by representatives of each NASA program office, appropriate centers, and Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition; (3) transfer of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Operations to Kennedy Space Center; and (4) establishment at ksc of the position of Director, Launch Operations. Dr. Kurt H. Debus would also act as Director, Launch Operations; G. Merritt Preston, head of msc Florida Operations, would become Deputy Director, Launch Operations. Resident offices were provided at ksc for msc and msfc program managers. (NASA Ann. 64-301; ksc Release 224)
Soviet members of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space visited NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. They were Prof. 0. G. Gazenko, Prof. Yu. D. Kalimin, and Mr. I. V. Milovidov. (Goddard News, 12/14/64, 2)
NASA announced three-month expedition at sea using converted Navy aircraft transport to launch sounding rockets would be conducted next year as part of International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy). 40 or more scientific experiments would be carried by Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets as well as Areas and Hasp weather rockets to areas of the upper atmosphere and the ionosphere that cannot be reached by land-based rockets. Exact locations of the launches had not yet been determined, but it had been decided that a number of experiments would be made in region of the magnetic equator in eastern portion of the South Pacific Ocean. NASA Wallops Station was assigned project management of the expedition and Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for coordinating most of the scientific experiments, being provided by universities, other Federal agencies, and NASA field centers. Project was under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications. ( nasa Release 64-246; Wallops Release 64-73)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Agena D booster toward a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. Purpose of the shot was not indicated. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
Air Force Office of Scientific Research and Massachusetts Institute of Technology announced jointly that scientists at the National Magnet Laboratory, using a giant water-cooled magnet, had produced the strongest continuous magnetic fields generated by man to date—up to 255,000 gauss. Maximum fields were maintained for periods of a minute. (afosr Release, 11/64,2S)
Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (I&L), advised Army, Navy, Air Force, and DSA that it was dod policy “to provide quality and reliability assurance services to NASA in a manner fully responsive to NASA’s technical requirements,” Memo clarified use of nasa Quality Status Stamps by dod personnel and npc 200-1A as the document establishing NASA’s quality assurance requirements, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Full-scale paraglider was successfully deployed at Edwards afb in test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for NASA to demonstrate the method of maneuverable recovery of manned spacecraft. After an air drop from usaf C-130 transport at 33,000 ft., the 31-ft.-long inflatable wing deployed and assumed the programed trimmed glide, (naa s&id Skywriter, 5/1/64, 1 ;Av.Wk„ 5/4/64,27)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
Results of meteoroid-protection research were presented at aiaa Structures and Materials Conference in Palm Springs. North American Aviation said its research suggested that current protective requirements against impact hazard might be reduced. GM Defense Research Laboratories reported on hypervelocity impact studies that showed meteoroid bumper concept may do more harm than good at lower impact velocities. NASA Ames Research Center research indicated use of honeycomb material for meteoroid protection would increase damage from impacts, because honeycomb walls channel sprayed particles into highly damaging clusters of pulverized material that blast through rear sheet of target material. Investigation of fiber metals by iit Research Institute showed that fiber metal bumpers were more efficient than solid bumpers in preventing damage to target material. {M&R, 5/25/64,29)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced award of $1,356,000 contract to Blaw-Knox Co. for design and fabrication of three 85-ft.-diameter dish-shaped antennas to be used in manned space flight tracking network for Project Apollo lunar mission, (gsfc Release G-4-64)
NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden announced to newsmen the bilateral agreement negotiated between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in June 1962 (the “Dryden-Blagonravov Agreement”), by which the two countries would cooperate in space programs for communications, meteorology, and geophysics, was discussed by him and Academician Blagonravov at Geneva. Cooperation in Soviet-American communications for global meteorology was to be implemented by the two countries’ sharing costs equally, each supporting the program in alternate months; a bilaterally financed communications link between Moscow and Washington was to be solely for the purpose of exchanging cloud pictures. The 1962 agreement grew out of correspondence -between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev in Feb. and March 1962. Dryden and Blagonravov also discussed American-Soviet cooperation in space biology. Agreement was readied, subject to review before final approval, by which American and Soviet space biologists would prepare bilingual reports on similar subjects. Soviets had proposed cooperation in biology and medicine, both of which had great bearing on manned space flight when exploration extended beyond the moon. (Wash. Post, 6/9/64; NASA Transcript, 6/8/64[2] “Background Information,” “News Conference.”)
Robert G. Deissler, NASA Lewis Research Center, received the Heat Transfer Division Memorial Award of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in New York City, (lrc Release 64-108)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Beckman Instruments Corp. to negotiate final contract for three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (Stars) at slightly more than $1,000,000. The contractor would be responsible for manufacture, installation, and maintenance of the system as well as training of Goddard personnel. This second phase of the Goddard Stars project would provide a highly automated method of preparing large quantities of data for later analysis by the scientific community, (gsfc Release G—33-64)
USAF Air Defense Command 10th Aerospace Missile Sq., a fully operational unit of adc at Vandenberg afb which would man an antisatellite weapon, was on 5-min. alert status. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 13)
First launch of NASA Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was conducted at Wallops Island, Va., the rocket reaching 6,000-ft. altitude in successful test. For this first test upper stage was inert, the main objectives being to demonstrate compatibility of Aerobee 350 with Aerobee launch-tower rail system and evaluate performance of Aerobee 350 during first-stage (Nike) boost. Preliminary evaluation of test indicated NASA Goddard Space Flight Center could proceed with plans to launch complete live Aerobee 350 without redesign of the rocket or the launcher rail system. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
A National Geographic report, based on findings by nasa and Air Force researchers, estimated that the earth’s gravitational field picked up several million tons of dust and small particles every year and that the total accumulation of this material on the earth’s surface since its formation two billion years ago was well over ten feet. {NYT, 12/27/64)
In interview with Aviation Week and Space Technology, Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert replied to question about mol: “I am sure that the mol must go forward. I am in sympathy with Mr. McNamara’s pressing us to try to define what we hope to do with it. This can have a lot to do with the subsystems that you plan to put in it. Also, the definition effort has to do with the cost, and with the time it is going to take us to do the job. We haven’t suffered at any time in the last three years that I have heen here by taking a few months to try and work out with reasonable precision what we are planning to do. I am convinced, for one, that the studies and program definition that we went through in the Titan 3 materially improved our chances of getting a fine booster at lower cost. I know, as Secretary McNamara knows, that there is a limit to the precision with which you can define what you are going to do with something you haven’t got. But the effort should be made to set out the parameters. It has -the merit, at least, of excluding some of the things you know you are not going to try. I’m convinced Mr. McNamara means exactly what he says—that we have to get this mol capability, and I’m not disturbed by the efforts that are being made to attempt to define what we mean by a capability. . . (Av. Wk., 3/2/64, 73)
fcc postponed a decision on the question of who would own and operate the ground stations to be set up as part of the communications satellite system and called for further filings on the issue. Detailed arguments were due Jan. 5, and reply comments on Jan. 18. It was estimated it would take the fcc a minimum of six weeks to evaluate all comments. The carriers that had filed protests to exclusive ComSatCorp ground station ownership were American Telephone and Telegraph Co., International Telephone and Telegraph Corp., Radio Corp. of America, Western Union International, and Hawaiian Telephone Co. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64,27; AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 12/10/64)
Washington Post editorialized: “The failure of the sixth straight Ranger spacecraft hoists aloft the question of whether the United States will accomplish its goal of putting an American on the moon by the decade’s end. . . . “A delay would not simply be a case of a stretchout in which work would continue but at a slower pace. A delay would take much of the binding and motivating tension from Apollo. It would increase costs by underusing men and facilities brought together for a tighter schedule, and it would allow projects and personnel to drift out of the main stream into the eddies of lower priority. A delay also would entail loss of prestige for NASA, for the Administration and for the Nation as well. “No schedule, however, is sacred. If it is determined that the landing of a man on the moon by Jan. 1, 1970, is simply not feasible, or cannot be done with reasonable assurance of safety for the astronauts, then the space agency and the country will have to adjust to this reality, no matter how costly and comfortless it may be. A manned flight to the moon will be no less exciting or valuable for being somewhat delayed.” {Wash. Post, 2/6/64,18)
XB—70 supersonic aircraft was unveiled at North American Aviation plant, Palmdale, Calif. The 2,000-mph intercontinental-range plane would be used to investigate feasibility of long-range high-speed flight. Speaking of achievements in the program thus far, Brig. Gen. Fred J. Ascani (afsc Aeronautical Systems Div.) said: “. . . Not all of these and other accomplishments can be termed radical breakthroughs (although the XB-70 program has produced about a thousand patent disclosures), but taken together they have helped to advance a technology which constitutes a base for a new generation of civil and military aircraft which will operate at sustained supersonic speeds.” (dod Release 374r-64; Witkin, NYT, 5/12/64,1; AF Pol. Info. Ltr., 6/1/64)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced U.S. Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife would administer for NASA the entire buffer zone Merritt Island lowlands, nearly 40,000	acres, (ksc Release 34-64)
Life science researchers in North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. were studying effects of weightlessness and increased gravity on boa constrictors, NAA reported. The eyes of the boas were of special interest, for they offered easily observable reactions to the conditions. Normally a slit that remains vertical, the pupil of the boa’s eye tilted some 15 degrees after the snakes were subjected to centrifuge. The snakes were “grossly disoriented” and, in striking at objects, they missed widely, (naa s&id Skywriter, 2/7/64, 2)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Soviet Chief Air Marshal Konstantin A. Vershinin said in Red Star that Soviet air force can destroy any enemy land, sea, or air target. Soviet air power now is based on supersonic, rocket-carrying planes capable of operating in all weather conditions, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A16)
Minuteman icbm exploded shortly after launch from silo at Vandenberg Afb, and usaf was investigating cause of the explosion. This came five days after usaf conducted 50th launch in its Minuteman development program, a successful AMR flight. (M&R, 3/30/64,16)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, discussed utilization of space technology for commercial application before American Management Association in New York: “In the present century, the lag from basic discoveries to applications has become progressively shorter. The Space Age is still further reducing the lag. “Two major programs are under way to meet the Congressional mandate for the widest possible dissemination of the results of space activities. The first aims to make available the primary technical data to aerospace scientists and engineers. The second repackages the information and moves space-generated technology out of the agency’s laboratories and the plants of its contractors into the non-space industrial complex. “NASA collects, organizes, and disseminates scientific and technical information on its in-house and contractor work by means of the latest in computer, microfilm, and other methods. Decentralization with local access is the keynote. “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose of the Technology Utilization Program, the first national program of its type. Staffs at each NASA Center are systematically organizing the reporting of new or improved ideas, materials, methods, and technology developed in the course of research and development activities. The more promising reports go for analysis to a group of industrial research institutes familiar with current industrial needs and requirements. If the analysis indicates promise, reports are published and indexed so that they are readily available to any segment of the economy that may find them useful. “NASA is making significant contributions to the growth of science and technology in most major fields. More important, NASA is dealing with the organization and utilization of expanding knowledge in a highly advanced and, we believe, very effective manner.” (Text)
First major test of revamped NASA worldwide tracking network, part of preparation for manned earth-orbital space flights in Project Gemini. During nine-day drill, simulated flight missions were conducted which involved Goddard Space Flight Center, Mission Control Center, and eight sites in the worldwide tracking network. (msc Roundup, 10/14/64,1; Goddard News, 10/19/64,1)
ComSatCorp announced six companies had made summary proposals to provide research data and consultant services for ground terminal stations: American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; ARCS Industries, Inc.; Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall; Hughes Aircraft Co.; Page Communications Engineers, Inc.; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Of these, one or more contractors would be selected. (ComSatCorp Release)
Evidence that the electron is smallest indivisible unit and that the proton lacks a core, as had been postulated, was reported at annual meeting of American Physical Societv in New York. Experiments were made with electron accelerator built by Harvard Univ. and mit and were described by Dr. Roy Weinstein of Northeastern Univ. (Boston), Dr. Richard Wilson of Harvard, and Dr; Louis S. Osborne of MIT. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/23/64, 20)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Chamber of Commerce dinner in Oxford, N.C., clarified the cost of a U.S. manned lunar landing in this decade: “This $20 billion outlay for manned space flight for the period 1961 through 1970 is for Projects Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. . . . “Of the $20 billion marked for manned space flight in the present decade, $18 billion will be expended for the launch vehicles and spacecraft, the ground facilities, the astronaut training, and the management skills and other human factors that are an integral part of our nation’s capital investment. These are all things we must have—in any event— to achieve the across-the-board competence in every major area of manned space flight that security, well-being, and progress of the nation may demand. “The portion of this total effort devoted to landing on the moon will cost only about $2 billion—that is, sending three Americans on a round-trip voyage of lunar exploration, along with everything in the way of spacecraft and special equipment that the expedition will require. . . . “I hope that this brief and somewhat simplified explanation will put the correct price tag on the extra cost of the lunar mission. Let us all endeavor to put the emphasis where it really belongs: on the rapid growth of American competence in all areas of manned space flight particularly in the area near earth which is the prime importance for national security.” (Text)
AEC announced a satellite carrying small Snap-9A atomic generator had been launched on Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb last April 21, but it did not go into orbit. Preliminary data indicated the satellite burned up upon re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. (AP, NYT, 5/12/64; Av. WL, 5/18/64,38)
usaf launched Titan II ICBM from Vandenberg AFB with pickaback instrumented capsule equipped to study heat and shock of reentry. The package containing 25 experiments was provided by General Electric Co. Re-entry Systems Dept, for DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa). The Titan II was launched by a SAC crew on routine training mission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/3/64; M&R, 10/12/ 64, 10)
Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said in address at centennial convocation luncheon, Worcester Polytechnic Institute:	* “The new era promised by the Space Age perhaps connotes a return to what was once called natural philosophy. The unifying element of these developments of the space program is a general spirit of inquiry into the nature of the external physical world. It represents a re-direction of interest away from the increasingly narrow specialization which has characterized the physical sciences in the last decades. “The second distinguishing feature of the scientific research in space is the fact that the various scientists have only been able to make their observations ... by virtue of the hardware developed by the engineer. This is in distinct contrast to the biologist who could invest in a good microscope and do research comparable with the best. . . . Generally, the engineer exploits and puts to practical use the knowledge acquired by the scientists. But in space, the scientist seems to be particularly dependent on the engineer to develop new devices and techniques. Engineering, in this context, has become a more creative and trail-blazing profession. “The third and possibly most imposing challenge of the space age is the potential feed-back of its developments into the civilian economy. In the long run, the justification of our space budget must stand on this ‘fall-out.’ . . .” (Text)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket successfully launched from the Argentine launch range at Chamical to study the ionosphere. Payload contained continuous wave propagation, electron temperature, and ion density experiments. This was first rocket launched by a South American country under a cooperative arrangement with NASA. Project was administered jointly by the Argentine National Commission of Space Research (ci^ie) and NASA. Argentina built the payloads and part of the ground station, while NASA trained Argentine technicians and engineers and provided some ground support equipment. Argentina purchased two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets in the U.S. No exchange of funds took place between the two agencies, (nasa Release 64-304; NASA Rpt. srl)
The first of three giant Pegasus satellites arrived at NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn I space vehicle (SA—9) would launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and ranging from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in the first quarter of 1965. Primary mission of the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000 sq. ft. of capacitator panels to measure, record, and transmit back to earth data on the frequency, size, direction, and speed of meteoroids in nearearth space. This information would be important to development of manned and unmanned spacecraft, (ksc Release 227-64)
faa disclosed it was requesting Coordinating Research Council of New York City to study comparative safety features of the two most commonly used aircraft fuels—kerosene and JP—4. (Hudson, NYT, 2/26/64,21)
usaf successfully launched Atlas F icbm from Vandenberg AFB in routine training mission. (M&R, 2/17/64,13)
Pratt & Whitney received $685,000 contract from NASA msfc for study and integration of an advanced liquid-oxygen-hydrogen rocket engine. Objective would be to integrate existing feasible concepts into one engine best able to meet future requirements. Work would be coordinated with other advanced mission studies such as Saturn V improvement, post Saturn, and the reusable orbital sbuttle transport. Configuration would be an engine with a single chamber turbopump unit with variable mixture ratio control. It would be throttleable and capable of multiple restarts and with a thrust range of 300,000 to 350,000 lbs. One-year study would use data produced under several separate NASA engine technology contracts at Pratt & Whitney with inputs from Aerojet-General Corp., Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, and General Electric Co. (M&R, 7/20/64, 8; SBD, 7/14/64, 63)
Air Force Systems Command announced plans to orbit an experimental fuel cell able to produce both electricity for space power and pure drinking water for space crews. The fuel cell would be orbited from Vanden-berg afb early in 1965. (afsc Release 43-11—145; NYT, 11/10/64,34; Houston Post, 11/10/64)
Reported that new 125-ft. radiotelescope opened at England’s Jodrell Bank Radio Astronomy Station early in June could give insight into creation of universe. Radiotelescope was to detect and analyze high-frequency radio pulses emitted by stars 6 billion light-years distant. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 7/6/64) During week of July 5—11: Unmanned paraglider wing designed to make air-to-ground cargo deliveries to forward battle areas successfully completed series of three flight tests at U.S. Army Yuma Proving Ground, Ariz. The paraglider, also designed to be a spacecraft recovery system, slipped three 1,000-lb. cargo packages to earth without mishap from 3,100 ft. Demonstration was performed by Space and Information Div. of North American Aviation under program called Precision Aerial Delivery System (pads) . (naa S&id Skywriter, 7/17/64, 1)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) said in Air Force and Space Digest article on technological goals: “A creative idea may be born in the mind of one man. Of primary importance is the basic and fundamental research necessary to spell out this idea. Here the financial investment is probably the smallest, limited to the man, his instruments, and the time. The amounts of money are relatively modest, except for capital facilities. Indeed, sometimes this money is used and. reused, for basic research is often done in the university climate where its effects nourish graduate students as well. “The planning, the adaptation, and the oversight of applied research and development is a more resource-consuming operation. By skilled and thoughtful planning project managers can avoid difficulties which tend to drag on important programs. Here the important resource is people, for the decisions are difficult. The history of many important programs in the United States in recent decades affords case studies of matters where waste might have been avoided if top-level people could have anticipated and eliminated specific problems. “One of the most difficult problems facing the United States is to determine the standards by which we can exercise the necessary judgment to avoid moving into the most expensive areas of technology— development, testing, and production—at an appropriate time to ensure that we do not become prisoners of high costs and unnecessary use of resources. We need to exercise more rigorous standards, more decisive judgment, and action.” (AF Mag., 4/64, 53-56)
Editorial in Christian Science Monitor said: “It is one thing to question the wisdom of spending so much so quickly to put an American hopefully on the moon in this decade, a time limit that the economy drive in Washington may remove. But it would be less than wisdom to cut back sharply on space funding under the false assumption that the United States is pulling ahead of the Soviets. It is still coming up from behind.” (CSM, 2/1/64)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing Harvard Business School of Washington, presented an appraisal of U.S. aerospace power in 1964: “My appraisal for 1964 indicates continuing increase in airpower. All of the atlas and titan missile squadrons were operational by the end of 1963. Our total U.S. strategic power, the backbone and starting point of deterrence, will more than double in 1964 when new min-uteman strategic missile wings become operational. . . . “Today’s appraisals of airpower must also cover the space front. “The Air Force space program will have a Manned Orbital Laboratory as its central project. The switch from Dynasoar to mol reflects a change in emphasis toward on-orbit experiment rather than re-entry experiments. . . .” (Text, dod Release 18-64)
I remain convinced that it will be possible to develop an American supersonic transport which will be economic to operate, will find a substantial market among the airlines of the world and will help to maintain American leadership in the air.
Lt. Gen. William J. Ely (usa), Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Administration and Management), said in testimony before House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Research and Development Subcommittee: “For the past six years, over 80% of the net value of rdt&e contracts of the Department of Defense has been to companies concerned with aerospace and electronics. Actually, 11 states received 88.3% of the awards in FY 1962; 18 states received 95.3% of the total. Five major Defense rdt&e complexes, centered around Los Angeles, the San Francisco Bay area, the New York City-northern New Jersey area, Boston, and the Washington, D.C., area accounted for about 58% of the total net value of rdt&e awards. . . we recognize that Defense R&D is concentrated geographically and that this concentration will continue for the foreseeable future. The Department of Defense, of all the agencies of government, is the one that must feel itself most constrained to the purpose of getting the best results in rdt&e at the least cost. We cannot speak for the remain* der of the government; such agencies as the National Science Founda* tion and the National Institutes of Health were created in part to support research, and therefore have legitimate additional criteria for their operations. We tend to follow competence where we find it and therefore consider that greater uniformity in the geographical distribution of our R&D contracts and grants can only be achieved to the extent that more uniform competence is developed.” (Testimony)
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation received four NASA contract modifications worth $22,378,626 on existing research and development production contracts for the F—1 engines, which provide thrust in first stage of Saturn V launch vehicle. NASA also awarded contract modifications to Douglas Aircraft Co. totaling $31,471,836 for additional work on the S—IV and S—IVB rocket stages. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1,9; Nashville Tennessean, 7/9/64)
Britain’s VC-10 long-range jet aircraft made its first commercial passenger flight—a boac flight'from London to Lagos, Nigeria. The aircraft featured rapid lift, allowing it to use shorter runways than its U.S. counterparts, the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8. (Farnsworth, NYT, 4/30/64,57)	_ April 29—May 1: Air Transport and Space Meeting and Production Forum held in New York, sponsored by Society of Automotive Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. At the meeting, NASA Ames Research Center scientists reported results of a study of a manned Mars mission: Nova-class launch vehicles and nuclear-propelled spacecraft, combined with extensive aerodynamic braking techniques at Mars and Earth, would allow manned Mars mission to be made with a single, direct launch from Earth. Use of aerodynamic braking at Mars and Earth would reduce total velocity requirements 50 per cent. (M&R, 5/4/64, 17)
Two nasa satellites—explorer xxiv and explorer xxv—were successfully launched into orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., aboard a single four-stage Scout rocket. This marked the first time NASA had orbited dual spacecraft with a single booster. The double payload was designed to provide more detailed information on complex radiation-air density measurements. explorer xxiv (Air Density satellite) was a 12-ft.-dia., 19-lb. polka-dotted sphere identical to explorers ix and XIX. It was covered with aluminum foil to reflect both sunlight and radio waves; approximately 4,000	white spots on the surface provided temperature control. EXPLORER xxiv would provide three types of global comparative measurements: (1) high-altitude air density; (2) sources of atmospheric heat through comparison of data with Injun and other satellites; and (3) density and temperature variations of the atmosphere as a function of latitude. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,550 mi.; perigee, 327 mi; period, 116 min.; and inclination. 81°. EXPLORER XXV (Injun-B), a 2-ft.-dia., 90-lb. metal satellite bearing 16 radiation sensors to measure protons and electrons in various ranges of energy, was roughly spherical in shape with 40 flat surfaces, 30 of them studded with solar cells. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,548 mi.; perigee, 326 mi.; period, 116 min.; and inclination, 81°. Tracking data after one complete orbit indicated that the satellites were close to planned orbit with all instruments operating. (NASA Release 64-284; Goddard News, 11/30/64)
It was reported that President Johnson would give special attention to science and technology programs in budget-making conferences at his Texas ranch. Dr. Donald S. Hornig, the President’s special assistant for science and technology, said in Austin Press Conference that the significance of his presence as a participant in all meetings was that Johnson was looking at the “totality” of the various Government enterprises supporting science and technology in an effort to pursue a balanced program. Hornig said the Federal government was spending about $15 billion—roughly 15% of its budget—on scientific research, technical development, test, and engineering programs with about half this amount spent by dod. Dr. Hornig also said he believed the hundreds of millions of dollars going into the effort to put an American on the moon by 1970 was well spent because “the moon is a very interesting place scientifically.” It will “take a lot of going” to achieve that goal, he said, but present schedules “will allow it.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/64)
Echo, Relay, and Syncom communications satellites were presented to the Smithsonian Institution in ceremony at Museum of History and Technology. Among the NASA officials participating in the presentation were Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, Langley Research Center Director Dr. Floyd Thompson, and Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry Goett. Carl T. Rowan, Director of U.S. Information Agency, said in address at the ceremony: “As we view the unfolding drama of the American space program it can be clearly seen that one of its most significant aspects is that it has been carried out in the full, open view of an interested and anxious world. When it was written into the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 that the activities of the new space agency were to be open to the widest practicable and appropriate spread of information, the Congress cast into law one of the deepest instincts of the American people. It was an act of faith to specify that this enterprise should be carried on openly before the gaze of those who wished us well and those who hoped otherwise; it was truly an expression of faith in freedom and the ability of Americans to meet the challenges and opportunities of an era when each day unfolds new perils and new promises. “If openness to public scrutiny was a basic concept in the entire space program, the decision to carry out a satellite program dedicated to freedom of communications on a global scale represented that concept converted into a highly meaningful fact. . . . “It is obvious that the over-riding quality of communications satellites is their internationalism. A practical system based on communication satellites is inherently universal, for it would be of little use if it did not mean communicating between the peoples of widely separated lands. Its basic premise involves the inclusion of as many countries as possible in the interchange that the system allows. “This presentation of communication satellites to our national museum of science and technology is, therefore, most truly an international occasion. For it is their international utility in the cause of world understanding, peace and progress which gives them their deepest meaning.” (Text)
At American Physical Society Meeting, the planet Jupiter was reported to be rotating slower. Prof. Alex G. Smith said in 1961 radio sources showed an abrupt change in rotational rate; observations made by radio observatories in Florida and Chile showed that the rotation had slowed by 1.3 sec. Dr. Smith said this was “almost as surprising as if the city of Washington had begun to drift across the surface of the earth at a rate of 10 degrees longitude a year.” Studies were continuing to determine whether Jupiter itself had changed its rotation or whether the change was limited to radio sources. (Finney, NYT, 4/28/64, 19)
Czechoslovakian news agency Ceteka reported Czechoslovakia would issue series of eight postage stamps in April bearing faces of 10 Soviet cosmonauts and American astronauts. (Reuters, Houston Post, 3/30/64)	#	#
Interview with General John P. McConnell (usaf), Vice Chief of Staff, usaf, in The Airman. General McConnell gave his opinion of USaf’s future role in space: “First, to augment the existing defense capabilities of the U.S. land, sea, and air forces by using space systems for such things as better communications, weather reporting, and navigation. Second, to develop a military capability for protection of U.S. interests in space. “I think the Air Force, by virtue of its overall mission and experience, as well as its DOD-assigned responsibilities for space developments and boosters, must seek to obtain space capabilities for our defense as quickly as they become economical and practical. “Our role to support the national goals of both the scientific exploration and the high-priority defense projects should continue. “I also visualize that in the long run, future manned vehicles will play an increasingly vital role. It is essential that the Air Force vigorously pursue space research and development as well as operations.” (Airman, 9/64,12-15) During September: Writing in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Capt. R. C. Truax (usn, Ret.) described early naval rocket development work at Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis. Captain Truax was in charge of all rocket propulsion work for usn Bureau of Aeronautics from 1946 to 1949.	(U.S. Naval Inst. Proc., 9/64, 82-108)
usaf Titan III transtage was successfully static-test-fired for more than six minutes to verify compatability of various subsystems, in operation to simulate injection of mol into 100-mi. orbit. Officials said firing went as expected, including length of bum time, although no mention was made as to whether it reached 312-second specific impulse demanded by Air Force. (SBD, 7/14/64, 66; M&R, 7/20/64, 8)
Dr. Bruno Bettelheim, professor of educational psychology at Univ. of Chicago, said in address before symposium on American Women in Science, at MIT, that women’s “specific genius for nurturing, humanizing, and preserving” should be made use of in all spheres of living, in science, engineering, architecture, medicine, and all other professions. (Leland, Poston Globe, 10/23/64)
Air Force Systems Command announced first successful demonstration of internal thrust from a “scramjet” (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine. The test was one in a series to demonstrate that scramjet engines could be developed for very-high-speed vehicles and was conducted under the direction of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Test conditions in the 30-in.-long scramjet engine simulated a speed of approximately mach six over a brief burning period. Frontal area of the engine was approximately three-by-four inches. Scram jets differed from conventional engines in that they had moving parts only in the fuel feeding system and produced thrust by burning fuel in a supersonic air stream. ( afsc Release 49—40-141)
West Germany’s Ministry of Scientific Research said estimated 4,300 West German scientists had left to work in U.S. between 1949 and 1961, and number was expected to increase. (Reuters, NYT, 10/31/64,8) October 30~November 1: Inventors’ Congress and Space Symposium held in Little Rock, Arkansas. NASA Administrator James E. Webb spoke on American progress and goals in space. He described “the Southern Crescent of the space program”—Cape Kennedy, Fla.; msfc, Huntsville, Ala.; Michoud Operations, La./Mississippi Test Facility; and msc, Houston, Tex. “One of the central facts about this great complex of space activities ... is the possibility that many varied research, development and production activities will gravitate in this direction. This is made likely by reasons of economics and of convenience. “By and large, these will be activities that require heavy contributions from science and technology, and Arkansas and the other states of the South are now in a position to get ready to take full advantage of the
NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center held Open House with more than 4,200 visitors attending. (Goddard News, 6/1/64)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. concluded in its manned Mars exploration study for NASA Marshall . Tlight Center that future interplanetary space travelers should be no taller than 5'7" and no heavier than 145 lbs. Six of these “20 percentile” men—smaller than approximately 80 per cent of American men—on a manned Mars flight would require 1% lbs. less food per day than larger men, thus saving nearly 500 lbs. of food cargo weight on a one-year trip. Study said 70,000 lbs. could be saved in gross weight of Mars spacecraft if the six astronauts were 20 percentile men. (dm&ssd Apogee, 6/64)
In testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that “1963 was a milestone year. It was the year of transition to hardware—now we can fill the pipeline and move forward to a manned lunar landing in this decade. . . . “The resources for the Gemini and Apollo programs are moving forward. The major developmental resources are essentially completed; the manufacturing resources are under construction and approaching our goal; the test and operational resources have been initiated; a logistics program is being formulated and our personnel build-up is progressing. “The personnel staffing at the NASA Centers ... is increasing from 11,858 at the end of FY 1963 to 13,711 at the end of FY 1964 and a forecast total of 14,711 at the end of FY 1965. In addition to the government team of personnel there are approximately 181,000 contractor personnel who are working on Manned Space Flight programs. With the continued buildup of construction, manufacturing, test and operations, it is anticipated that this figure will approximate 300,000	personnel at the peak of the Manned Space Flight Program. ...” Discussing planned activity in manned space flight program, he said: “A major decision was made in 1963 to adopt the ‘all-up’ testing concept as a basic approach to our flight verification test program. ‘All-up’ testing means, all flights will be scheduled with complete space vehicles using live stages and flight type spacecraft. ... “There are several advantages to the ‘all-up’ approach. It will permit us to land an American astronaut on the moon, and return him safely to earth, in accordance with our schedule even though we are operating this year on a reduced budget. It will permit us to capitalize on successful flights. It will also allow us to gather a very large amount of data early in the flight program and thereby provide much needed information to our design organization. It is planned in the Saturn IB and Saturn V programs to launch a complete unmanned space vehicle on the first flight in an earth orbital trajectory.” (Testimony) February 6: NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, appearing before House Committee on Science and Astronautics, outlined NASA’s program of advanced research and technology and proposed activities for FY 1965. Objectives in advanced research and technology were summarized: “1. Basic research aimed toward an understanding of the natural laws underlying aeronautical and space technology. “2. Engineering research aimed at the application of these laws and at codifying them in terms of engineering design principles. “3. Experimental subsystem development, using advanced concepts and components, to produce test ‘know-how’ for the design of future operational systems. “Our aim in basic research is to contribute to the fund of relevant scientific knowledge and, in so doing, to maintain the best possible contact with the scientific and engineering community. Engineering research, that is the creation of engineering design principles, is also conducted by these same institutions with industry playing a somewhat greater role than in the case of basic research .... “A program of [advanced] research . . . which looks beyond today’s technology is believed to be a pre-requisite for continued advancement in the performance and efficiency of aeronautical and space vehicles.” (Testimony)
Dr. Herman J. Sander, Behavioral Scientist in USAF OSR Life Sciences Directorate, was presented Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal by Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, OAR Commander, (oar Release 2-64-1)
In an interview with U.S. News & World, Report, Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, defended the U.S. program to land a man on the moon by 1970 and stated that it was his belief that at the present time the chances were “better than 50%” that the project would be successful by the target date. In commenting on reports that the Russians had forsaken a race to the moon, von Braun ventured that it was possible that the Russians had “picked another focusing point besides the moon for their manned spaceflight program” such as the development of a large manned space station orbiting earth. In addition, he commented: “I don’t think the Russians have ever said they aren’t going to the moon. But, even if we are going alone, this would not hurt one bit. The purpose is not so much to race the Russians—or, for that matter, even to land on the moon—but to design a hard-hitting program to develop an American space-flying capability.” (U.S. News, 6/1/64)
North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. was studying the planaria to help understand human healing process under conditions of weightlessness. Planaria was capable of regeneration even under extremes of temperature, vibration, and shock. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
Dr. Robert M. White, Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau, said in address before joint American Meteorological Society-American Geophysical Union banquet in Washington: “Man has always had to contend with hurricanes, tornadoes, seismic sea waves, floods, earthquakes, and the like. His scientific, technological, and social advances have now brought him face to face with new environmental hazards. I am thinking of communications blackouts, the effects of atmospheric turbulence on high-speed aircraft, radioactive fallout, and radiation in space. ... “We are now developing revolutionary new methods of acquiring global information about our environment. The space satellite, although still in its embryonic state, offers a potential for acquiring environmental information over the entire globe in a manner hitherto unimaginable. However, satellites are extremely costly, and their cost will require that ‘ a system be devised for multiple uses. A satellite observational system for environmental purposes will have to serve navigational and geodetic functions, make observations of the weather, probe the oceans, and sound the ionosphere. “Any observational platform should be put to multiple uses if it is expensive to build and operate. I am thinking not only of space satellites, but also of ships and aircraft. We can no longer ignore the necessity of using expensive platforms to collect data for many geophysical purposes. The concept of an oceanographic survey without a simultaneous atmospheric survey must be abandoned by force of economics alone. . . .” (Text)
Explosion-fire of fuel for usaf XB-70 aircraft at Edwards afb, Calif., caused four injuries and one death (Ivan W. Mayo of North American Aviation, Inc.), (upi, Wash. Post, 10/21/64)
Nuclear submarine John Adams, submerged off Florida coast, successfully fired Polaris A—2 missile about 1,500 mi. to its target in the Atlantic Ocean. This was last American missile-firing submarine to be equipped with the A-2 model, (upx, NYT, 6/24/64, 38)
At a symposium sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Dr. Norman F. Ness likened the earth to a kind of comet with a long magnetic tail that extended for an unknown distance. The “new look” was drawn from results of the first detailed mapping of the earth’s magnetic field on the nighttime side of the magnetosphere by explorer xvm (imp I, Interplanetary Monitoring Platform), launched Nov. 26,1963. Until recently, scientists had believed that the earth’s magnetosphere was basically spherical; however, data from explorer xviii indicate that countless magnetic lines of force stretched out like the tail of a comet to an unknown distance in space, apparently beyond the moon. Within this comet-like tail, the lines of force in the Northern Hemisphere were directed towards the sun; in the Southern Hemisphere, away from the sun. In between, there was a neutral zone. Dr. Ness characterized this neutral zone, which had been hypothesized but never before detected, as a thin sheet which was a permanent part of the earth’s environment and virtually void of any magnetic activity. Though the neutral zone’s exact role was unknown, Dr. Ness speculated that it might be responsible for formation of the auroras, creation of the Van Allen radiation belt, and presence of the gegenschein. Ness concluded that in view of the evidence from explorer xviii, “The only difference between the earth and a comet is that the earth possesses a strong magnetic field and comets do not.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/16/64; Hixson, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/16/64; Wash. Daily News, 12/16/64; Toth, Detroit News, 12/16/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/64; AP, NYT, 12/16/64, 30; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 25)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7, 1964] in which he had proposed a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacrifice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmonizing mol and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the total space effort. “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space Committee in raising questions about mol and Apollo-X was to accomplish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either project.” New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration was the letter’s implication that it would be difficult to defend the proposed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administration could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT, 12/20/64,45)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced Sylvania Electronics Systems-East had been selected to negotiate $1.8 million contract for transportable ground station (“Advanced Technological Satellite Transportable Ground Station”). Sylvania would design, fabricate, install, test, and check out the system, which featured two sxtremely low noise amplifiers: one a maser and the other a parametric amplifier. These amplifiers operate at temperatures in the range of —440° F and prevent spacecraft signals being overshadowed by heat-induced noise generated inside the receiver. (GSFC Release G—23-64)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center officials announced they believed they had successfully “hit” explorer xxii satellite with laser beams fired one-per-second across more than 500 miles. Whether the hits were definitely achieved or not would await further analysis. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/14/64; Wash. Post, 10/14/64)
A Thanksgiving Day message from President Johnson was broadcast ‘by relay i, relay ii, and syncom II communications satellites to American armed forces all over the world. (Day, Phil. Eve. Bull., 11/26/64)
In an address to Plans for Progress Seminar, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said American success in space technology represented several accomplishments and potentialities: we can make benefits available to other nations; space achievements are vital in maintaining technological balance of world power; and it gives opportunity for utilizing all our human resources in carrying out the broad-gauge programs necessary for making significant inputs into space knowledge, regardless of race, creed, or color. (Text)
USAF launched unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/64; NYT, 7/12/64, 2)
A ten-second firing of the “battleship” stage of the Saturn S—II, second stage of the Saturn V moon rocket, was conducted by North American Aviation, Inc., at their Santa Susana Field Laboratory. The test demonstrated the ability of the battleship stage and accompanying facilities to operate the J-2 engine at full thrust. The S—II would be powered by a cluster of five J-2 liquid hydrogen engines, developing a total thrust of a million pounds, (naa' s&id Skywriter, 12/31/64, 2; Marshall Star, 12/16/64,1,12)
NASA Astronaut Donn F. Eisele dislocated his left shoulder during weightless flight training at Wright-Patterson AFB in KC-135 jet aircraft, and was placed on limited duty for about three weeks. (Houston Post, 9/17/64) ■September 15: Two NASA-USAF memoranda of understanding providing for exchange of technical management and scientific personnel became effective. Signed by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden and usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, the agreements were based on recommendation by joint usaf/nasa Military Requirements Review Group. Previously no NASA personnel had been assigned to USAF; under the new terms, NASA would assign personnel to usaf on a “when-needed” basis. NASA personnel would be GS-13’s and above, and usaf officers assigned to NASA would be majors or higher unless “the position offers exceptional opportunity to the Air Force,” according to agreement. Under basic agreement dating from 1959, about 100 USAF officers were now on duty with NASA, including 13 astronauts, not affected by the agreement, and 40 recent rotc graduates. About 40 more senior officers were scheduled for assignment to NASA in the near future. (nasa Release 64r-234; dod Release 671-64)
ranger Vii team of scientists presented lunar photographs to iau in Hamburg, Germany, and discussed data obtained from them. Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., known as an outspoken proponent of the “fairy castle” theory of lunar surface structure, said there was nothing in the ranger vn photographs that would give him reason to revise his hypothesis. Dr. Gold also disputed hypothesis of Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, of Univ. of Arizona, who identified what he interpreted as lava flows on the moon (crater rays, essentially); Dr. Gold stated none of the photographs showed evidence of volcanic lava on the moon. (NYT, 9/1/64)
White House announced new development plan for U.S. supersonic transport, authorizing technical design competition between two airframe manufacturers (Boeing and Lockheed) and two engine contractors (General Electric and Pratt & Whitney). Thus North American Aviation and Curtiss-Wright were eliminated from airframe and engine competition respectively. New “program of action” recommended by FAA and President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport and endorsed by President Johnson called for: Commerce Dept, studies and forecasts of overall economy of the 1970’s; National Academy of Sciences advice on sonic boom studies; and Boeing and Lockheed examination of purchase cost, operating cost, and sonic booms as related to various designs, sizes, and ranges of the plane. This phase would be completed in November. (Clark, NYT, 5/21/64, 1; Av. Wk., 5/25/64, 22)
A 60-ft. pad was rapidly fabricated at Moffet Field, Calif., for full-scale evaluation using the Bell X-14 vertical take-off aircraft. In this test neither the. 1,500° F temperature nor the wheel-loading adversely affected the rapidly prepared pad, AFSC Research and Technology Div. reported. The instant-landing pad, a ground-hardener of polyester resin, was being developed by Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory for rapid preparation of landing sites for future jet vertical take-off and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Operational Vtol aircraft would drop or spray the semi-liquid preparation in forward combat areas, land on it 15 min. later. (AFSC RTD Biennial Rpt., 7/62-7/64, 23)
Plans for adding a transmitter to the Pan American Boeing 707 for twoway communication tests using syncom ill as a relay point were discussed at an Air Transport Association meeting attended by representatives of FAA, nasa, Bendix, Pan Am, and Hughes Aircraft. Teletypewriter messages had been successfully transmitted in November from a ground station at Camp Roberts, Calif., to a Pan Am 707 enroute to Honolulu. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64, 34)	_
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified payload. (M&R, 7/13/64, 14; SBD, 7/8/64, 33)
Western Devices, Inc., was awarded SI,615,111 nasa contract for work at Launch Complex 39, John F. Kennedy Space Center Merritt Island Launch Area. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. ( dob Release 605-64)
NASA announced it would purchase 102 additional J—2 rocket engines for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles at cost of about $165 million. Contract would be negotiated by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center with Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 64-211)
Three airframe manufacturers and three engine manufacturers submitted initial design proposals for the U.S. supersonic transport, FAA Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development Gordon M. Bain announced. The airframe manufacturers: Lockheed Aircraft, Boeing Co., and North American Aviation; engine builders: Curtiss-Wright, General Electric Co., and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft. (FAA Release 64-4)
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
General B. A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced organization for National Range Division (nrd), commanded by Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis. Air Force Missile Test Center, Patrick afb, Fla., was redesignated Air Force Eastern Test Range (etr), and Air Force Space Test Center (Provisional) at Vandenberg afb was redesignated the Air Force Western Test Range (wtr). Both ranges would be assigned to nrd. General Davis also was assigned responsibility for Satellite Control Facility (scf), Sunnyvale, Calif., which has operated dod R&d satellite tracking and control facilities. With Hq. at Andrews afb, General Davis would function as both NRD Commander and afsc Deputy Commander for Global Range, (afsc Release 45-R-50)
At American Meteorological Society meeting, ucla campus, Lewis D. Kaplan presented paper on current ideas about atmosphere of Mars-— surface pressure is considerably lower than previously estimated and C02 concentration is considerably higher—and discussed significance of these findings for Martian-atmosphere entry spacecraft, (ams Program, 717)
Researchers reported the centrifugal experiment conducted for the Air Force by Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div. indicated that a centrifuge device in a space station could help to recondition astronauts living for prolonged periods in a weightless condition. Tests in which five college students spent 42 days in a horizontal position showed that tendency to faint on standing diminished after periodic centrifuge rides. (NYT, 12/20/64, 42)
17-nation Disarmament Conference resumed in Geneva. In his letter of Jan. 19 to the Conference, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “There is only one item on the agenda of this conference—it is the leading item on the agenda of mankind—and that one item is peace. “Already this conference has led to more concrete and effective results than any disarmament conference in modern history. Your efforts and deliberation laid the ground work for the nuclear test ban treaty—for the communications link between Washington and Moscow—and for the U.N. General Assembly action against nuclear weapons in space. . . .” President Johnson then proposed five major types of potential agreement : to stop spread of nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing them; to accept observation posts on both sides; to stop all production of fissionable material; to ban threat or use of force in changing boundaries or controlling territories; and to freeze numbers and kinds of strategic nuclear-carrying vehicles (aircraft and missiles). (Text, CR, 1/22/64, 812; “Statement to American People,” CR, 122/64, 813)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with University of Pittsburgh and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center instrumented payload was launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 74.5-mi. altitude. Primary objective of flight was to obtain propulsion and environmental data on the Aerobee 150A. New severance techniques also were employed. Additional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study of yellow radiation from sodium vapor, Dovap transmitter studies for tracking rockets, nuclear emulsions for cosmic-ray studies, and attitude control system employing new techniques for pointing. Rocket performance was good, and excellent propulsion and environmental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000 cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $1,000 award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System, used recently in ranger VII lunar photography mission. Wilmer H. Reed III of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. HughL. Dryden. (Program)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, advocated international controls on space experiments. In Saturday Evening Post article, he said: “It is now time for concern about the ethical standards which man must apply to embryonic dangers which are not obvious. We cannot afford to wait until the dangers become practically apparent, since some experiments may create an irretrievable condition. . . .” As an example, he described the ozone layer, and continued: “. . . it happens that zone is rather easy to destroy. And if it is intentionally or accidentally removed, then the ultraviolet radiation would penetrate to earth. If this happened for a sufficiently long period, then human beings migh suffer severe sunburn and possible sterilization. Further, the temperature distribution in the atmosphere could be radically altered and, in the state of our present knowledge, no one could predict what climatic changes might occur. “It is not difficult to estimate that a few tons of suitable contaminant, deposited in the atmosphere 25 miles above the earth, would destroy the ozone over several miles for a few hours.... a rocket launched from earth to land a man on the moon might bum up 2,000 tons of fuel in its passage through the earth’s atmosphere . . . [and] the launching of one such rocket a week might well lead to a permanent transformation of the conditions in the high atmosphere,” according to recent study by the Advanced Research Projects Agency. “. . . when one turns from the contamination as an accidental byproduct to an intentional act, an ugly array of possibilities is revealed. To begin with, specially selected substances could be deposited in great quantities at precise altitudes. . . . The American [arpa] report states that 25 tons of fluorine would be sufficient to depopulate the ionosphere of electrons and so blot out all long-distance radiotelephony. The deposition of large quantities of gases like carbon monoxide at an altitude of 25 miles might radically alter the temperature distribution and the climatic conditions by absorbing some of the sun’s infrared radiation.... “The human race therefore faces a critical situation in the next few decades, because there is at the moment little evidence of the moral and legal controls which must be enforced if man’s continued life on earth is not to he jeopardized by the accidental or intentional results of space research. There are large areas of uncertainty, so that it is not yet possible to assess whether various other space activities may affect man more directly than in the inhibition of his study of the cosmos. It is a vital necessity of our age that the political decisions on these problems should be based on the judgment of the international scientific community, and that this judgment should govern the future space launchings of the world.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/22/64,10,14)
NASA and Pan American Airways announced that a scheduled Pan Am flight operating between San Francisco and Honolulu had successfully received error-free teletype messages for one hour from NASA’s communications satellite, SYNCOM ill, which was in stationary orbit over the mid-Pacific. NASA said that the relay of communications to an aircraft in flight from a station on the ground was another “first” for SYNCOM III. (NASA Release 64-297)
Research in extrasensory perception as a means of communication with astronauts on space flights was advocated by Harold Sherman, President and Executive Director of ESP Research Associates Foundation, Little Rock, Ark. Speaking in Los Angeles, Sherman said: “It is entirely feasible for the Air Force to experiment in the training of astronauts to transmit and receive thoughts and, in this connection, a battery of ‘sensitives,’ who can communicate with them on a two-way basis while they are traveling through space.” (L. A. Herald-Examiner, 8/6/64)
usaf announced launching of Thor-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, JPash. Post, 8/6/64; M&R, 8/17/64,9)
NASA Lewis Research Center awarded a 02,315,400 contract to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc,, for design, development, and testing of an Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine that would use flox (liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen). The contract provided for firing a complete Atlas sustainer engine for the first time using flox as the oxidizer; RP-1, a type of kerosene, would still be the fuel. (NASA Release 64r-306; lrc Release 64-113)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., reached 110-mi. altitude in experiment to collect data on celestial x-ray sources. Despite slight underperformance of the rocket, preliminary experimental results were considered good. American Science and Engineering, Inc., provided instrumented payload consisting of four Geiger counters, one photoelectric detector, two scintillation counters, and two star sensors. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
The policy committee of the Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center of New York urged the Government to begin immediately to develop procedures for the selection and training of crews for the supersonic transports now in the design stage. The group urged the initiation of intensive studies of the “operating environment” of supersonic aircraft now in use by the military, and the development of joint management-union programs for selection of crews based upon physical and technical competence rather than upon the seniority principle. (AP, NYT, 6/2/64, 63)
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb after sundown left spectacular trail across the sky seen from San Francisco to San Bernardino and caused Redding and Chico areas to call civil defense alerts. Cross winds distorted the exhaust trail and it was lighted by rays from the sun below the horizon. (AP, NYT, 2/27/64,17)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center awarded 29 contracts involving studies of advanced manned missions. The 29 studies, which were designed to look beyond the time when American astronauts would have landed on the moon, covered the subjects of launch vehicle development, earth orbital operations, lunar exploration, and planetary exploration. (NASA Release 64-175)
Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe announced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some “promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Residents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local usda offices. Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be forwarded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study, (gsfc Release G-6-64)
usaf Atlas-Agena D satellite booster combination was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified payload. It was later disclosed that three satellites were orbited. (AP, NYT, 10/24/64; hhn—48)
First manned free-flight test of Gemini paraglider landing system was unsuccessful at Edwards afb, Calif. The paraglider, with pilot E. P. Hetzel of North American Aviation in mockup spacecraft slung beneath it, was towed to 13,000 ft. by helicopter, then was cut loose. Pilot Hetzel lost control and at 3,000 ft. was forced to bail out. The paraglider crashed. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/64)
Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, told scientists at American Geophysical Union meeting in Seattle that the structure of some of the ridges on the lunar surface photographed by ranger vii indicated that water might exist on the moon. (AP, St. Louis PostDispatch, 12/31/64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with sodium-vapor payload was launched to 106-mi. altitude from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, in joint effort of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. Rocket performed as predicted, sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature and turbulence measurements were made with ground-based cameras and instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced 14,760 visitors to the facility during 1963. (ksc Release 16-64)
U.S. Navy was reported to be defining its manned orbiting laboratory (mol) ocean surveillance experiment despite the proposed merger of the Air Force mol and NASA’s Apollo-X programs. Navy felt its space mission potential should be explored as thoroughly under either military or civilian programs. The Navy space mission was first envisioned to involve five major areas concerning shipping: detection; location; identification; classification; tracking of surface and subsurface craft. (Fink, Av. Wk., 12/28/64,13)
NASA established ranger VI Review Board, composed of members from NASA Hq., Langley Research Center, and Goddard Space Flight Center, and chaired by Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs Earl D. Hilburn, to review program effect of ranger vi failure. The Board would review results of failure analyses and corrective procedures being prepared by jpl, then make recommendations regarding remainder of Ranger flight program. At press conference, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., explained that the single aim of the Board was to determine when Ranger 7 would be launched. Until the mystery of ranger Vi’s failure was solved, NASA was delaying launch of Ranger 7, which also would have mission of photographing lunar surface, (nasa Release 64-26; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/64; Finney, NYT, 2/4/64)
syncom ill communications satellite, high above Sumatra in the Indian Ocean, was boosted into near-circular orbit above the equator by its apogee motor. The motor burned for 19.6 sec. at the command of ground station at Salisbury, Australia, which based its command on computer calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The satellite was now in orbit of 23,550-mi. apogee; 21,235-mi. perigee; 14° inclination; and 1,449-min. (24 hr. and 9 min.) period. It was drifting westward at rate of about 3(4° Per day. (NASA Press Conf. Transcript; nasa Release 64-193)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists would evaluate two H—10 atomic hydrogen maser clocks for possible use in high-precision satellite tracking as well as experiments testing Einstein’s prediction of the effect of gravity on time. The clocks were developed by the Quantum Electronic Devices activity of Varian Associates and would use the natural oscillation resulting from the interaction of the proton and the electron in the hydrogen atom. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
President Johnson appointed a national commission to study the impact of technological changes on American life. Howard Bowen, an economist and president of the Univ. of Iowa, was nominated chairman of the 14-member panel which would submit a report to Congress and the President on four areas: the role and pace of technological change, both past and future; the impact of technological change during the next ten years on the Nation’s economy and social structure; unmet community and human needs to which modern technology might be effectively applied; the most effective means for channeling technology into promising directions. (Wash. Post, 11/15/64, A6)
oco I satellite probably would obtain 50%—and perhaps as much as 75%—of planned scientific data, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Director Dr. Harry J. Goett said at Washington news conference. The satellite was still not locked onto the earth but was spinning at rate of 5 rpm. All 20 experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, but only 17 were sending back useful information. Although oco I was “crippled,” Dr. Goett said, “we have quite a vigorous cripple.” For example, the satellite was transmitting 10 times more data bits than ever received from the most advanced Explorer-class scientific satellite. (NASA Transcript)
North American Aviation, Inc., began testing prototype Apollo environmental control system, developed by Garrett Corp.’s AiResearch Div. Unmanned tests would continue for about six months, with manned tests scheduled to begin June 1.	(Av.Wk., 12/25/63,23)
Air Force Systems Command announced that Air Force pilots would fly a high-altitude Lockheed U-2 aircraft in a research program directed by the Research and Technology Div.’s Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, to measure and predict high-altitude clear-air turbulence (Hi-Cat). The U-2 would gather Hi-Cat data at altitudes above 55,000 ft. for developing a worldwide statistical model showing occurrence of clear-air turbulence, (afsc Release 47-30-144)
nasa announced selection of Trans World Airlines for negotiation of contract to provide base support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Under this contract twa would provide general maintenance, utilities operation, and supply operations on a cost-plus-incentive-fee basis; and janitorial, fire protection and prevention, security, and medical services on fixed-price basis, (nasa Release 64-32; ksc Release 13-64)
Air Force Systems Command’s Research and Technology Div. reported the High Power Facility at the Rome Air Development Center (radc) was operational. It was designed to evaluate high-power transmitting tubes and radio frequency components, and would support research in plasma physics and engineering where brute force was needed in direct current and pulse radio frequency, (afsc Release 44-128-139)
USAf’s “Summary of Lessons Learned from Air Force Management Surveys” found that cause of management deficiencies was absence of three essential elements: program-oriented management structure; comprehensive written procedures spelling out guidelines in all foreseeable situations; and effective discipline. (Armed Forces Mgmt., 5/64, 37)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D—Wis.) spoke in the Senate about the pattern of Federal r&d expenditures which he said was “having an unfavorable effect on the Midwest, home of many of our greatest industries and our greatest universities. . . . We cannot pursue a policy, even unintentionally, which has the effect of wasting the industrial and intellectual potential of the American heartland. . . .” He pointed out that “not all the blame for lack of Federal research and development activity can be attributed to the Government. The industries and universities of the Middle West have not in all cases been as aggressive as they should have been in seeking Federal contracts.” (CR, 9/29/64, 22355-58)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed World Affairs Council of Northern California, in San Francisco, discussed national and international aspects of the U.S. space program: “The competition is tough. The U.S.S.R. has the ability to concentrate its efforts without public debate and without the regard for individual freedom of choice or living standards which enjoy high priority in our own country. But it does not follow that our own space effort should be similarly concentrated. The implications of space are broad, broader than we can now know, and they do not end on the moon. The necessary technologies are enormously demanding and therefore enormously promising. And, whatever we do in space, we are critically dependent upon a thorough knowledge of the space environment. Moreover, the Soviet program, which has appeared to many of us to be so narrow and directed almost exclusively to prestigious exploits, more recently gives signs of broadening to include considerable basic research as well as practical investigations, for example, through the use of weather satellites in which we pioneered. “Therefore, we must not be trapped into a narrow competition— focusing our energies on one mission or even on manned flight alone. Our preparations must be broad enough to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort and ability to move in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. “The projects and programs, national and international, in which we are engaged have unprecedented scope and potential. It is this scope and this potential which make space activity a valuable instrument of national and international policy. It is a many faceted tool to be used for the economic and social advance of this and cooperating nations as well as for the preservation of our technological and political leadership in the world. This tool and its importance should be fully understood and appreciated. At the same time, as Lord Hailsham has said, we should remember that international cooperation is not a substitute for national excellence. “Europe has not been alone in recognizing these factors. In the complex of UN organizations, great interest has been evidenced among nations great and small in the problems and benefits of space. “Here again, space has served to bring East, West, and neutrals together in a code of legal principles to govern space activity, which was unanimously adopted in the last session of the General Assembly. In the associated forum of the International Telecommunications Union agreements were reached on the assignment of radio frequencies for space research and space communications. Without these arrangements the future of communications satellite systems would be heavily clouded. And in another UN agency, the World Meteorological Organization, a start has been made in the evaluation and planning of requirements for a world weather satellite system which also promises real economic and human benefits. “Thus it is clear that our national effort in space research and exploration is becoming a powerful force in developing greater international cooperation—cooperation which is not limited to the nations of the Free World, but which spans the Iron Curtain, as well. It is in this context, as a force which joins all mankind against a common enemy, the hostile environment of space, rather than against each other, that the space effort may bring the most significant and enduring rewards.” (Text)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island to an altitude of 76.8, with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure measurements. Experiments were provided by Goddard Space Flight Center (csfc) scientists. Rocket performance was excellent but instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since grenades did not eject or explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
usaf version of F-lll tactical fighter plane, designed for use by both usaf and usn, rolled out of General Dynamics’ Fort Worth, Tex., plant, in ceremony attended by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze, and other officials. Secretary McNamara said: “For the first time in aviation history, we have an airplane with the range of a transport, the carrying capacity and endurance of a bomber and the agility of a fighter-pursuit plane. . . .” The technology of the variable-geometry wing configuration was developed at NASA Langley Research Center, (dod Release 719-64; Witkin, NYT, 10/16/64,1, 11; Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/64; Av. Wk., 10/26/64, 32)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 2/24/64,11)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Because of the initiative and the daring of the Wright Brothers, this nation gave man the capacity for powered flight, freeing him forever from the bonds which for thousands of years of human existence had confined his activities to land and sea. The United States became the first country in the world to possess a military airplane when, in 1908, the Army Signal Corps contracted for a Wright biplane. “Yet, prior to World War I this nation was still so pre-occupied with conventional weapons systems that it totally neglected the development of aeronautics—the force which was to dominate warfare for the next quarter century. In 1914, the United States possessed fewer military aircraft and of inferior types than the six leading aeronautical nations (including Mexico). The United States in 1914 was the only major nation in the world not to possess an aeronautical laboratory with an up-to-date wind tunnel. By November 1918, not one aircraft of American design and manufacture had entered combat operations during World War I. “In the 30’s we were so pre-occupied with refinement of conventional piston-driven aeronautical systems that we made little progress in jet propulsion. Meanwhile, the Germans set out to build a bigger and better NACA and to a large extent, they did, developing jet propelled military aircraft and 5%-ton V-2 rockets, which almost spelled disaster in World War II. “In the late 40’s, despite the fact that Robert Goddard had demonstrated the feasibility of a liquid-fueled rocket engine in this country in 1926, and despite the memory of V—2’s raining on London during the blitz, we were so pre-occupied with mating jet carriers to our exclusively held atomic bomb capability that we neglected missilry while other nations forged ahead. And finally, in the 50’s, our A-bomb advantage gone, we were so pre-occupied with the development of our ballistic missile program that we neglected a clear opportunity to become first in space. “Today, the nation faces, we all face, this question: Have we learned enough from the often bitter and always costly experience of the last half century not only to carry out with determination this effort to meet the requirements of the present in space research and exploration, but to exercise the vision which is demanded if we are not, once again, to find ourselves lagging in the next phase of this most challenging effort? . . . “The present gap in manned flight activity is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960, until May 1961, when President Kennedy recommended the present manned lunar landing project as a national goal. “The decisions which confront us today are those which will determine whether this kind of history will repeat itself a few years hence and whether we will once again experience a bitter awakening to the fact that others have seized the initiative in the more advanced space missions of the future. . . .” (Testimony; CR, 2/5/64, A548-50) February 4: Nike-Cajun sounding rockets with grenade experiments were launched at Wallops Island, Va., and Ft. Churchill, Canada, in current nasa series of comparative upper atmosphere studies. The experiments were designed to obtain wind and temperature data and to measure the effects of the “warming trend” at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops reached 73.8-mi. altitude, with all 12 of its grenades exploding; Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 78-mi. altitude, with 11 grenades functioning normally and the twelfth ejecting but not exploding. (Wallops Release 64-14; NASA Rpt. SRL)
usaf launched Blue Scout, Jr., probe from Vandenberg AFB on a nonorbital space mission. Press sources reported this as the second successful launch of a contact cesium ion engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. (hhn—48; M&R, 1/4/65,11)
Series of six Sandia Corp. Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets was launched from May to August. The six Nike-Tomahawks, which reached altitudes of about 300 km. (186 mi.), were launched from the Island of Kania, as part of U.S. readiness program for use if space testing of nuclear devices was resumed. Experiment instrumentation for the series was provided by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists. Objective of the experiment was to obtain precise measurements of radiations in the sun’s corona. Another purpose was to demonstrate feasibility of using relatively inexpensive, spin-stabilized, ballistically pointed rockets for solar x-ray spectroscopy. Results of this research were lated reported at the December meeting of the American Geophysical Union (agu). (oar Review, 12/64,22) During the space age: As of the close of 1964, NASA had placed 70 spacecraft into earth orbit, lunar trajectory, or solar orbit since the birth of NASA on Oct. 1,1958. Of this number 52 were still orbiting as of Dec, 31,1964, and 21 were still transmitting signals. Some 55 million data points were being received daily at GSFC, recorded, and stored on magnetic tape at the rate of about 100,000 reels per year. Three of the 70 spacecraft impacted on the moon; 15 re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and burned up. Of the 31 silent satellites in orbit, 6 were in orbit about the sun, 25 about the earth. Satellites still transmitting meaningful data included one deep-space probe (mariner IV), 5 communications satellites (plus the beacon on passive communications satellite echo ii) , 3 weather satellites, 10 scientific satellites. (NASA Release 65—1)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit vosichod i spacecraft with three-man crew: pilot-cosmonaut, Engr. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovich Komarov; scientific co-worker cosmonaut, Candidate of Technical Sciences, Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov; and physician-cosmonaut, Boris Borisovich Yegorov. This was history’s first multi-manned space flight and marked the entry into space of a scientist and a physician. Initial orbit (as given by Tass): 409-km. (254-mi.) apogee, 178-km. (110-mi.) perigee, 90.1-min. period, and 65° inclination to the equator. Tass announced purposes of the space flight were to: test new multiseat manned spacecraft; investigate work capability and interrelationship, in flight, of a group of cosmonauts consisting of specialists from various branches of science and technology; conduct scientific physico-technical research under actual spaceflight conditions; continue study of effects of spaceflight conditions on human organism; and conduct expanded medico-biological investigations under conditions of prolonged flight. Television photographs of the cosmonauts, wearing lightweight woolen suits rather than spacesuits, were received in U.S.S.R. and transmitted both taped and live by TV stations during the day. On its eighth orbit, as the spacecraft passed over U.S., the crew radioed greeting: “From aboard the spaceship voskhod we convey our best wishes to the industrious American people. We wish the people of the United States peace and happiness.” (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 10/13/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; Tanner, NYT, 10/13/64,1)	...
Second flight-test of XB-70 aircraft was conducted at Edwards Afb, Calif., with pilot Alvin S. White (North American Aviation, Inc.) and copilot Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) . The aircraft reached 600 mph instead of planned 700 mph and attained 28,000-ft. altitude instead of planned 35,000	ft. It was forced to land prematurely because of hydraulic system problems. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/6/64; Av. Wk., 10/12/64, 29)
ARIEL ii (UK—C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of three U.S.—U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi. perigee, 101-min. period, and 52° inclination to the equator. Under overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmosphere, measure galactic Tadio noise, and detect micrometeoroids encountered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp. for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)
A Thor-Agena D booster was used by USAF to launch an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 11/23/64, 8 HHN-48)
usaf successfully launched 30th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, a routine training launch by sac crew. (M&R, 2/17/64, 13)
First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A. O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface were chipped off the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4; GSFC Release G—13-64)
Dr. Robert L. Barre, former nasa Scientist for Social, Economic, and Political Studies, said in address before American Orthopsychiatric Association in Chicago: “Space activities may be viewed either as a cause or as a consequence of social and cultural change. From either point of view, freedom to engage in scientific activity entails significant social responsibility. . . . “It is ironic that a consequence of the extension of definite verifiable knowledge, the primary product of science, should be to extend confusion. To increase knowledge, not only adds knowledge where it did not previously exist, but corrects previously held mistaken knowledge and belief. In so doing, it alters the conditions of existence; hence man’s relationship, not only to his physical environment, but to other men. “Scientists produce the conditions from which these alterations develop. The inescapable responsibility of scientists is to continuously inform society of the knowledge they have, or are trying to create, and to explain its scientific significance. “The institutional locus and the social role of the scientist has traditionally fulfilled this responsibility. The scientist in the past was, not only a creator of knowledge, but an integrator, a teacher—a transmitter of knowledge. New knowledge could be incorporated in its appropriate context and transmitted more rapidly than it could be produced. Today we have altered these arrangements. . . . “While slowing down the system for the transmittal of new knowledge and reducing the proportion of the educated populace who have access to the existing system, we are simultaneously speeding up the production of new knowledge. While ignoring the processes of evaluation, integration, interpretation, and assimilation of new knowledge, we have fixedly accelerated the processes of specialized acquisition of new knowledge. “We have upset the equilibrium between invention and innovation. I submit that the social responsibility of the scientist is obvious: to assist society restore the balance.” (Text)
American scientists began a two-year experiment at the South Polar ice cap in which they would study cosmic rays of solar and galactic origin. Located at the South Pole so that the same background of stars would be present at all times, experiment was to investigate any regularities in solar outbursts of cosmic rays, as well as reason for cosmic Tays from sun and galaxy. Cosmic rays could be lethal to astronauts. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/10/64)
Four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket vehicle was launched at 12:01 a.m. est from Wallops Station, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 587.22-mi. altitude. Payload experiments: magnetic mass spectrometer to identify ions in upper atmosphere and measure their distribution; Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to determine spatial variation of atomic hydrogen in atmosphere; and experiment to measure altitude distribution and intensity of night airglow from atomic oxygen. Impact occurred 727 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Data were telemetered to ground stations and no recovery operation was attempted. Experiment was designed and built by E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research at U.S. Naval Research Laboratory and flown in cooperation with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-6)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of GE Command Systems Div. to negotiate contract for additional spacecraft tracking system for Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station at Fairbanks, Alaska. The new system, known as Goddard Range and Range Rate System because it was originally developed by gsfc engineers, was designed to provide improved tracking data for space probes, satellites, and launch vehicles traveling in elliptical or synchronous orbits. Two previously completed systems installed at Rosman, N.C., and Carnarvon, Australia, had proved highly successful in tracking EXPLORER XVIII (imp) . (gsfc Release G-21-64)
usaf’s big Project Forecast, according to Richard Witkin in New York Times, anticipated eventual need for four new manned aircraft: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), intercontinental-range attack aircraft; transport capable of 10,000-12,000 mi. range; Vtol attack-reconnaissance craft; and limited-range Vtol transport. Begun almost a year ago at request of Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuc.kert and Chief of Staff General Curtis E. LeMay, Project Forecast was said to be virtually completed. (Witkin, NYT, 2/16/64,1)
NASA announced award of three-year contract to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. for launch support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Contract was expected to cost about $2.8 million for the first year hut could amount to as much as $17 million for the three-year period. (NASA Release 64-256)
Rebuilt X-15 No. 2 was rolled out of North American Aviation, Inc.', facility at Los Angeles. Damaged in landing at Mud Lake, Nev., in Nov. 1962, the X-15 had been modified to increase its top speed by nearly one third. The rebuilt rocket research aircraft would be capable of short bursts of flight at mach 8—more than 5,300 mph. It would resume test flights later this year. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/16/64; AP, Wash. Post, 2/16/64; frc X-Press, 2/20/64,1)
Members of Local 1685, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) and nearby Patrick AFB facilities. The walkout had tied up $246 million in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly building for the Saturn V lunar rocket, and work at the Titan III and Saturn IB launch areas. Carpenters had protested the use of nonunion workers by the Akwa-Downey Construction Co., a subcontractor on one of the projects. It was the fourth major labor difficulty at NASA Kennedy Space Center in 1964. (upi, NYT, 12/18/64, 39 and 12/19/64, 48; Chic. Trib., 12/18/64) During the eclipse, extensive heat-map measurements of the lunar surface were made from Egypt by team of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories scientists. Preliminary analysis of their measurements showed hundreds of “hot spots,” or surface temperature anomalies, on the lunar surface, although the experimenters had expected to find only a few dozen. The experimenters made 12 20-min. scans of the moon during the eclipse, in both the visual and infrared portions of the spectrum. Measurements were made at El Kottamia Observatory, 50 mi. east of Cairo, at invitation of United Arab Republic Astronomical Service. (M&R, 1/4/65, 21; NYT, 12/22/64.; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, addressed aiaa in Cleveland: “. . . the number of new systems which can be fully developed is limited. The future, on the other hand, is highly uncertain. The inevitable result ... is that the number of major weapon systems being developed for the inventory is relatively small. The number of concepts and potential weapon systems being explored in other categories of r&d are very large but still not all inclusive. The approach which we are taking to assure the availability of proven technology and prototypes of critical system elements is through exploratory and advanced development programs; this does not usually include full vehicle or system prototypes although in some cases it may. By working on the critical technical, cost or operational problems of a potential new system intensively while ignoring the other elements of the system, we are placing ourselves in a better position to decide to buy that system and to get it in reasonable time, in the event that either our own national policy, the international situation (especially the actions of our adversaries), or obsolescence arising from new technological developments in counterweapons make necessary the rapid acquisition of a new system, and we are doing this at considerably lower cost than the cost of developing all the candidate systems even if these developments were at a very low rate. For example research and exploratory development on high energy fuels for both solids and liquids support potential needs both for larger and improved ICBMs and for new space boosters. The 120" and 156" solid rocket under development by the Air Force and the 260" solids being supported by NASA provide at the prototype level the necessary components of much larger ballistic missile and space launch vehicle systems over a wide range of payload capacities. The application of the 156" solid technology to a new missile in the Minuteman tradition would provide a payload capability many times that of Minuteman. Studies are under way to examine the payoffs and tradeoffs relating to the application of high energy fuels to a new upper stage suitable for application to both dod and NASA launch vehicles. The aim of these programs is to reduce the degree of uncertainty and the element of risk which would he associated with the decision to proceed with such systems. Yet there is no assurance that these developments will, in fact, be used in their present form. They may simply be stepping stones to a later generation of propulsion systems in advanced development. The coupling of requirements for economy, reliability and commonality has led to the dictum for technical advances that many are called, but few are chosen. . . .” (Text, dod Release 361—64)
Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of Washington had reserved a delivery position for U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, faa announced. TransAmerican was expected to make the aircraft available to a Latin American flag carrier through leasing arrangement, (faa Release 64-14)
In the Journal of the American Physical Society, Irwin I. Shapiro of mit’s Lincoln Laboratory proposed use of radar as a test for Einstein’s general theory of relativity: radar pulses would be sent to one of the solar system’s inner planets, either Venus or Mercury, and the time-lapse before the radar echoes’ return measured on the earth. According to Einstein’s theory, when the radar beam passed close enough to the sun to encounter a very strong gravitational field, the radar waves should slow down. The slowdown should be sufficient to delay return of the radar echoes by as much as 0.0002 seconds, a time interval accurately measurable by electronic techniques. {Wash. Post, 12/28/64)
AFsc announced new graphite refractory coatings for use in aerospace vehicles had been developed by Research and Technology Division’s Air Force Materials Laboratory. Materials research engineer Khodabakhsh S. Mazdiyasni applied for patent on the process of coating graphite with zirconium oxide, (afsc Release 43—13—64)
usn announced $36,000 contract with the Convair and Electric Boat divisions of General Dynamics Corp. for analytical and design studies of a flying submarine—a small craft capable of flying to and submerging for operations in relatively closed waters. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/27/64) November 27: Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced that about 100 of the 140 personnel in the Kennedy Space Center Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div. would move from Marshall Space Flight Center to ksc by Aug. 1965. ( nasa Release 64-298; NYT, 11/28/64,16)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N. Mex., to 119-mi. altitude in successful flight to collect data on celestial x-ray sources. American Science and Engineering, Inc., provided payload instrumentation, which included four Geiger counters, one photoelectric detector, two scintillation counters, and two star sensors. Rocket and instrumentation performance were considered good. This was the 500th launch of an Aerobee liquid-propelled sounding rocket, the booster that carried first U.S. rhesus monkeys into space on high-altitude flights in 1951 and 1952. Aerobee was outgrowth of rocket program begun in 1946 by what is now Aerojet-General Corp., which was then engaged in jet-assisted take-off (Jato) research. (NASA Rpt. SRL; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/64)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaysia toured John F. Kennedy Space Center. Rahman stated after his tour: “I can’t say what impressed me most. Everything impressed me. It was so scientific.” (AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/27/64)
Nike-Apache launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 90.6-mi. altitude, in flight to detect quiet-day ionospheric electric currents using for first time a very small rubidium vapor magnetometer designed for use in small rockets. Experiment was project of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb in successful flight 5,000-mi. down Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 2/3/64, 10)	.......................
A $700,000 contract was awarded to the Defense and Space Operations Division of the Westinghouse Corp., Baltimore, Md., Operations Center by the Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract called for the complete integration, checkout, and testing of the ground communications system for NASA’s Rosman, N.C., Stadan (Space Tracking and Data Acquisition Network) station’s second 85-ft. antenna system which would support the new Advanced Technological Satellite (ats) . (gsfc Release G-16-64)
In recent interview Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, had complained: “American military radar is seriously interfering with our studies of the universe.” In the 406-410 megacycle band, he said, radar signals were interfering with Jodrell Bank radiotelescope’s listening to radio waves from distant points in the universe. The interference had 'been occurring over the past 9-12 months, and “we’ve had to stop one program because of it.” Sir Bernard and other astronomers indicated the 406-410 megacycle band was “the only relevant band” for studying quasi-stellar objects (“quasars”). U.S. Government officials acknowledged receiving similar complaints from astronomers at Cambridge Univ. However, according to William E. Plummer, acting chief of frequency management in U.S. telecommunications coordinating office, “No radar of any kind is authorized to operate on that band.” (Toth, L.A. Times, 10/4/64)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1.5-million contract to Monitor Systems, Inc., of Fort Washington, Pa., for two digital telemetry systems to be installed at ksc’s Central Instrumentation Facility on Merritt Island. The systems would be used as intermediate data converters and processors during Apollo/Saturn V rocket launches from Merritt Island, (ksc Release 220-64)
explorer xvni, the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) satellite, survived sub-zero temperatures during eight-hour flight in the earth’s shadow, a duration record for satellites, imp remained in the shadow for so long because of its highly eccentric orbit, carrying it out 122,000	mi. at apogee. As it entered the shadow, imp shut off automatically, and temperatures on imp’s surface fell to more than 400° below zero. After it emerged once again, imp’s transmitter signal was picked up by nasa tracking station at Santiago, Chile. Preliminary evaluation of telemetry tapes at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center indicated data from the imp experiments were of good quality, (nasa Release 64-111)
The usaf successfully fired a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
American Institute for Biological Sciences expressed concern that NASA was not giving sufficiently high priority to the investigation of extraterrestrial life. The Institute, a federation of biologists, said NASA should begin planning a project for detection of possible life on Mars when the planet comes into favorable position in 1969. Search for extraterrestrial life also was advocated by nas Space Science Board nearly two years ago. NASA originally had hoped to perform the Mars biology mission in 1964, but technical, scientific, and political obstacles delayed the attempt. (Finney, NYT, 6/11/64, 2; Wash. Post, 6/11/64)
Canaveral District of the Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $19,055,953 firm-fixed-price contract to the George A. Fuller Co., for construction of Pad B of NASA’s Saturn V Complex 39 at Merritt Island, Fla. The contract also provided for building a two-mile section of crawlerway for transporting launch and arming towers to the pad. (dod Release 844-64; M&R, 11/30/64,22) November 30—December 3: James T. Ramey, a commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission, analyzed the use of cost-effectiveness techniques in a speech to the Atomic industrial Forum in San Francisco. He said: “The cost effectiveness technique assumes end-applications or requirements, and then figures out the costs of alternative systems of achieving equal or greater effectiveness ... it would seem that the requirements system, and the cost effectiveness techniques, tend to favor the status quo in technology, if not in economics or politics. . . . “This leads me to the conclusion that the underlying problem is really whose judgment and recommendations should receive most weight in determining which development programs and projects should go forward. Should these decisions be made by the science advisors and coordinators, and budget specialists who have no direct programmatic responsibility and are not accountable for failure to carry out the directives of the President and the Congress? Or should the judgment of the developmental agency which has the statutory responsibility for the program and the technical depth and experience receive the most weight? . . . I have a certain affinity for giving considerable weight to the judgment of the development agency, which, in regard to atomic energy, would be the aec and its laboratories. In regard to nuclear energy in space, it would be aec and nasa, and to some extent the Air Force. . . . “I am quite optimistic about achieving the great possibilities of atomic energy in space. I firmly believe the atom will provide the means for the propulsion and servicing of manned space ships for moon missions following Apollo, and to and from the planets . . .” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, During November: NASA’s Flight Research Center completed a series of wind-tunnel tests of X—15 models with canard stabilizers mounted on the nose to determine if a canard'surface would permit the X-15 to re-enter the atmosphere at higher angles of attack. Tests were carried out in a Jet Propulsion Laboratory tunnel. (M&R, 11/9/64,9) During November: The Titan III-C 120-in. solid strap-on engine was fired successfully at United Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., development center. The engine burned for 110 sec. (M&R, 11/23/64, 9)
NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with sixth payload of Japan-U.S. experiments in cooperative program to investigate properties and characteristics of the ionosphere. Payload was sent to 521-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean 840 mi. from launch site. Telemetry during flight was intermittent, so preliminary results of the experiments were inconclusive. For the cooperative experiments, Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo, supplied radio frequency (RF) resonance probe and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center supplied Langmuir probe. (Wallops Release 64-75)
USAF launched Adas-Agena D combination from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload. (M&R, 3/2/64,12)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced researchers had developed first known high-temperature-resistant ceramic potting compound in which space electronics could be imbedded for protection against extreme heat. The ceramic potting compound can be cured at temperatures as low as 150° F, permitting it to be cured in place around the electronics without subjecting the delicate equipment to damaging heat. The ceramic potting compound combined protection against heat up to 2,500° F with protection against vibration, (gsfc Release G—18-64)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb with an undisclosed payload. (M&R, 9/28/64, 9)
FAA released summary statements on the supersonic transport by the six companies that submitted initial design proposals—three airframe companies (Boeing, Lockheed, and North American) and three engine manufacturing companies (Curtiss-Wright, General Electric, and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft). Boeing’s proposed SST.was based on basic arrow-wing shape, designed to carry 150 passengers, and cruise at mach 2.7. Lockheed’s proposed SST was based on advanced “double delta” wing shape, designed to carry 218 passengers, and cruise at mach 3. North American’s proposed sst was based on modified delta shape wing, was designed to carry up to 187 passengers, cruise at mach 2.65. Curtiss-Wright’s summary said its proposed turbojet engine would produce thrust about twice that of current transport jet engines. GE’s proposal offered choice between advanced turbojet or turbofan engine types suitable for cruising speeds at mach 2.5 to mach 3. Pratt & Whitney offered two configurations of turbofan engine for aircraft flying up to mach 3. (faa Release 64-8)
Theory that moon’s surface resembled cotton candy and was only about 19% solid was expounded by David D. Cudaback of Univ. of California’s radio astronomy laboratory at Berkeley. Based on his four years of research with microwaves from the moon, Dr. Cudahack said moon had highly porous surface extending down to a depth of “at least” nine or 10 ft., and “very possibly” deeper. He said only one other American scientist had obtained the same figures on high porosity, but that “quite a few Russians” had produced findings similar to his own. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/25/64)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., said in speech before Tennessee Valley Post of American Ordnance Association, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.: “Space can be nothing less than a total national undertaking. “Space has to do with our future, with our country’s future, and with the progress of civilization. It also has to do with our personal and our national security. . . . “I personally believe that the working partnership between NASA and the Department of Defense will grow increasingly close in the months and years just ahead, and that joint efforts in ventures such as Gemini, and the lunar expedition, will serve to identify this country’s slate of space activities as national programs. . . .” Discussing role of the military in space, he said: “As a national policy, we have declared that space will be reserved for peaceful purposes. This, I submit, serves to put the military into space—not restrict space to purely non-military activities. . . . “In describing the military mission, I like to say that the Defense Department’s job is to insure that space is used for us—not against us.” {Marshall Star, 1/15/64,1—2)
usaf fired Atlas E icbm on successful 5,000-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, testing advanced nose cone design. Same day, USAF also fired Minuteman icbm from Cape Kennedy and two Minuteman Icbm’s from Vandenberg afb, Calif., within 45 min. of each other, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,17; M&R, 3/2/64, 12)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that President Johnson had ordered development of the world’s largest airplane— a giant military subsonic jet transport able to carry 600 troops or 250 tons of cargo nonstop for 7,000 mi. at 550 mph. The CX (Cargo Experimental) military jet transport was predicted to be ready for the Air Force by later 1968. Development costs would total $750 million. According to McNamara the CX would “maximize the effectiveness” of eight combat-ready divisions stationed in the U.S. and reduce “reaction time in meeting global crisis.” It would also “have potential commercial use for both passenger and cargo purposes.” In addition the CX would be able to carry any piece of divisional equipment used by an Army division, which present aircraft cannot do. (Mohr, NYT, 12/23/64, 1; Glass, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/23/64)
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, afsc, discussed in aas luncheon address the role of usaf in U.S. space program, tracing history of icbm development: “The task for the Air Force in those early days was a tremendous one. It had full responsibility for the development, acquisition, and deployment of an icbm force capable of deterring any missile threat the Soviets might develop. This meant that we had to develop reliable high thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat caused by re-entry friction, guidance components, and a host of subsystems for use in our icbm’s. We had to develop command, control and tracking systems, and a wide range of support and test facilities for launch and retrieval. We had to recruit and train a tremendous force of highly skilled specialists and technicians. In addition we had to set up whole new management structures and apply expedited management methods under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible speed. “Time was the critical factor. The Soviets had a very substantial advance in technological lead times over us. For this reason it was essential that we have the fullest cooperation and support from all segments of our society. The response to these needs was characteristic of the American people. . . . “We had tremendous support from many government agencies. The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which became the National Aeronautics and Space Agency in 1958, gave unfailing support. For example, naca’s Moffett Laboratories did a major portion of the high speed wind tunnel testing for our nose cone development program. naca’s Cleveland Propulsion Laboratories provided vital support to the Air Force in the rocket engine field. These are just two examples of the highly successful partnership which has evolved between the Air Force as the primary military agency in space and the NASA as the primary civilian agency in space. The partnership continues to be one of the most vital and dynamic aspects of the national space effort. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-51)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced: “The United States has successfully developed an advance experimental jet aircraft, now the A—11, which has been tested in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles an hour and at altitudes in excess of “The performance of the A-ll far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today. The development of this aircraft has been made possible by major advances in aircraft technology of great significance to both military and commercial application. Several A-l 1 aircraft are now being flight-tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. . . . “The development of supersonic commercial transport aircraft will also be greatly assisted by the lessons learned from this A-ll program. For example, one of the most important technological achievements in this project has been the mastery of the metallurgy and fabrication of titanium metal which is required for the high temperatures experienced by aircraft traveling at more than three times the speed of sound. “Arrangements are being made to make this and other important technical developments available under appropriate safeguards to those directly engaged in the supersonic transport program. “This program was first started in 1959. Appropriate members of the Senate and the House have been kept fully informed on the program since the day of its inception. The Lockheed Aircraft Corporation at Burbank, Calif., is the manufacturer of the aircraft. The aircraft engine, the J—58, was designed and built by the Pratt & Whitney Division, United Aircraft Corporation. The experimental fire control and air-to-air missile system for the A—11 was developed by the Hughes Aircraft Company. “In view of the continuing importance of these developments to our national security, the detailed performance of the A-ll will remain strictly classified and all individuals have been directed to refrain from making any further disclosure concerning this program. . . .” The President also announced he would release on March 2 Eugene Black’s supersonic transport study. (Transcript, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A20)
USAF successfully fired an Atlas-F icbm down the WTR from Vandenberg afb—the third major launching from the base in two days, (upi, NYT, 12/23/64, 28)	'
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket from Vandenberg AFB with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, NYT, 10/7/64, 19; HHN—48 )
NASA announced its Ames Research Center would negotiate with J. W. Fecker Co., division of American Optical Co., for satellite attitude control simulator. Contract would amount to about $1 million. The simulator would be used in vacuum chamber to evaluate performance of systems and components being developed for attitude control of spacecraft, (nasa Release 64-188)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by USN from the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carried a spectrograph payload prepared by Princeton Univ. to 78.8-mi. altitude before the payload returned to earth by parachute. Primary objective of studying ultraviolet radiation of three stars in the constellation Orion was achieved. Payload was recovered in good condition and the film extracted and developed. Princeton said it 'believed this was the first time any university had attempted to study the atmosphere and composition of stars by means of equipment contained in a rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRL; NYT, 11/17/64, 72)
Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex was officially redesignated Cape Kennedy Air Force Station. (Special Order GA-7, issued by usaf CofS Curtis E. LeMay, in khn-i )
NASA selected six firms for competitive negotiations leading to contract for launch support services at Kennedy Space Center, NASA: Aerojet General Corp., American Machine and Foundry Co., Bendix Corp., Chrysler Corp., General Dynamics Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp. The contract would be cost-reimbursement type with incentive-award fee provisions, and would be awarded for one year with renewal options for two more years. Total cost of three-year contract was expected to be more than $20 million. Most of the work would be performed at new facilities now under construction on NASA Merritt Island Launch Area, (nasa Release 64-95)
nasa’s echo ii passive communications satellite was placed in near-polar orbit by Thor-Agena B launch vehicle launched from Van-denberg afb, Calif. The second-stage Agena fired shortly after booster separation, coasted, then reignited over South Africa, injecting into orbit the canister containing the laminated mylar plastic and aluminum balloon. Canister opened and released the 535-lb. balloon-satellite which inflated to 135-ft. diameter. Initial orbital data: apogee, 816 mi.; perigee, 642 mi.; period, 109 min.; inclination to equator, 81.5°. (nasa Release 64-11; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64; Becker, NYT, 1/26/ 64,1)
Radiation hazards to Project Apollo astronauts bound for the moon were described at American Medical Association conference by Dr. Hermann J. Schaefer, scientist at U.S. Naval School of Aviation Medicine. Dr. Schaefer predicted that in 1969 proton streams from the sun could range from deadly “downpour” to very light “shower.” He calculated chance of lethal-dosage proton stream was three in 10,000; chance of moderate but incapacitating “rain” would be one in 1,000; and chance of light “shower” would be one in 100. Dr. Schaefer emphasized his forecast was based on predictable solar behavior and that the weather of the sun, like that of the earth, could be unpredictable. (Justice, Houston Post, 6/23/64)
Shipments of nearly six million pounds of large components for NASA Langley Research Center’s $12.5 million Space Radiation Effects Laboratory began arriving. Beginning in mid-1965, the new facility would be operated by Virginia Associated Research Center (varc), comprised of representatives of the College of William and Mary, U. Va., and vpi. (LaRC Release) During April: NASA awarded contract modification exceeding $12 million to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for further work on Saturn V’s S—II stage. (Marshall Star, 4/22/64, 4)
nimbus I meteorological satellite, which had lost its electric power and stopped functioning Sept. 23, revived and was returning useful engineering data. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center said the solar paddles, which had been locked, had apparently directed themselves at the sun long enough to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries but the gas for stabilization had been exhausted and the craft was tumbling at about 15 rpm. This caused photographs to be fuzzy and useless, (gsfc Release G-64-34)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)
Ironworkers who had walked off the job at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area (MILA) when their contract expired March 31 began returning to work at the request of the Missile Sites Labor Commission. Contract negotiations continued in Washington. Construction projects that had been delayed by the walkout included three mila buildings of the Kennedy Space Center, NASA, the Saturn Vertical Assembly Building, as well as facilities for usaf Titan III, Army Corps of Engineers said, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/9/64; M&R, 4/13/64, 10-11)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified: “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year 1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and •the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY" 1964 are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further delays- It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of exploring the moon with men within this decade. “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our program to the reductions imposed for FY 1964 indicates that this will likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is not the case. “In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in the appropriation for FY 1964, we have already sacrificed the margins and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assurance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say is that we have a ‘fighting chance.’ “To sum up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds which the President has requested, there is nothing left to sacrifice except the National goal itself. “. . . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the pace, the momentum, which the supplemental, appropriation and this authorization request will provide. “. . . Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we can do it for less than $20 billion. . . . [But] if the program is further curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which achievement of our goal is delayed. “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar exploration would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits obtained. . . (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
AFSC established Hq. National Range Division (NRD), Provisional, at Patrick AFB, Fla., with Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (USAF), as commander. Replacing General Davis as AFMTC commander was Brig. Gen. Harry J. Sands, Jr., vice commander of afmtc. At the same time, afsc established Air Force Space Test Center, Provisional (AFSTC), at Vandenberg afb, with Brig. Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of 659th Aerospace Test Wing (SSD) as commander. To become fully operational on July 1, Hq. nrd would coordinate activities of AMR (managed by afmtc commander) and of that portion of PMR transferred from usn to usaf (managed by AFSTC commander). (afsc Release 41-5-1; SBD, 1/7/64, 26; M&R, 1/13/64, 10)
usaf announced it had launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb. (AP, 8/21/64)
usaf successfully fired an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California. (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
General B. A. Schriever (usaf) addressed an Air Force Association squadron in New York City on the subject of “The Air Force in the Years Ahead”: “A major consideration in long-range planning today is the rapid pace of technical progress. Since the early days of World War II we have been caught up in a massive technological explosion. One of the most important military products of this explosion is the intercontinental ballistic missile, which today forms an increasingly important part of our nation’s strategic forces. . . . “In addition to its direct contribution to our national security the Air Force icbm development program has created much of the technology, hardware and facilities that have been utilized in the nation’s space program. Most of the nation’s space shots to date have been launched by military boosters from Air Force facilities. The Titan III Standard Launch Vehicle, which is currently under development by the Air Force Systems Command, is based on the technology and experience gained in icbm development. “The Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program is the logical next step in military space development. The mol is required, to help us answer basic questions about man’s role in space, such as the length of a time a man can safely remain in orbit, his ability to make full use of his faculties in space, and his ability to perform a useful military function there. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 43-R-32)
usaf fired a Minuteman missile from Vandenberg afb. It was the 70th Minuteman to be launched from that base. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/5/64)
Seventeen of the buildings programed for the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in the Merritt Island spaceport area had been completed or were about ready for occupancy, ksc announced, (icsc Release 69-64)	'
Ray Romatowski, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs, was among the 12 Federal employees selected by Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs to study at Princeton Univ. during 1964r-65 academic year. (Wash. Post, 4/27/64)
NASA announced it would negotiate with Sanders Associates, Inc., for purchase of seven display systems to be used with computers for checkout and launch of Saturn V launch vehicles. Three of the systems would be used at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center and four at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Cost of the cost-plus-incentive-fee type contract may exceed $5 million. (NASA Release 64-249)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the nasc staff addressed the National Space Club on the Soviet bioastronautics program. He said that although some American scientists had been critical of the amount and kinds of data released by the Soviets, Soviet scientists appeared to be desirous of further opening their research in technological areas such as life support. On choosing the proper atmosphere for space flight, Dr. Konecci said: “Some American scientists . . . advocated a two-gas system. . . . Others chose a 5 psi 100% oxygen system. . . . Animal and human experiments to date indicate that there are no apparent physiological effects due to 100% oxygen up to and beyond 30 days. “What is important to mention is that we had the technology as part of our aircraft system in handling 100% oxygen in low pressure-high pressure and liquid states, and we have extended this use to space cabins. The Soviets . . . have not been confronted with 100% oxygen problems. Because of the near sea-level atmosphere in their Vostok and Voskhod flights . . . they were concerned more with weightlessness and radiation effects. . . .” Dr. Konecci said that both U.S. and the U.S.S.R. had much research work ahead. “The Soviets have still to fly their life support systems for the full designed parameter ... in Vostok this was supposed to be ten days with later literature indicating a twelve-day capability. I expect the Voskhod has the comparable capability, that is, about twelve days, but because of the three-man crew this would in fact mean a threefold increase of their life support capability, i.e. on a man-per-day basis. I think we can also expect the Soviets to attempt manned rendezvous maneuvers. I really do not believe at this time that they will attempt manned extravehicular experiments until (1) they have a better space suit, which they appear to be working on; (2) that they have a better fix on the possible decompression sickness (bends or dysbarism) problems of decompressing from a sea-level atmosphere with nitrogen to a compatible space suit environment; and (3) until we perform the Gemini intentional decompression and extravehicular experiments.” (Text)
Expressing congratulations on the success of RANGER VII lunar mission, Chancellor Ludwig Erhard of West Germany said in telegram to President Johnson: “We are happy with the American people over this tremendous technical and scientific achievement.” Other response to the successful lunar mission included statement by President of Mexico Adolfo Lopez Mateos, who said that RANGER vil was “without doubt, up to the present moment, the most brilliant page registered in the scientific history of modem times.”. British astronomer Sir Bernard Lovell praised die success of ranger vii and said: “The results will be of . . . critical importance to the American plan for a soft landing of instruments on the lunar surface next year and for Project Apollo, involving a manned landing at the end of the decade.” (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/2/64)
Speech by Peter Hackes of nbc News inserted in Congressional Record by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D.—Conn.) advocating a progressive space program. Hackes said: “Some of those who have studied space age economics tell us that by the mid-1970’s our space spending will return to the American economy a dime for every nickel we’re spending now. Aside from the very obvious race with Russia to be first to land on the moon; in addition to advancing science to the point where we may locate life on another planet and might discover the secrets of the beginnings of mankind; and besides the use of space to defend ourselves militarily—besides all these reasons, the U.S. space program will bring us two other exceedingly important dollars and cents 'benefits: a sizable advance in industry and employment. And an as-yet uncalculated fallout in new civilian products. . . .” (Text, CR, 7/2/64, A3690-92)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper, head of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona, said at meeting of American Geophysical Union in Washington that Mars did not have enough water to support any but microscopic life forms. He described recent observations from McDonald Observatory in Fort Davis, Tex., that showed Mars to be enveloped in sheath of atmospheric ice crystals. Dr. Kuiper said in Martian spring the frost covering its pole during the wintertime evaporates directly into the air rather than melting. He estimated Martian air to be two parts nitrogen to one part carbon dioxide, with small amount of argon and even less water vapor and oxygen. Dr. Hyron Spinrad of Univ. of Calif. (Berkeley) described recent observations of Mars from Mt. Wilson Observatory. He said Mars was so cold that water melted only in the afternoon and when Mars was nearest the sun; amount of water in the Martian air was a thousandth of that in sea-level air in the arid southwestern U.S. The speakers rejected the idea that Martian air contained nitrogen-oxygen compounds, proposed last December by Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess and chemist Dr. Sebastian Karrer. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/64,8)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
Dow Chemical Corp. selected by Kennedy Space Center, NASA, for contract to provide engineering support services at Merritt Island Launch Area facilities. Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was estimated at $1.4 million for the first year, with two one-year options for extensions. (SBD, 6/26/64, 315)
Pan American Airways’ Guided Missile Range Div. was awarded one-year, $112 million contract from usaf for continued operation of Air Force Eastern Test Range. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 25) During May and June: Project Taper (Turbulent Air Pilot Environment Research) was conducted by FAA and NASA to study turbulent air hazards for jet aircraft and ways for pilots to deal with them. Project involved flights into light-to-moderate turbulence at high altitudes by faa Convair 880 flown by faa and NASA pilots. Data on motion effects experienced in the cockpit, gathered in the 800 flights, were used in NASA laboratory tests on motion simulator. In second series of flight tests, using FAA Boeing 720 airliner, instruments recorded pilot control actions and aircraft response in turbulent air, also tested autopilot and yaw damper for their ability to maintain control. (Hudson, NYT, 5/1/64, 58)
Institute for Strategic Studies, an international organization for research on defense, security, and disarmament, reported U.S. had increased its strategic superiority over U.S.S.R. The report warned, however, that “this may he the last year in which the western superiority in long-range striking power is so marked.” By early next year the U.S. would have 925 intercontinental ballistic missiles, compared to U.S.S.R.’s 200. American superiority in fleet ballistic missiles had increased to four to one over U.S.S.R.’s less advanced counterpart of the Polaris. Soviet Union had maintained her superiority in submarine strength. (Cerutti, Chic. Trib., 11/13/64)
usaf launched a new Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System experimental nosecone (Abres) from Vandenberg afb 5,000 mi. down the WTR on an Atlas-D icbm. The nosecone tests were being conducted to develop more effective re-entry systems for America’s intercontinental ballistic missiles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/64; Houston Chron., 12/1/64)
William C. Schneider, Gemini program deputy director, NASA Hq., discussed flight readiness of Gemini launch vehicles and spacecraft in Data interview: “The launch vehicle is leading in flight readiness and this is as it should be. The Air Force Titan II has been under development for over four years, and 33 flights have been made in the program. NASA has benefited fully from the results of this extensive qualification flight test program that is now complete. The spacecraft, however, is still in the developmental phase of testing and is simply a younger program. In addition, the GLv’s will be essentially identical throughout the Gemini Program. This is not true of the spacecraft. . . {Data, 10/64,15-21)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. It was later disclosed that two satellites were placed in orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64,10; hhn-48)
First two-way telephone call between U.S. and Japan via a communications satellite was conducted by personnel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md., and Radio Research Laboratory Station, Ka-shima, Japan, using relay II satellite in orbit about 4,000 mi. above the Pacific Ocean. (NASA Release 64-122)
United Press International (upi) reported that the Air Force would attempt pickaback launch of a secret satellite (OV—1) next month from Vanden-berg aeb with hopes of proving a method which would save the taxpayers $370,000 per launch. The 300-lb. satellite, carrying its own rocket motor, would ride into space on the side of an Atlas missile making a re-entry test. Near the peak of the Atlas’ flight, OV-1 would spring away, coast for a few seconds, and be launched into orbit by its own rocket. The Atlas would continue on its mission, (upi, NYT, 11/10/64,34)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., two with grenade payloads to investigate winds, temperature, density, and pressure in the upper atmosphere. The first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; it sent payload to about 57-mi. altitude, where aluminum-coated mylar plastic sphere was ejected and inflated to 26-in. diameter. The sphere continued up to about 78.4-mi. altitude before floating down to earth. Radar tracking of ascent, descent, and drift provided data for calculating densities at various altitudes. Less than two hours later the Ft. Churchill rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades detonating at intervals in region of 28 to 58 mi. 20 min. later the final rocket—the second carrying grenades—was launched from Wallops Island, with grenades exploding in about the same altitude range. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center conducted the flights to observe characteristics of the upper atmosphere and to measure variations occurring through the period of increased heating. The grenade experiments were an extension of series conducted from Jan. 23 to Mar. 6 involving 13 Nike-Cajun flights which “yielded excellent data on the characteristics in the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according to project scientist Wendell S. Smith. Follow-up experiments were planned for late summer when solar heating would be near maximum, for comparative data. (Wallops Release 64-38)
usn announced KC-130F (Hercules) transport, a four-engine turboprop aircraft, had made series of landings and take-offs from aircraft carrier Forrestal without aid of arresting gear or catapults. The tests were made last November, but USN spokesman said reason for delaying announcement was that “the project was being analyzed.” {NYT, 11/1/64,20S) During October: NASA Assistant Administrator for International Programs Arnold W. FrUtkin said in id erospace: “The prime purpose of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s international space program is to serve broad foreign policy objectives through useful scientific and technical projects. “But a practical consequence for the American aerospace industry is that the program has stimulated a level of space activity abroad which might not otherwise have been achieved. Purely as a by-product, then, cooperative space projects have created limited markets for American know-how and hardware overseas. .. .” (Aerospace, Fall 1964, 10-15)
usaf launched Titan IIICBM from Vandenberg AFB on 5,000-mi. flight down pmr. (upi, Houston Chron., 2/18/64)
Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold said in Science article that absence of surface rock outcroppings in ranger vii close-up lunar photographs supported his thesis that the moon is covered with dust. Erosion of the moon’s surface at rate of one micron (1/25,000 in.) per year would be enough, “over geological time,” to smooth out a once-rocky surface. This erosion, caused by cosmic dust and energetic solar particles, would have deposited dust in low areas and gradually filled them. However, Dr. Gold said that even if in the craters and seas the dust were a mile deep, it was no cause for concern; dust on the moon, like that on earth, would not necessarily be loose and powdery at depths below the surface. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/4/64)
usn launched Polaris A—3 missile from land site at Cape Kennedy in successful flight test down AMR. This was 14th success in 23 land launches of the A-3.	(M&R, 1/13/64, 10) First Week in January: NASA lifted hiring freeze on about six manned space flight projects, including Apollo work at North American Aviation, Inc. (L.A. Times, Miami Herald, 1/10/64; naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/10/64,1)
NASA’s newly created Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight convened for first time at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Formed to advise Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, the committee met for briefings by NASA officials and tours of nasa facilities at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island. (NASA Release 64-72)
NASA announced signing of nine-month contract extension for Project Apollo spacecraft with North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. The $496-million extension called for five additional command and service modules, three additional flight boilerplate spacecraft, a full-scale mockup, and nine adapter sections to house Lunar Excursion Modules, (nasa Release 64-227)
H. J. High Construction Co. received $1,012,800 NASA contract for construction of third-floor addition to Operations and Checkout Building, John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA (Merritt Island). Army Corps of Engineers awarded the fixed-price contract, (dod Release 357-64)
usaf announced that Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems, would receive a $4,000,000 order to an existing contract for procurement of Thor space boosters from Space Systems Div. of Air Force Systems Command, (dod Release 888-64)
dod announced $2,641,430 contract to Akwa-Downey Construction Co. for construction of NASA test buildings at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 688-64)
Soviet space scientists Dr. Vladimir Lebedev and Dr. Oleg Kuznetsov, writing in Soviet Air Force magazine, discussed U.S. Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s sightings of houses and other objects from space as he orbited over Tibet in May 1963. The scientists noted that some U.S. experts had attributed Major Cooper’s sightings to hallucinations caused by spaceflight conditions. However, the Soviets said, their own experiments with men in soundproof, dark chambers simulating spacecraft led them to conclude that Major Cooper’s observations were “an illusion of recognition caused by insufficient information.” (AP, NYT, 10/19/64, 3)
Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for significant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the U.S. during 1964 were: Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively of the joint AEC—NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibility of nuclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the future.” Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous technical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed photographs of the lunar surface.” Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.” John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.” Col. Harold W. Robbins, usaf Space Systems Div., for “technical direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 9) December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe of NASA Ames Research Center suggested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the cometlike tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instruments aboard explorer xxi imp-b (Interplanetary Monitoring Platform) and ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi. revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2^ earth diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90° around earth. Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic solar storms. Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon, (arc Release 65-2; AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, told the Council on World Affairs in Dayton, Ohio: “Space has become one of the newest dimensions of power: a dimension that ranks potentially with that of the land, the sea, and the air. And because national security is based on such dimensions, our security is heavily involved in our space achievements. Prudence demands that we conduct our program on a scale and at a pace that will permit no hostile force to employ space against us as an unchallenged avenue of aggression, politically or militarily. “At the same time we must never lose sight of another powerful concept, that in the eyes of the world, space has become an area of active competition with much more at stake than considerations of national pride or prestige. In the view of other nations, the relative effectiveness of the American system of free enterprise is, in a very real sense, being tested in space.” (Text)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)
NASA announced award of contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. to provide four RN-6 liquid-hydrogen-cooled nozzles to be used in tests. Three nozzles were to be used for Nerva program, the fourth for Lewis Research Center’s Advanced Nuclear Rocket Systems Analysis Program, (nasa Release 64^162)
Office of Naval Research was studying submarine-based antisatellite missile system, according to Aviation Week & Space Technology. System would use Polaris fleet ballistic missile to supplement existing Army and Air Force weapons. (Av. Wk., 9/28/64, 18)
Venus was found to be rotating backward with a period of between 248 and 258 earth days, Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill of Cornell Univ. reported at iau assembly in Hamburg. The new value was a refinement of one made in late 1962 by JPL studies, which indicated a rotation of between 239 and 293 (266 mean period) and was obtained by radarastronomers using new l,000-ft.-diameter antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. (Hines, Wash Eve. Star, 8/27/64; Sullivan, NYT, 8/28/64)
Analysis of findings by Stratoscope II balloon-astronomy investigation last November was announced by National Science Foundation and Princeton Univ. astronomers. Dr. Martin Schwarzschild, director of Project Stratoscope II, reviewed first findings of the telescope and instrument package carried aloft by balloon. Studies of the moon showed lunar surface material reflected more solar light in the infrared band than in the visible spectrum. Other findings included confirmation that water vapor exists near red giant stars—for example, there is “about as much water vapor above one square mile of Mira as there is above one square mile of Earth.” {NYT, 6/28/64, 56; Burkett, Houston Chron., 6/28/64)
The platform adopted by the Republican National Convention contained a number of statements pertaining to the U.S. space program. The platform stated: “This administration has delayed research and development in advanced weapons systems and thus confronted the American people with a fearsome possibility that Soviet advances, in the decade of the 1970’s, may surpass America’s present lead. Its misuse of cost effectiveness has stifled the creativity of the Nation’s military, scientific, and industrial communities. “It has failed to originate a single new major strategic weapons system after inheriting from a Republican administration the most powerful military force of all time. It has concealed a lack of qualitative advance for the 1970’s by speaking of a quantitative strength which by then will be obsolete. It has not demonstrated the foresight necessary to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple Orbit“It has endangered security by downgrading efforts to prepare defenses against enemy ballistic missiles. It has retarded our own military development for near and outer space, while the enemy’s development moves on. . . . “We pledge . . . replanning of the present space program to provide for a more orderly, yet aggressively pursued step-by-step development, remaining alert to the danger of overdivision of skilled personnel in critical shortage from other vital areas such as health, industry, education, and science.” (Text, CR, 7/28/64, A3934, A3939) Mid-July: The U.S. Weather Bureau prepared a letter to the World Meteorological Organization advising that Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) pictures from TIROS VIII were no longer usable. Useful apt pictures totaled 4,067. (GSFC Historian)
USAF launched Thor-Able-Star rocket toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., but did not disclose payload or mission. It later was revealed that the Thor-Able-Star placed three satellites in orbit. (upi, NYT, 10/7/64,19; SBD, 10/8/64, 202; hhn-4s)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in article on nasa and usaf relations in The Airman: “At a time when possible military missions for manned spacecraft have not yet been clearly defined, the nasa Gemini and Apollo programs and the Air Force mol program are developing American manned space flight technology and operating experience at a rapid rate. “We believe that the progress called for in the Gemini, Apollo, and mol will enable us to demonstrate clear superiority over the Soviet Union in manned space flight capabilities during this decade. “Our accomplishments in these three programs will prepare us much better for whatever further steps may be necessary to meet our national defense needs in space. . . .”	(Airman, 8/64, 6-11)
NASA said major contractor on Project Apollo, North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div., would soon reduce its Apollo personnel by about 1,000. The action was a cost-reduction measure, and was not indicative of either current Congressional debate or change in Apollo scheduling. “We are merely trying to keep costs down as much as we can,” NASA spokesmen said. (AP, WSJ, 5/22/64; Finney, NYT, 5/22/64, 9)
On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) received the Langley Medal, highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (CR, 5/5/64,9767-68)
usaf announced launching four-stage Blue Scout, Jr., rocket combination from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with undisclosed payload, (upi, NYT, 8/30/64)
Three researchers from North American Aviation, Inc., stepped out of a rotating capsule after three days of rotation and one with the capsule at rest. The capsule, about twice the size of an Apollo capsule, was on the end of a 23-ft.-radius arm which traveled at a rate of five rotations per minute, producing a g force of 1.08. The test was preliminary to more extensive ones intended to study living and working conditions in a manned orbital laboratory. While in rotation, the researchers shot darts, maneuvered on a teeter-totter, worked puzzles and mathematical problems. Conclusion was that by end of second day, performance was back to normal, (naa s&id Skywriter, 6/12/64, 2)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 95.3-mi. altitude in satisfactory flight to measure ambient electron density, measure ion densities, and monitor solar ultraviolet radiations. Instrumented payload, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, contained CW propagation experiment, probe with Gerdien condenser, planar ion trap, and planar secondary emission detector. Another objective of the flight was to test efficiency of the 12.267 mc/s shroud antenna at D-region altitudes; one of the antennas performed unsatisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Maj, Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of usaf Office of Aerospace Research, addressed National Space Club in Washington: “I am sometimes asked how military space research differs from space research conducted by civilian institutions or other government agencies. The answer, of course, is that there is no difference, except in the ultimate purpose for which it is conducted. As a matter of fact, there is very close liaison in this field between my Command, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Office of Naval Research, and the scientific community. We make every effort to keep them informed about the work we are doing or sponsoring, and we are constantly exchanging information with them about our findings on the characteristics of space. Our job, however, is specifically to support the Air Force mission in space. . . . “I know that you are all familiar with the potential radiation hazards to man in space, particularly with the deadly proton showers that accompany certain solar flares. We have made great strides in predicting the onset of these showers at our Sacramento Peak Observatory in New Mexico. “We can predict safe periods with increasing accuracy—better than most weather predictions here on earth—but there is still a large gray area in which we do not know whether conditions will be safe or unsafe. It is possible that we could narrow this gray area significantly with that which penetrates the atmosphere and can be picked up at the observatory. “If we had this knowledge, it would extend the time we could operate in space with absolute assurance of safety. It would also give us advanced early warning that would enable us if necessary to get our astronauts out of danger. “Even in the present state of the art, our Sacramento Peak predictions have been crucial to the safety of the astronauts participating in the Mercury program. We have been able to give NASA absolute assurance of safe conditions, insofar as proton showers are concerned, when the astronauts have gone into orbit; and warnings of potential danger, at other times. . . .” (Text)
usaf fired Atlas-D 5,000 miles downrange from Vandenberg afb as part of an advanced re-entry systems program, and indicated shot was successful. (upi, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists, via Rosman, N.C., tracking station, succeeded in turning on 14 of the experiments onboard OGO I and received scientific data transmitted from the satellite. Power level in the NASA “space bus” was said to be satisfactory. OGO I was obtaining less than half the power it needed for full-time operation of its 20 experiments, because it was spinning slowly in space instead of having its solar panels constantly aimed at the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64; AP, NYT, 9/8/64, 31)
Cornell Univ. announced that scientists at the Ionospheric Observatory at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, bounced a radar signal off the planet Mars while it was about 138,000,000 mi. from earth today. Cornell said this was the farthest distance at which Mars had been detected by radar. (AP, Balt. Sun, 11/20/64)
Hand-held navigational device called a “stadimeter,” conceived by usaf scientists at Air Force Avionics Laboratory, was displayed by afsc. To be tested in Project Gemini manned space flights, the device used only manual and visual alignment and required no electronics. Astronauts would use stadimeter to determine optically the range of the spacecraft from the earth. (afsc Release 44-14-56)
Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) stated in Portsmouth, N.H., press conference: “I don’t feel safe at all about our missiles, to tell you the truth. I wish the Defense Department could tell the American people how undependable the missiles in our silos actually are.” Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announced that Senator Goldwater’s charge was “completely misleading, politically irresponsible, and damaging to the national security. There is no information, classified or otherwise, to support the false implications that our long-range missiles cannot be depended upon to accomplish their mission. . . .” (NYT, 1/10/64,1,14)
usaf Atlas-Agena D space booster was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with undisclosed payload. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/9/64; hhn-4 8)
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD for failure to proceed with flight-testing the nuclear-powered Low Altitude Supersonic Vehicle (lasv) . Speaking at Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright-Patterson afb, Dr. Teller said: “For the sake of an economy that amounts to less than 1% of the Air Force budget this has been canceled. I believe this is the biggest mistake we have made since the years following World War 2 when we failed to develop the ICBM. . . .” (Av. Wk., 8/17/64,65)
Richard L. Schleicher of North American Aviation, Inc., received Royal Aeronautical Society of Great Britain’s George Taylor Gold Medal for 1963 for paper on X-15 structural design which he presented to the Society. (Av. Wk., 6/1/64, 13)
His Majesty Hussein I, King of Jordan, visited NASA Kennedy Space Center and toured facilities at the Cape, (nasa Off. Int. Aff.)
House and Senate received from NASA Administrator reports on a grant to Cornell Univ. of $1,350,000 for construction of facilities for research. Reports were referred to the two Congressional space committees. (NASA LAR, III/116)
At aas meeting in New York, Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. Director of the Center for Radio Physics and Space Research, said the porous, crush-able material of the lunar surface extended “to a depth of tens of centimeters or meters,” according to radio thermal measurements. “It seems very probable that a few per cent of the lunar surface is hard and rough, probably in the form of many young craters, while the rest is covered with material considerably less dense than solid rock. . . . [We must be prepared] to find a crushable surface material many meters deep and smoothly deposited, covering most of the moon, and a few per cent of rough hard rock regions covered only with a thin layer of the fluff... (Av. Wk., 5/18/64,83)
Howard Simons of the Washington Post was awarded the 1964 American for the Advancement of Science-Westinghouse Science writing award. His winning entry consisted of stories on the Samos satellite, cybernetics in Russia, and the planet Jupiter. (Wash. Post, 12/18/64)
At aiaa former American Airlines’ vice president William Littlewood said problems of sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction of supersonic airliner from 1970 target date to some time between 1975 and 1980. Problems of practicability and noise would have to be solved before supersonic transport became reality, Mr. Littlewood said:	(Finney, NYT, 7/2/64, 28)
First Apollo spacecraft preflight acceptance test station was declared operational. Built by GE Apollo Support Dept, with associate contractors Control Data Corp. and Radiation, Inc., the station would be used at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., facility in Apollo preflight testing. Three others would be located at Grumman Aircraft Engineering, Bethpage, N.Y.; NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex.; and Msc Florida Operations, Merritt Island, Fla. (NASA Release 64-214)
The Air Force version of the controversial F-lll fighter-bomber, formerly called the tfx, made a successful but somewhat abbreviated maiden flight from Carswell afb, Tex. (the site of the General Dynamics Corp. plant that built the plane). Piloted by Richard L. Johnson and Val E. Prahl, the 1,650-mph aircraft performed all the items on the test program that were possible with the malfunctioning wing flaps. The variable-geometry wings, capable of a 70° sweep, were kept in 26° position during the first flight. In 21 min. of flight, the F—111 achieved an altitude of 17,000 ft. and a speed of 230 mph. On takeoff it required less than half the runway used by conventional jet planes. The Navy version of the F-lll was scheduled to fly by mid-1965. (Witkin, NYT, 12/22/64, 12; UPl, Chic. Trib. 12/22/64; Aviation Daily, 12/23/64)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in address at sixth Air Force Academy Assembly: “It is not possible to predict the course of events, but there are certain points I want to make tonight that might serve as benchmarks. “First, the nation has no choice but to pursue the almost limitless possibilities of space with energy and imagination. “Second, we must do everything possible to prevent exploitation of space for aggressive purposes, and be prepared to defend freedom in space. “Third, the emerging defense responsibilities in space exemplify and extend the requirements for professionalism in the military, focusing sharply on the mutual responsibility of the military and civilian professionals in science, industry, and government. “Fourth, despite the appeal of space exploration, we must continue to increase our investment of brains and money in the effort to build a a decent life on earth if this nation is to continue as leader of an expanding free world on the earth.” (Text)
Four consecutive full-duration F-l engine test firings at new Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., demonstrated the operational readiness of the site, which was officially accepted by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun from the Army Corps of Engineers. In the ceremonies, Dr. von Braun assigned site operation responsibilities to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., which would use the site for qualification firings of F—1 rocket engines. {Marshall Star, 10/14/64,10; nasa Release 64-259)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Student Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs: “. . . in assessing the future one can always learn from the past, and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contemporary undertaking is almost never perceived. “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. . . . “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to initiate die Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his theories about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the formula for space flight, but less than 40 years after Goddard devised the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened his horizons to include the entire solar system. “Science today has at its disposal a modem caravel, the chemical rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate measurements of the environment of space—that environment through which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative speed of 67,000 miles per hour. “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in which there is no foreseeable horizon. . . .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64, 6686)
Kennedy Space Center, NASA, awarded $3,061,826 contract to LingTemcoVought’s Range Systems Div. for services at Merritt Island Launch Area: automatic data processing, technical information, photographic support, and printing plant operation. The one-year contract would be renewable for two more years through annual options. (SBD, 2/25/64, 296)
Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander, Research and Technology Div., AFSC, speaking at the Seventh Hypervelocity Impact Symposium, said: “Another example of advanced development hypervelocity in nature if you will, is the asset Program. ASSET stands for Aerothermodynamic/ Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests, and involves the flight verification and demonstration of aerodynamic and structural design concepts for the lifting re-entry class of aerospace vehicles. Three ASSET vehicles have been launched to date of which two were quite successful. The ASSET Program was originally conceived and conducted by the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory and has now been turned over to the Systems Command’s Space Systems Div. program for even more advanced vehicles.” (Text, AFSC Release)
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and NASA announced the award of a contract for master planning of NASA’s $60 million Electronics Research Center to the joint venture firms of Edward Durell Stone, New York City; Giffels and Rossetti, Detroit; and Charles A. Maguire Associates, Boston-Providence. The contract was awarded by the New England Division of the Corps of Engineers, which had been designated by the Electronics Research Center as NASA’s design and construction agent for the buildings to be located on a 29-acre site at Kendall Sq., Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Release 64-307)
In lead editorial on the RANGER vii flight, New York Times lauded the success of the experiment but expressed the opinion that the flight once more emphasized the possibilities for international cooperation in such efforts: “. . . Proud as this country has reason to be of Ranger 7’s accomplishment, we can only conjecture how much more rapidly and cheaply its photographs could have been obtained had Soviet and American scientists been able to pool their efforts and resources years ago, rather than being required to pursue their efforts in competitive— and costly—isolation. The ease for a unified international effort to reach the Moon—as urged by Presidents Kennedy and Johnson—is strengthened by every consideration of the needless waste and duplication that have marked humanity’s space exploration to date.” (NYT, 8/1/64,20)
Dr. S. Burman Long, Worcester, Mass., minister, delivered address on religion in the space age at the 73rd convention of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs in Atlantic City, N.J.: . . My religion in the space age confirms my faith in a spiritual heaven as real as my humble earthly home. The sooner that mankind accepts an orderly and unlimited universe, the earlier we will have faith in truth. Our cosmology has changed because our knowledge has changed. It has changed before. Once a new continent was discovered. We no longer limit the universe to hell below, heaven above, and some of both between. The God of creation is in control now as He always has been. ...” (Text, CR 7/24/64, A3801-02) Early June: Air Force Space Systems Div. announced 10-ft. delta wing glider able to travel almost around the world as goal of improved Asset program. Glider would be ready for launch in two years. This improved Asset program was said to be more “realistic” prospect for manned reentry vehicle than canceled Dyna-Soar project. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
NASA and General Electric Co. announced they had accomplished precision tracking of explorer xxii with a laser device. Tests were conducted at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center using a ruby laser mounted on a telescope. With the telescope aimed along the predicted path, the laser was flashed several times as explorer xxii, containing an array of corner reflectors, passed overhead. The reflectors, made of quartz crystal, were designed to return the beam of the laser almost exactly where it came from. The optical signals were displayed on an oscilloscope. As the laser pulse traveled from the telescope to the satellite, then back to the ground, the elapsed time measured could be converted into distance. Expected accuracy was within 10 ft. {Chic. Trib., 12/7/64)
A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Chemical Propulsion, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, discussed 1.5-million-lb.-thrust hydrogen-oxygen M—1 engine and the large solid-propulsion rocket motor before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Last year this engine project [M-l], which was originally planned for completion in the late 60’s, was slowed down to a minimum level of effort consistent with such a development program. It is our intent to maintain the low level of funding during the present critical years of the manned lunar landing program and then to accelerate this development for completion in the early 70’s. . . . “The M—1 can be a team-mate of the large solid propellant motors. Potentially these two, if used in vehicle systems together, can provide the United States with increased payload capability at reduced cost during the 1970’s. . . . “. . . the large solid motor demonstrations have heretofore been funded by the Department of Defense and have been carried out by the Air Force in compliance with NASA-defined requirements. . . . This year NASA is requesting funds for the continuation of the contracted work on the 260" diameter solid propellant motors. . . . “Each contractor [Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General Corp.] will fire a half-length solid motor during the fiscal year. . . . each half-length motor will produce three million pounds of thrust, about double the thrust of the Saturn I booster. The full-length motor, for which we would intend to contract if the half-length motor firings are successful, will produce about six million pounds of thrust.” (Testimony)
Dr. Thomas Gold, Chairman of Cornell Univ.’s Astronomy Dept., told COSPAR that laboratory experiments to simulate conditions on lunar surface pointed “toward a surface of soft, crushable material, between 6 and 10 times less dense than solid rock. It would have a texture something like cake. A man walking on the moon might sink pretty far into the soft surface. How far we don’t know.” (AP, Houston Post, 5/18/64)
Sen. Mike Monroney (D.-Okla.) told American Fighter Aces Association, Washington chapter, that aviation was “short-changed” in research and development. He urged that more NASA effort go into aeronautical r&d, particularly on the supersonic transport, “nasa means National Aeronautics and Space Administration. I’m worried about what’s happening to the A-for-Aeronautics.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/25/64)
Addressing American Ordnance Association in Washington, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is my thesis that mutual disarmament—and prudence dictates that there should be no other kind—would greatly increase the flow of funds and effort into space exploration and into the building of greater space capability. This does not necessarily mean a full transfer of all available resources to space applications. But, just for illustration, suppose that there were a 10% decrease in weapon systems spending. With good planning at least half of it could be diverted smoothly and efficiently into an increased space effort. With greater difficulty, the remainder might be directed toward mending other inadequacies in our society. . . . “I am an avid supporter of the private competitive enterprise system. I also am an avid supporter of a responsible government which creates a climate in which the private system can work efficiently. My proposal to accelerate space activity to offset decreases in weapon system activity does not conflict with my support of private enterprise. In fact, it supports it, even though the funds would pass through government hands in ffie process. The basic objective is to strengthen our country. . . . “In conclusion, let me emphasize: “First. Disarmament, in the form of decreased production of weapon systems, does not need to cause an economic depression. “Second. Resources made available as a result of decreased production of weapon systems could most effectively be applied to accelerated development of space systems. “Third. While it is important to keep private industry healthy, government financing of research and development is not in conflict with such objectives. In fact, it may well stimulate increased production and increased employment by private companies. “And finally, I do not suggest that there should be a sharp increase in spending for space. But I do believe space spending should increase at a rate at least consonant with the increase in our gross national product, not only because increase in the gnp makes resources available for more space activities, but also because space exploration itself stimulated the gross national product.” (Text)
usaf announced that Aerojet General Corp. would receive a $2,744,000 increment to a previously awarded contract for research and development for the Titan III transtage engine, from Ballistic Systems Div. of Air Force Systems Command, (dod Release 888-64)
Comparison of science in U.S. and U.S.S.R. was subject of article by Prof. Robert E. Marshak, Univ. of Rochester. Distinguishing between “pure science or basic research and applied science or technological development,” he said U.S. was “doing exceedingly well in basic science. . . . The striking American performance in pure science in recent years results from a combination of fortunate circumstances. A primary factor is that the openness, freedom and emphasis ou individual initiative that characterizes the American way of life provide a favorable climate for the practice of pure science. . . . “On the other hand, in applied science the U.S.S.R. has demonstrated its capability of organizing large team undertakings whose favorable outcome depends as much on careful mobilization of material and human resources as on scientific brainpower. . . .”	(NYT Mag., 10/11/64,
100th flight of the X-15 rocket aircraft was conducted near Edwards afb, Calif., with Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) as pilot. X-15 No. 1 reached 3,682 mph (mach 5.4) and 107,000-ft. altitude in its “fully successful mission.” The X-15 was launched over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 76 sec. and the flight lasting 11 min. X-15 program was initiated in December 1954 with signing of formal memorandum of understanding by naca, usaf, and usn. Contracts were awarded to North American Aviation for construction of three X-15 aircraft and to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div. for manufacture of rocket engines. X-15 was designed to fly at mach 6 and 250,000-ft. altitude, objectives often exceeded in flight. First powered flight of X—15 was made Sept. 17, 1959, by NAA test pilot A. Scott Crossfield. X—15 research program has provided information on aerodynamics, structures, flight control, and physiological aspects of highspeed, high-altitude flight. Follow-on program, begun in 1962, utilizes X—15 as test-bed for scientific experiments beyond earth’s atmosphere. (twx, frc to NASA Hq.; FRC Release 2-64)
USAF announced launch of Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidentified satellite payload, from Vandenberg afb. (upi, NYT, 11/3/64, 53; hhn-48)
NASA Telephone and Data Distribution Center became first technical support element of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to become operational on Merritt Island, KSC announced. Some buildings were being serviced by telephone service through the Center and other buildings would be phased in as required. Fully equipped to handle all types of communications, the Center participated in its first technical support operation during launch of Saturn I SA-5, when it provided closedcircuit television service to Washington and other areas, (ksc Release 11-64)
North American Aviation, Inc., announced FY 1964 sales of $2,189,594,000, the largest annual total ever recorded by a company predominantly in the aerospace business. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 29)
NASA Flight Research Center’s selection of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc., for contract negotiations on general purpose jet airborne simulator system was announced. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract was expected to amount to about $1 million. The new system would be installed in Lockheed Jetstar aircraft (C-140A), purchased last year for use in extensive flight research directed toward problems of a variety of aircraft types, including supersonic transport, (nasa Release 64-97)
NASA GSFC-launched 201-ft.-diameter balloon carrying 160-lb. experiment package from Moberly, Mo., at sunrise. The balloon flew at altitude of about 24 mi. over 300-mi. course, ejecting its payload on signal about 12 hours after launch. The experiment package contained instruments to record and store data on cosmic rays in the earth’s magnetic field, data which would be used to help map radiation fields around the earth and in space. Experiment payload was designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center; the balloon was launched Under onr’s “Skyhook” balloon flight program, (gsfc Release G—22-64; AP, NYT, 8/19/64; K.C. Times, 8/20/64)
Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Tests (Start) established in Advanced Planning Directorate of the Deputy for Technology, Air Force Space Systems Div. Start included two activities: Asset re-entry vehicle program and unnamed glide re-entry vehicle, still under study. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
NASA announced award of three-year, $3.6-million contract to Federal Electric Corp. for instrumentation support services to the Merritt Island Launch Area of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-156)
Rep. Roland V. Libonati (D.—111.) presented to the House a group report on AFSC, SAC, TAC, and Air Force Academy, after Congressional delegation visited various usaf installations. Listing highlights of afsc during 1963, report said: “Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s Elgin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the Project Firefly program. The project actually is the intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and an assault on the secrets of ‘near space’. . . . “amrl [Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson afb] initiated the first lunar gravity research in 1963. Using a zero-gravity parabola, aircraft tests were conducted under actual lunar—one-sixth earth gravity—conditions. . . .” (CR, 2/18/64, 2906-35)
NASA announced it had assigned management responsibility for large solid rocket motor development to its Lewis Research Center. The 260-in. solid motor development was formerly a program of the Department of Defense. Under its FY 1965 budget, NASA assumed funding responsibility for the program; it would begin management responsibility for it next July. Two contracts for the program, with Aerojet General Corp. and Thiokol Chemical Corp. and initiated by the Air Force in June 1963, had been transferred to NASA. Smaller, 156-in. solid motor program continued under Air Force development. (nasa Release 64-231)
Effective this date, usaf Western Test Range’s facility at Point Arguello became part of Vandenberg afb, and its facility at Kwajalein Island was turned over to the Army. Organization plans for National Range Division with its Eastern Test Range and Western Test Range had been announced Mfiy 4.	(L.A. Times, 7/2/61)
It was reported that usaf was planning to orbit the third in the Oscar series of satellites. These satellites were built by radio hams in California and had no military significance. It was designed to receive and re-transmit a single word in Morse—“Hi.” The 25-Ib. satellite was to be launched as a pickaback payload on some usaf launch from Vandenberg Afb. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64, 8)
General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, was interviewed in General Electric Forum and discussed aerospace power’s contribution to national security. “In recent months, the area of direct technical concern to the Air Force has 'become much broader. For example, we must now press for technical superiority not only in aircraft but also in missiles, space systems, and command and control systems that are responsive to the compressed time scale of military operations. We cannot afford to fall behind in any of these fields, because the potential enemy can be expected to exploit Jill of the important technical gaps that might appear.” LeMay said that “chiefly because of the cost factor, we are not exploiting anything like the total amount of technology that we think might be useful. Certainly we would like to do more, but our r&d outlay already comprises 18 percent of the Air Force’s total budget and must be balanced against other needs.” (GE Forum, 10-12/64,14-17)
Permanent Hall of Science was dedicated at World’s Fair, New York City. Participating in dedication ceremony, nasa Administrator James E. Webb said the Hall of Science would “contribute to the understanding of those many disciplines which comprise modern scientific undertakings. . . .” Robert Moses, World’s Fair president, noted particularly the “extraordinary public interest in space exploration” in his remarks. (Webb Text; nasa lar III/172-78; NYT, 9/10/64)
afsc/bsd commander Maj. Gen. W. A. Davis, asked at Cape Kennedy press conference to comment on the recently reported Atlas ICBM failures at Vandenberg AFB, said: “There are several possible reasons for the failures. The Adas is a complex piece of machinery that has a habit of using up some of its reliability with age. SAC has been taking Adases off of operational sites, where they have been for a year or more, placing them on the stand at Vandenberg and firing them. “I feel that this type of test is not operational realism as SAC calls it You take the missile out of its environment, load it on a plane, fly it 1,000 or more miles, load it on another stand and fire it. This requires disconnecting and reconnecting wires and fuel lines and installing destruct packages and some instrumentation for the training launches.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/64)
NASA launched explorer xxii (be-b) beacon-explorer satellite with four-stage Scout launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Orbital data: 669-mi. apogee, 549-mi. perigee, 104.7-min. period, and 80° inclination to the equator, explorer xxii was last of five satellites in first phase of NASA’s ionosphere exploration and first of five satellites in nasa’s geodetic satellite series. Ionosphere experiment involved satellite’s transmitting radio signals down through the ionosphere. Ground stations around the world acquiring the signals measured electron distribution by the Doppler shift method and the Faraday rotation method. The international scientific effort with explorer xxii was the most extensive ever for a U.S. space project. Network of more than 80 ground stations was being operated by some 50 scientific groups in 32 countries. Geodetic experiment involved laser beams sent from NASA Wallops Station to the satellite, on which were mounted 360 one-inch “cube-corner” reflectors to return the light. In addition a small supporting experiment, electrostatic probe, measured electron density and temperature in immediate vicinity of the satellite, (nasa Release 64-237; NASA News Conf. Transcript)
Support for theories that extraterrestrial forces influenced rain and snowfall was reported at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Glenn W. Brier of the U.S. Weather Bureau presented evidence that the moon, when new or full, influenced the timing of precipitation by gravitationally nudging unstable atmospheric conditions into rainfall or snowstorms. Dr. E. Keith Bigg of Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization in Sydney reported research which substantiated his theory that meteoric dust particles acted as nuclei for ice crystals to form on and fell to earth as rain or snow, with the whole process taking about 30 days. (Osmund-sen, NYT, 12/29/64, 6)
The largest contract awarded to date for work on the NASA Mississippi Test Operations facility was awarded to Koppers Co., Inc., Malan Construction Department, New York City, for the construction of the first test position on the S—IC dual test stand. The contract was for $17,280,157, and was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Mobile District. Work on the stand would include construction of three concrete tiers each about 158 ft. high, a tower approximately 105 ft. high, a steel flame deflector, and other equipment. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1) . .
After examining Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), U.S. Air Force doctors at San Antonio said the former astronaut was on the way to “virtually complete recovery” from his inner-ear injury resulting from accidental fall last February. (AP, NYT, 10/2/64,62)
Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far U.S. now was on its way to the moon. “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.” Asked about Administration policy to classify Soviet space failures, Dr. Welsh replied: “. . . The policy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed largely to protect sources of information, many of which in those days were individuals actually in the Soviet Union. “Most of the information we get today comes from sources outside the Soviet Union which need no protection. As a consequence, there is less j ustification at the present time for classifying Russian space failures than there was in the past. I am not saying that there is no justification. . . . “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet failures.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, told Denver Post reporters that the manufacture of the mol spacecraft would be delayed until the Defense Dept, presented an “acceptable definition” of the program. He said that President Johnson was reviewing the 1966 budget which contained $155 million for mol, but that the money would not be spent until Air Force objectives in space were defined and accepted. (Partner, Denver Post, 12/22/64)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Producers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and spacecraft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it. Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket by then. “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be too late for us to match them again in this century. “In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space superiority. “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful cooperation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to exploit for the purposes of communism. “Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justified only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political, propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth. “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead, and lead without doubts and excuses. . . .” (Text)
It was reported that usaf was planning to permanently preserve the launch complex from which the first American astronauts were launched into space and to develop the area around it into an Air Force Space Museum. (Strothman, Miami Herald, 7/24/64)
NASA conducted three grenade experiments with Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from Wallops Island, Va.; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Ascension Island in the South Atlantic, part of current series to gather comparative data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures at widely separated locations. At Wallops Island, Nike-Cajun lifted off at 11:11 p.m. est, followed by Nike-Cajun at Fort Churchill at 11:17 p.m. est, and Nike-Cajun at Ascension Island, 11:18 p.m. est. Grenades were ejected and detonated at altitudes ranging from 23 to 56 miles. The series of experiments was under direction of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-11)
His Excellency Philibert Tsiranana, President of the Malagasy Republic, toured NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and received briefings on the Goddard mission by GSFC Director Dr. Harry Goett. In his official party were his wife, the Malagasy Foreign Minister, their Ambassador to the U.S., and officials of the U.S. State Dept, and NASA Hq. (Goddard News, 8/10/64,1)
New evidence of possible explosions in Milky Way galactic core, reported by Soviet astronomer Dr. Iosif S. Shklovsky, was discussed by British astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Dr. Shklovsky discovered that spurlike structures above and below the galaxy are connected in a single figure-8 configuration, its center at the galactic core. It is possible that the loops, which are strong sources of radio emissions, are magnetically trapped particles which may have been forced from the core by a past eruption. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/24/64, 48)
NASA announced Syncom C communications satellite would be assisted into proper orbit later this month by its sister satellite Syncom II, which would provide a reliable relay point in space for communications be« tween ground stations and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA Syncom Project Officer H. N. Stafford said: “As far as we know, this is the first time one satellite has been used to help in the launch of another. Tiros satellites have been used to help predict weather before manned space flights. The Relay satellite carried pictures of the Cooper flight. But this appears to be the first case of direct use of a satellite in an operational role during a launch.” (NASA Release 64-204)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists conducted interrogation of OGO I satellite through Rosman, N.C., tracking station, and 15 experiments were turned on to confirm their operation. Signals were weaker than previously received, because OGO i’s solar panels were not locked onto the sun; the satellite’s solar panels were successfully commanded to turn 42° into a more favorable sun angle, thus ensuring satisfactory power levels. As of this date, 19 of the 20 onboard scientific experiments had been turned on and had transmitted data, which were being evaluated by experimenters. (NASA Release 64-232; GSFC Release G-26-64)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper (Maj., USAF) was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert, at the National Geographic Society, Washington. Award cited Major Cooper for “the most outstanding contribution to the Nation’s progress in aerospace during 1963,” orbiting the earth 22 times in Mercury spacecraft in May 1963. (Wash. Post, 9/22/64X
Dr. Norman W. Rosenberg, of the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, was presented the DOD Distinguished Civilian Service Award, highest decoration for civilian employees. Since joining AFCRL in 1959, Rosenberg designed and executed a number of important experimental studies in upper atmosphere physics, most of which were part of Project Firefly. ( oar Release 7-64-3)
In a speech to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., NASA’s Director of Advanced Manned Earth Orbital Missions M. J. Raffensperger said: “Our limited flight experience to date indicates that any deleterious effects of space flight can be controlled, but man’s reaction to long-duration space missions is not yet quantitatively understood. Thus, the biomedical and behavioral areas must receive major attention in the earlier extended duration earth orbital flights.” Other areas that Mr. Raffensperger felt showed promise in providing beneficial returns to humanity were “research and observation of meteorology from a manned spacecraft” and “earth mapping and survey.” (Text)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Univac Div., Sperry Rand Corp., for negotiation of contract for Message Multiplexer communications processor systems. Final contract would call for Univac to supply, install, check out, program, and document two complete message handling systems to be installed in NASA communications switching centers at London and at an undetermined site in Australia. Contract was expected to amount to about $1.3 million, (csfc Release G-64-28)
At press conference, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials said nimbus I meteorological satellite was performing successfully and sending back cloud cover photographs of unexpectedly good quality. First nighttime pictures of cloud cover, made with the satellite’s infrared sensor, were comparable in quality and resolution to the TV pictures made by Tiros meteorological satellites. Unplanned orbit—eccentric rather than circular—reduced the satellite’s earth coverage from 100% every 24 hours to about 70%. (gsfc Press Conf. Transcript; Finney, NYT, 9/3/64,13)
President Johnson announced he was sending a set of lunar photographs taken by RANGER VII to leaders of 110 nations. “The success of the Ranger 7 exploration has been greeted with enthusiasm and interest around the world. Men of all nations recognize this is one of the greatest extensions of human knowledge about the lunar surface to occur in many centuries. “The American people can be justly proud. We started behind in the space age. But we placed our trust in our open society and free system. Our achievements in peaceful exploration of space give us all cause to be proud, grateful and confident. . . . “More than 60 countries now work together voluntarily in this pursuit. We continue to hope that the extent of such international cooperation will be enlarged and that all nations will join through the United Nations to place the peaceful realms of space off limits to the designs of aggressors on earth. “I am sure the American people will continue to support what is necessary to assure leadership. In return, they will rightfully expect that our program hold to the orderly and responsible course which has brought such outstanding success in such a short period.” (Spivak, UPI, Wash. Post, 8/17/64)
A Gemini-type spacecraft was successfully landed at Edwards AFB in first manned test of the new paraglider recovery system. North American Aviation test pilot Donald F. McCusker guided the capsule back to earth following a four-and-a-half minute flight beneath the inflated wing, after being released from a helicopter at an altitude of 8,500 ft. McCusker was slightly injured when the paraglider landed at about 25 mph—faster than had been anticipated. (L.A. Times, 12/20/64; San Diego Union, 12/20/64; naa s&id Skywriter, 12/31/64, 4) ,	.
Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin told the Soviet parliament that expenditures for defense would drop by four per cent or 500 million rubles ($555 million) in 1965. He also declared that his government had acted after being informed by American officials that U.S. planned to reduce its military budget in the coming year. A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy said later that the embassy had no knowledge that such information had been given to the Soviet government. In his budget message, Premier A. N. Kosygin told the Supreme Soviet that “people of science must do a lot for us to be able to provide more material benefits for the satisfaction of the population’s growing requirements,” complained that the opportunities for doing this “have been by no means exploited.” After calling for scientific breakthroughs to the production process in chemistry, electronics, transistor technology, and biology, Kosygin said: “There are major shortcomings in scientific research planning. Our plans do not make use in good time of all that is progressive and useful in research discoveries. For this reason, scientific discoveries and technical inventions not infrequently become outdated and lose their practical worth. “Utilization of the latest achievements of science and technology should be made one of the main criteria in the appraisal of economic plans and their fulfillment. Unfortunately, many people employed in industry continue to regard further capital investments as the main and only source of increased output and do not really strive hard for the rapid introduction of scientific and technical achievements, which could produce a considerably greater effect than additional capital investments. Scientific and technical progress opens new horizons for a radical improvement in quality and an expansion of the range of goods produced.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64,16; Tanner, NYT, 12/10/64; WSJ, 12/10/64)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center officials successfully made the first of two final corrections in the orbit of syncom hi communications satellite, raising the satellite’s perigee closer to perfect circle 22,289 mi. above the earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/10/64)
At American Astronautical Society meeting in New York, msc’s Dr. Charles A. Berry said Apollo astronauts would be kept in isolation longer than earlier space crews, to prevent infection and disease. Families of crewmen would be given intensive medical care to ensure the good health of the astronauts. If one member of the three-man crew becomes ill, the entire crew would be replaced, he said. (Houston Chron., 5/6/64)
William G. Gisel, President of Bell Aerosystems Co., said before N.Y. Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate the space exploration project , . . without a tremendous surge of pride in the human race. We are going to the stars, gentlemen. The human race will travel to the planets and, in time, to other solar systems and in doing so will fern the spark of greatness which in spite of ourselves has carried us from the cave to the threshhold of space. Man can go to the moon in this decade. The important question is, will it be an American?” (nasa r&sc Div.)
NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster reliability testing program at Michoud. Other two awards were for increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-48)
NASA engineers at the Goddard Space Flight Center were puzzled 'by the question of how a colony of fleas managed to infiltrate a special chamber which was supposedly protected against invasion even by bacteria. The chamber had been designed and installed to test, under conditions simulating those of space, optical equipment to be placed on board the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory. One possible explanation for the presence of the fleas suggested that they entered concealed in the fur-lined parkas worn by technicians adjusting equipment inside the low-temperature chamber. (Wash. Daily News, 6/2/64)
Discussing U.S. supersonic transport program, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president Dudley E. Browne told American Bankers Association’s conference in Philadelphia that Lockheed had proposed “increased use of Government capability to underwrite both risk and financing, balancing this with sufficient risk assumption and financing by the contractor to justify returning him a reasonable profit. . . . “Whatever final plan is adopted, the banks will be called upon to play a significant part. “When they are, I think they will find themselves participating in a program whose magnitude they have never encountered before, a total program cost that may run into something like $8 or $10 billion, may involve loan limits for aircraft of as much as 20 years in place of the present 10 or 12, and may require supplemental participation of other financing organizations like insurance companies. . . .” (Clark, NYT, 2/2/64,90)
dod announced $1,245,601 contract award to B. B. McCormick and Sons, Inc., for road work at Merritt Island Launch Area, John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa. The NASA-funded contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 699-64)
It was announced that a new ultraviolet radiation spectrograph had been developed at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in an effort to solve the mystery of “airglow.” The spectrograph would be carried aloft by a rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms of the airglow. (nana, San Diego Union, 11/29/64)
In a New Year’s greeting addressed to President Anastas I. Mikoyan and Premier Alexei N. Kosygin of the Soviet Union, President Johnson urged agreement on a series of United States disarmament proposals and arms control: “Arms control remains especially urgent; nothing can contribute more to the hopes of mankind for the future. During the months ahead I hope we can work for practical agreements to this end. We can and should move to limit the spread of nuclear weapons; to achieve a verified worldwide comprehensive test ban; to make a cut-off of fissionable material production for weapons coupled with measures to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear power; and to agree on a verified freeze in existing offensive and defensive strategic nuclear delivery systems. “By progress in this critical area, our Governments can help to make this a happier and safer world for all people. You may be certain that the American people and their Government will never be second in this effort.” (Mohr, NYT, 12/31/64,1—2)
usaf Titan III-A space booster was launched from Cape Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb. “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a 360° somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyroscopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges automatically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a separate orbit. After the Titan III-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confidence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
Dr. Hari K. Sen, research scientist in Space Physics at usaf oar’s Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, had shown that evaporation of solar corona was largely responsible for origin of the solar wind, OAR announced. Dr. Sen evolved simple physical theory explaining how electrons and protons of solar winds escape solar corona, then compared his results with observed interplanetary electron densities and with experimental data obtained from spacecraft on solar winds near the earth. His theory agreed, in order of magnitude, with experimental data and gave estimate of interplanetary electron density beyond observed range out from the sun. He set critical altitude for escape at about four solar radii, about 1,300,000 mi. above the visible solar disc. (oar Release 3-64-5)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in remarks at Univ. of Alabama: “In the 5% years since the launching of Explorer I in January of 1958, scientists in the nation’s universities and in government laboratories, supported by the engineering competence of American industry, have made an impressive record. In this 5% years 42 different university sponsored experiments have been orbited on 22 NASA satellites. Twelve of these experiments on five satellites are still operating. There are pending at the present time a total of 123 experiments representing 36 different experimental concepts contributed by nineteen universities. These experiments have been approved and will be flown on 19 NASA satellites including the orbiting geophysical observatories, the orbiting astronomical observatories, the orbiting solar observatories, and the Explorers. Of great significance is the fact that some of these experiments will be flown on future international satellites, particularly the United States-United Kingdom series.” (Text)
Dr. Donald E. Hornig, scientific adviser to President Johnson, was quoted on the controversial MOL project and its possible merger with NASA’s Apollo: “mol is still under discussion, and the scope of it is still in a state of flux. The Air Force certainly has a role to play in space.” Sources inside the White House said Dr. Hornig was against full funding of the mol, for which project the Air Force wanted $175 million in FY1966.	(Av. Wk., 12/14/64,15)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. ( hhn-4 8)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced two firms would negotiate to provide three Satellite Telemetry Automatic Reduction Systems (stars) : Beckman Instruments, Inc., and Electro Mechanical Research, Inc. Negotiations with the two firms would lead to final selection of single contractor for 82.5-million award, (gsfc Release G—30-64)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “In the field of military applications of space, our views as to the future remain unchanged. We believe that we must vigorously exploit the most likely avenues of interest, though we are not yet able to be definitive enough to describe man’s military space role adequately to project specific weapon systems. . . . “The Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program, which replaced the Dyna-Soar, is a research program aimed at giving man the opportunity to operate in space so that we may determine whether and when the manned space vehicle will be militarily significant. The mol program will provide much of the supporting knowledge for indicated future manned space systems. The timing of the program is based upon a technical decision that our primary need is to know what functions man can perform in orbit, before exploring, as completely as Dyna-Soar would have, the problems and techniques of controlled reentry. This latter will now be studied on a more limited developmental basis.” (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
General Bernard A. Schriever, afsc, said in speech to the Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami, regarding the USAf/usn F—111: “The outstanding characteristic of the F—111 is its versatility. The F—111A—the Air Force version—can penetrate supersonically on the deck for interdiction or low altitude tactical reconnaissance. For purposes of close support, it must be able to maneuver well at low altitudes and be able to carry a variety of conventional weapons. It must also be able to loiter for extended periods while awaiting target assignments from the local ground commander. Combined with this low altitude capability, the F-lll requires a very high altitude capability for reconnaissance flexibility and air superiority missions. It must be capable of high altitude deployment between theaters without tanker support. “The F-111A will significantly increase the Air Force’s capability in support of the Army. Its great ferry range will increase Tactical Air Command’s capability to react even more rapidly than now to meet contingencies anywhere in the world. But even more importantly, the F—111A, with its variable geometry wing design will operate effectively over a wide range of speeds and altitudes in any conservative combat environment. “Basically the F-lll will be the first truly multi-purpose all-weather tactical fighter in tac’s inventory with a capacity to operate from short austere fields. This means greater dispersal and flexibility and, of course, quicker responsiveness to support Army requirements for immediate and effective close air support, air superiority and interdiction. In short, the F—111 represents a quantum step forward in the development of a tactical air weapon system providing optimum combat effectiveness at the lowest cost and with the greatest possible flexibility. “The F—111B—the Navy version—has a primary role of air superiority. It will be armed with the Phoenix missile system and will be able to loiter at the outer defensive perimeter of the fleet for much longer periods of time than present day Navy fighters. It will also be able to accelerate out of a subsonic loiter condition and maneuver for supersonic attack. “It is easy to see that both the Air Force and Navy versions of the F-lll call for a number of conflicting inflight performance characteristics. The requirements for high subsonic cruise efficiency and for short takeoff capability call for maximum lift from the wing area. In other words, you need wings swept fully forward. On the other hand, supersonic low altitude flight calls for swept back wings, since the body design itself provides sufficient lift to support flight; and additional wing area only induces instability. At altitude more wing area is required, but the higher speeds obtainable dictate either very thin straight wings or else a higher degree of sweep. “How do you answer these conflicting demands? The answer is obvious—develop a variable sweep wing aircraft. Contrary to some impressions, the variable sweep design is not new. A variable sweep design was used in the Bell X-5, which was developed under Air Force sponsorship and flown at Edwards in 1951. A similar principle was utilized in the Grumman F—10F prototype which flew in 1952. But there is a major difference between those designs and the one to be used in the F—111. The early designs required a bulky internal mechanism to move the wings. That mechanism is not required for the newer designs, and consequently the use of a variable sweep wing has become practical.” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-64)
Prof. Marcel Florkin of Liege Univ., a member of the Committee on Space Research (cospar), said that many American and Soviet scientists shared his belief that men cannot survive weightlessness in space for more than five or six days. He said that Soviet scientists had produced photographs showing abnormalities in cell division attributable to the sustained weightlessness some of their astronauts had experienced. Prof Florkin said that under present conditions, only space robots could visit the moon or Mars and that the only alternative would be space vehicles that could produce artificial gravity to simulate normal human environment. (O’Toole, NYT, 12/24/64)
Oran W. Nicks, Director of NASA Lunar and Planetary Programs, presented history and status of the Ranger project to the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, detailing in particular the recommendations of NASA Board of Inquiry (Kelley Board) prior to RANGER VI and the Hilbum Board following RANGER VI. Hilbum report outlined: (1) design changes effected after analyses of RANGER VI flight data; (2) changes agreed to be desirable “if properly evaluated and qualified”; and (3) board recommendations “not entirely resolved by OSSA and JPL.” Notable change in the first category: NASA would closely monitor Ranger test program at JPL, would have to concur in spacecraft’s flightworthiness before it could be shipped. (Testimony) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster combination from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/64)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported on a letter (dated Nov. 9, 1964) from Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, to President Johnson in which he recommended a merger of the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program and NASA’s Apollo X program. He argued that $1 billion could be saved over a five-year period if mol were to be cancelled and the Air Force funds applied to the Apollo-based space station. A jointly operated national space station program would, according to Anderson, best utilize U.S. space resources. Sen. Anderson felt that mol lacked growth potential because it could not progress beyond its two-man, 30-day mission without development of a resupply system. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,16; NASA Archives)
Two NASA sounding' rockets were launched from Kronog&rd, Sweden, in early morning coordinated launchings. Nike-Apache with micrometeoroid-particle-collector payload reached 77-mi. altitude in conditions of moderate noctilucent cloud display. The payload impacted in a lake and was recovered safely, usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated in the experiment. Twenty minutes later, Nike-Cajun was launched with grenade payload to 80-mi. altitude, providing good data on atmospheric temperature, wind, air density, and pressure. Stockholm Univ.’s Meteorological Institute cooperated with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in this experiment. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
Aerobee 300A vehicle launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 95-lb. instrumented payload to 192-mi. altitude in experiment to measure simultaneously electron and neutral particle temperatures in the upper atmosphere. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on ion and neutral particle densities. After 10%-min. flight, payload impacted 156 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fourth in series of ionosphere studies, joint project of Univ. of Michigan and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-10)
USAF fired Titan II icbm from Vandenberg AFB more than 5,000 mi. down the Pacific Missile Range in 10th and last of series of R&D tests at pmr. (AP, Wash. Past, 3/14/64)
Safety of jet airliners had improved sevenfold since 1959, William W. Moss told 17th international air safety seminar of the Flight Foundation in New York. Capt. Moss, a Pan American World Airways pilot, said there was average of one fatal accident per 690,000 flying hours in first nine months of this year, whereas there was one per 85,000 flying hours in 1959. (NYT, 10/13/64, 74)
Dept, of Commerce announced opening of World Weather Center in Washington, D.C., composed of the Weather Bureau’s National Meteorological Center and National Weather Satellite Center with assistance provided by other Weather Bureau components. WWC would gather, process, and distribute weather observations and prepare weather analyses and forecasts for as much of the globe as possible; provide opportunity for the training of meteorologists from the U.S. and abroad; conduct basic and applied research on large-scale weather problems; and archive weather information for use of the scientific community for research purposes. The Center would utilize the new direct Washington-Moscow weather communications link as well as the existing international weather communications systems. Plans for the U.N.-sponsored World Weather System would include three World Meteorological Centers: one in Washington, another in Moscow, and a third at a presently undesignated location in the Southern Hemisphere. (Commerce Dept. Release G 64-184)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $9.2 million increase to contract with North American Aviation, Inc., calling for construction at Downey, Calif., of seven new buildings and modifications to existing structures to permit expansion of naa’s research and development. Naa is prime contractor for Apollo command and service module under contract signed with msc Aug. 14, 1963. (AP, Tulsa Daily World, 1/24/64)	_
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of Reeves Instrument Co. for negotiations of $2.5 million contract for three 30-ft. Unified S-Band Antenna Systems. The antenna systems would be installed in tracking ships for Project Apollo, (gsfc Release G-64-29)
NASA awarded $158, 466,800 contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for production of 76 F-l rocket engines for the Saturn V launch vehicle. The action defined and detailed the procurement action initiated with letter contract in June 1962. Delivery of static-test engines to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had already begun, and the first flight F-l would arrive at msfc in November, (nasa Release 6448; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1)
Federation of Italian-American Democratic Organizations of New York presented to NASA a plaque honoring the late President Kennedy and Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci. The plaque, which commemorated Vespucci’s sighting the area now called Cape Kennedy, was accepted by NASA Administrator Webb in ceremonies at NASA Hq. (nasa Announcement 64-47. It was subsequently hung in the Hq. building of Kennedy Space Center, NASA; KSC Release 61-64)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, spoke on “New Technology—Its Selection and Development” before the Atomic Industrial Forum conference in San Francisco. His address made the following points: (1) preeminence in space demands that a program of development of new technology be continuously supported; (2) the formulation of a responsible requirement requires the existence of an underlying body of technology; (3) the development of a new branch or extension of a branch of technology should be directed at a related class of requirements rather than a single requirement; (4) development of a new technology requires the existence of a focal point in the form of advanced hardware; (5) short and long-term goals must be related to the Nation’s policies and plans; (6) our goals must be continuously assessed; (7) our work must be relevant to the goals which have been set; and (8) better processes of program management must be devised. He said in conclusion: “A balance of technologies in our favor will, however, require wisdom in the selection of new technologies in which to invest our resources and resolution in their development.” (Text)
Atlas F icbm exploded on launch pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R,
Sixth anniversary of NASA. In Headquarters ceremony honoring the first NASA Administrator, President T. Keith Glennan of Case Institute of Technology (Aug. 1958-Jan. 1961), and the first Deputy Administrator, Dr. Hugh L. Dry den (Aug. 1958-present), official portraits were unveiled. Administrator James E. Webb made informal remarks on the role of NASA in fulfillment of the American concept of power and purpose in human affairs. He read a letter from President Lyndon B. Johnson which said, in part: “We must be first in space and in aeronautics to maintain first place on earth. The accomplishments of this past year show clearly that we are making rapid progress to achieve and maintain that position. “Significant as our success has been, it is but indicative of the far greater advances that mankind can expect from our aeronautical and space efforts in the coming years. We have reached a new threshold of competence in the air and beyond it in space which opens to us the widest possibilities for the future.” Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans (1960-present) reviewed the personal contributions of Drs. Glennan and Dryden in the initiation and progress of the U.S. civilian space program. Friends and relatives of those honored and official NASA guests attended the ceremony. (Program; Letter)
General Curtis E. LeMay, Air Force Chief of Staff, testified before House Committee on Armed Services: “The Air Force program of research and development seeks to assure that this Nation is first in the development of military capabilities in space. We have some cause for optimism in this area. Our Titan III program is proceeding satisfactorily. In addition, we are undertaking the development of a medium altitude communications satellite program. . . . “The next major step toward the achievement of future space capabilities is the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) which was approved for development under Air Force management. The MOL will provide a means to fulfill the compelling requirement to acquire information essential to determining accurately the threat from space, the usefulness and the capabilities of man-in-space, and the unique advantages which may accrue from military space operations. It will also serve as a platform to support testing of equipment and procedures in the environment in which they will be used. . “Although the Dyna-Soar program has been terminated, a need still exists for development of a maneuverable aerospacecraft capable of controlled reentry and precision recovery, ferrying missions to and from a space laboratory, transfer of men and equipment in space, and a wide range of other roles. . . (Text, AF Info. Pol. Ltr., 2/64)
Quasars (quasi-stellar objects) were subject of discussion at American Physical Society meeting in Washington. Too large to be stars, too small to be galaxies, quasars emanate tremendously strong radio waves even though they are billions of light-years away. Dr. Peter Bergmann of Yesbiva Univ. said pulsing quasar 3C-273 must have been shining for at least a million years, because it must have taken at least that long for the jet of luminous gas protruding from one side to reach its presently observed length. Dr. Bergmann presented his theory that quasars shine because of gravitational collapse—transformation of mass to energy by gravitation rather than stellar fusion. Dr. Louis Gold and Dr. John W. Moffatt of Martin Co.’s Research Institute for Advanced Studies rejected theories that quasars operate on stellar fusion principle, theorized that “ordered oscillation” was operating inside the vast gaseous envelopes rimming quasars. Laser effect, or coherence of particles, occurred in the gaseous envelope, which was about 1 to 10 light years thick. Dense core of quasar must act as fusion furnace, providing particles which acquire coherence on their way to the outside. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/29/64,15; Haseltine, Wtish. Post, 4/29/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/64)
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation and Douglas Aircraft Co. received three contract increments totaling more than $8 million for work on S-IVB stage of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles from NASA msfc. Additional funding of $3.6 million went to Rocketdyne to equip their plant for production of J—2 engines and for providing static test site and propellant storage area. Douglas received two incremental contracts. One, for $2.3 million, was for purchase of long-term items on recently ordered additional eight S-IVB stages. Other, for $2.2 million, was for purchase of additional set of automatic checkout equipment. (SBD, 7/14/64, 63; Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 9)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.—Minn.), Vice-Presidential candidate, told rally in Washington, D.C., that the Administration would form a study group to seek “the appropriate mechanisms of development and research” by U.S. industry. (Pomfret, NYT, 10/12/64,15)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed Young Presidents’ Organization Eastern Area Conference in White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.: “As the national space program moves into its seventh year, the United States has reached the halfway point in the broad-based accelerated program for the present decade, a program that was planned and has been carried forward by the three Administrations. “The National Space Program is creating for the United States new resources for whatever use the national interest may require, whether that interest is in maintaining national security, international relations, stimulating education, or implementing scientific and technological progress. . . . “In writing the Space Act of 1958, Congress stressed that the scientific and technical knowledge acquired as the national program moved ahead should be shared promptly with all who could use it. . . . “To be of most use this information must be identified and repackaged to meet the special needs of nonaerospace industries. This is the purpose of the NASA’s Technology Utilization Program, the first national undertaking of its scope. . . He detailed how the program works and enumerated outstanding examples, then concluded: “NASA’s major contribution here has been to provide a vital communications link between activities where information is developing and areas where it may be utilized. “We are convinced that NASA’s Technology Utilization Program will be of increasing benefit to the American economy. It is the mechanism through which the discoveries made in space science and technology can pay substantial dividends to American business and industry.” (Text)
NASA and Dept, of Health, Education and Welfare announced cooperative one-year research project to study anti-cancer, carcinogenic, and anti-radiation potential of certain chemical compounds closely related to plant growth regulators. Project would extend studies made at North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. in NASA research program to protect man in space. To be conducted at s&ro under $198,185 contract with HEw’s Public Health Service, project would be directed by phs National Cancer Institute and financed through a transfer of funds by NASA as part of its Technology Utilization program. (NASA Release 64-190)
Soviet Ministry of Defense said Pentagon was spying on Russian military and space installations in Moscow, via radio and radar monitoring stations on borders of U.S.S.R. and other Socialist nations and satellites. Allegation called for increased Soviet vigilance against such “espionage.” American embassy in Moscow called statement “nonsense.” (NYT, 6/11/64,10)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in coordination with Nike-Apache launch at Ascension Island, third set in current NASA series to obtain data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures. A correlated launch from Ft. Churchill, Canada, was postponed due to sound interference problems. The Wallops experiment was timed to coincide with the annual east-to-west “warming trend”, was to measure its effects on the upper atmosphere. The experiments were designed to obtain measurements at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. The Wallops experiment used grenade payload; for the Ascension experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with pitot-static probe to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures. The series was being conducted for NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
Indonesian air force launched Soviet-built surface-to-air missile in connection with military alert exercises, according to official Antara news agency. (M&R, 2/24/64, 11)
relay I began its third year in orbit and could still send clear, high-resolution television and audio signals across oceans and continents. The communications satellite had circled the globe 5,685 times and accomplished 186 demonstrations and 2,139 experiments, with a transponder-on time of 334 hours. The relay i project was directed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 64-213)
Scientists from the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, the Swedish Space Committee, and NASA announced they would investigate the nature of noctilucent clouds during a period starting the last week in July and extending through Aug. 24. This would be the second in series of rocket-borne experiments to be conducted from' Kronogard Range in Northern Sweden. Principal purpose of experiments was to confirm results of experimental flights completed in August 1962, when it was tentatively determined that noctilucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or the residue of burned out meteors. Program calls for the firing of four Nike-Apache rockets for collection purposes and four Nike-Cajun rockets to measure temperatures and winds associated with the presence or absence of the clouds, (oar Release 7-64-2)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/28/64; hhn-48)
President Johnson congratulated American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) on its first annual meeting and technical display, held June 29-July 2, Washington. He said: “I am particularly pleased that you have selected this occasion to honor the highly respected and capable Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64, 1)
dod announced it had undertaken comprehensive review of procurement policies and practices affecting labor-management relations at missile and space sites.. NASA was cooperating in the study, which in 1964 was expected to involve the following sites: Vandenberg AFB, Warren AFB, Minot AFB, Whiteman AFB, and NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility. The first on-site review was made at Cape Kennedy late last month, (dod Release 110-64)
Air Force Systems Command reported that Rome Air Development Center (radc), sponsoring approximately $1 million annually in computer research and development, was major Air Force agency performing research in the computer field. According to Alan R. Bamum, Chief of radc’s Data Processing Section, “radc’s primary responsibility in computer research is development of high speed computer devices and special computers to meet peculiar Air Force problems. Also, methods of programming computer instructions, development of larger and faster computer memories and research in a new area called artificial intelligence.” (afsc Release 11-64)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite aboard a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 6/15/64,10)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) announced nomination of Richard E. Horner, Senior Vice President of Northrop Corp., as aiaa president for 1965. Mr. Homer served as the first Associate Administrator of NASA (June 1959-July 1960) and before that as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development. (NYT, 10/8/64)
Minuteman ICBM was successfully fired from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., by a Strategic Air Command crew from Malmstrom AFB, Mont. The missile traveled 5,000 mi. down the Western Test Range. (MdeR, 11/9/64, 10)
First of improved H—1 engines, whose thrust had been upped from 188,000 lbs. to 200,000 lbs., were delivered recently by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Division to NASA Michoud Operations. Cluster of eight H-l engines was to improve thrust of Saturn booster, augmenting thrust of 1.5 million lbs. for Saturn I to 1.6 million lbs. for Saturn IB. (Marshall Star, 6/10/64,1)
