usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster combination, (upi, NYT, 5/19/65, 2)
Report of experiments by the European Organization for Nuclear Research indicated there was no fifth force in nature as had been proposed, independently, by two groups of American physicists to explain some unexpected experimental results. The four forces in nature were gravity, electromagnetism, and weak and strong nuclear forces. (Reuters, NYT, 2/28/65, 69)
Snap 8, NASA—aec experimental reactor, had run continuously at power for 209 days, thereby completing the longest known power operation of a nuclear reactor. Built by Atomics International Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., Snap 8 began power operation in November 1963, ran 91% of the total time available, and produced more than five million kw. hours of heat. It was operated in a shielded AEC test facility near Los Angeles. (Atomics International Release Ai-18)
Commenting on American contributions to space science, N.	M. Sissakian, Soviet biochemist, wrote in Pravda: “Soviet scientists note with satisfaction the considerable contribution of American science to the study and opening up of cosmic space, which specifically manifested itself in a series of flights of cosmonauts in one-seater and two-seater ships. Most essential results were obtained by the American scientists from the flights of the ships Gemini 4 and Gemini 5. . . . . . The flight of G. Cooper and C. Conrad was additional proof that the state of weightlessness during the minimum time required for a flight to the moon and back does not cause essential physiological changes in the human organisms and has no noticeable influence on his ability to work. “Of great interest in the cosmic flight of man from the biological viewpoint is the study of such problems as the functional state of the cardiovascular system, the water-salt exchange, and the vestibular apparatus. “Aboard the ship Gemini 5 a number of physiological experiments . . . were performed. The method tested on the Cosmonaut C. Conrad of inflated cuffs around the extremities, which were intended to maintain the necessary functional vigor of the cardiovascular system, merits attention. . . . “The flight of Gemini 5 is a great success for U.S. scientists. The Soviet scientists sincerely congratulate Cosmonauts G. Cooper and C. Conrad on the successful conclusion of their flight, giving due credit to their courage and endurance. They transmit to the scientists and the entire personnel which prepared and carried out the flight their congratulations and wishes for further successes in the peaceful opening up of the cosmos.”	(Pravda, 9/2/65)
NASA would negotiate with the Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for 22 h-1 rocket engines with 200,000-lb. thrust for use on the 12 Saturn ib launch vehicles presently planned, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Engines, with supporting services, would cost more than $6 million, (msfc Release 65-155; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
usaf “ripple-launched” two Minutemen icbm’s from Vandenberg afb. Roth were launched from silos, the second within minutes of the first. (M&R, 2/15/65, 12)
Two teams of scientists collecting dust from Greenland and Antarctic icecaps presented their findings to the American Geophysical Union, meeting in Washington. The scientists were collecting particles by “core sampling”—boring through the ice with a thermal drill and analyzing particles to determine their origin. Team studying Greenland samples—E. L. Fireman, J. Defelice, and C. C. Langway, Jr., of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the U.S. Army—believed their dust samples to be nonterrestrial in origin. Team studying Antarctic samples—M. B. Giovinetto of the Univ. of Wisconsin and R. A. Schmidt of NASA—was not certain of the origin of these particles. They reported a high concentration of spherucles in the core samplings; the amount of these particles, which closely matched those found in volcanic eruptions, made identification of dust origin more difficult. They had collected dust from 165-ft. core of ice, representing 400 yrs. accumulation. Greenland team had drilled to depth of 1,800 ft. and expected to continue to 5,000 ft. National Science Foundation would use the same thermal drill—beginning in summer of 1967 or 1968—to drill to 8,000-ft. depth through the south polar ice. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/20/65, 1) Week of April 19: Cryogenic propellants were loaded for the first time into a ground test model of the NASA Saturn S-IVB upper stage to verify the design of the stage and fabrication techniques, and to demonstrate operational procedures. The S-ivb, 58 ft. long and 21.5 ft. in diameter, was being built for Saturn IB and Saturn V by Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. for nasa msfc. (msfc Release 65—98)
USAF named Robert G. boewy chairman of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, (Hussie, Phil. Inq,, 9/26/65) *	ComSatCorp asked fcc for permission to make available service via early bird i outside of normal hours to permit transatlantic televising of Pope Paul vis visit to the U.S. October 4. The Corporation normally could offer its services between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. daily; it was seeking to extend them from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. during the papal visit. (ComSatCorp Release) *	Potential of a manned orbiting vehicle to obtain advanced photographic and electromagnetic intelligence on Soviet ICbm defenses, on Russian deployment of new smaller solid propellant icbms, and on Chinese progress toward a strategic missile force was suggested by Aviation Week and Space Technology as being significant factor behind Defense Secretary Robert S, McNamara’s decision to proceed with manned military space missions. It was photographic evidence provided fay Samos, shortly after McNamara had come to the Pentagon, that had enabled the U.S. to determine that the Russians were not building and deploying icbms as fast as had been believed and which had allowed McNamara to establish more modest missile production goals. (Av. m„ 9/27/65, 261
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div., was cited by President Johnson for cost reduction efforts on the Titan III program. The citation said his efforts had enabled the Air Force to achieve on time all major program objectives with fewer test flights than programed, “thus reducing defense costs $33 million in fiscal year 1965.” (dod Release 487-65)
usaf Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, speaking at a meeting of the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., said: “. . . As airmen, all of us in the Air Force look at space with real concern. Will it someday become an area of military operation? If so, what will be the U.S. posture? In military language, what is our readiness? . . . “Space exploration is the responsibility of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. . . . The act which created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave NASA broad responsibilities for meeting many of the broad needs of the nation. It also stated that the Department of Defense should be responsible for and direct those space activities peculiar to or primarily associated with the development of weapon systems, military operations or the defense of the United States. “So we have both NASA and Air Force assigned specific responsibilities. We have the basis of a partnership. And a partnership it is in carrying out the national program as recommended by the President and authorized and funded by Congress. The intent of Congress is very clear. The members wanted the broad space capabilities of the nation to be built up as rapidly as possible without unnecessary duplication of effort or of waste. This we are attempting to do. And while I would not ordinarily try to speak for Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, I think I can speak for him today on this subject, in saying, that it is a very well understood mutual objective between the Air Force and NASA.” Asked his opinion about spending of $20 billion to reach the moon, McConnell said: “I think it is necessary for us to get everything we can out of space. And I think we should get it as rapidly as we can at as reasonable cost as we can. But you can’t get it rapidly and at the same time cheaply . . . going to the moon is just the end product of what we are getting out of it. If we were just going to the moon, I wouldn’t think it would be worth 20 billion dollars to go to the moon. But I don’t hesitate to say that all of the other things which we have to do, the preliminaries, and the things that we’re going to learn in the process of achieving that goal is well worth the expenditure of whatever money is required to attain the knowledge which we will attain as a result of this project.” (Text)
usaf launched a Titan I ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., as one of a series of tests to determine compatibility of the missile with various payloads, (ap, NYT, 3/6/65, 9; M&R, 3/15/65,11)
U.S. Army modified Redstone missile was successfully test-fired from wtr as part of Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Project Defender. Some 24 Army-stockpiled Redstones had been ordered by arpa for use in reentry measurements. This seven-year-old Redstone, among the first Redstones reactivated last June for Project Defender, was the first Redstone to be launched since November 1963. (SBD, 1/13/66. 72: M&R, 12/13/65, 17)	'	'	' During November: Wendover Air Force Auxiliary Field, Utah, an empty facility in “caretaker” status, was reported to be leading candidate for site of the first American inland landing station for spacecraft. A study made by a dod committee had described Wendover as “the only site known to satisfy the recovery requirements of polar orbiting vehicles.” (NYT, 11/28/65, 50)
afsc’s 6595th Aerospace Test Wing assumed responsibility for Atlas launches into the Air Force Western Test Range in support of the Army Nike antimissile program and the usaf Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems ( Abres) program. ( afsc Release 46.65)
General Dynamics/Convair was being awarded a $2,198,000 firm fixedprice contract by U.S. Army for designing, furnishing, and installing an operational tv system for Launch Complex 39 at Kennedy Space Center, nasa. (dod Release 664^-65)
Statistics on intercontinental ballistic missiles were given by Robert R. Brunn in an article in the Christian Science Monitor: “In the Soviet Union 270 to 300 intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms) are in place. Underground and overseas the United States has more than 1,300. “Within five years the Soviets may have emplaced 500 to 600 of these great birds with nuclear warheads. But by then the American missile arsenal may have the destructive power of 3,000 1965-type A multiple warhead for the Minuteman had been developed, Brunn said, which could triple the effectiveness of this missile: “Approaching enemy territory, it could separate into three warheads, each with its own guidance system. It would be steered to the target and report if it was going to miss or hit.” (Brunn, CSM, 7/2/65, 9)
AEC’s 970-lb. snapshot spacecraft carrying Snap-10A nuclear reactor was successfully launched from Vandenberg AFB by an Atlas-Agena booster into nearly circular polar orbit; 820-mi. (1,320 km. I apogee; 788-mi. (1,269 km.) perigee; 112 min. period; 90.17° inclination. Four hours after injection into orbit, radio command from earth activated the 250-lb, nuclear reactor by moving internal shielding that had kept the emission of electrons from the uranium-235 fuel element from reaching the chain reaction stage. The reactor would provide electric power for a 2,2-lb. ion engine. This was the first attempt to test a reactor-ion system in orbit. Twelve hours after launch, radio signals from the Agena vehicle carrying the reactor indicated it was producing 620-668 watts of electricity—some 20r/< over its designed power. Electricity generated by the reactor would be stored in a 480-lb. bank of batteries and released as the ion engine was put through start-stop tests during a three-month period. The engine would manufacture its own power by electrically vaporizing the 3Yz oz. of the metal cesium in its fuel tank into atomic particles and expelling them at high speed through a nozzle to provide thrust of two-thousandths of a pound. aec said the satellite would stay aloft more than 3,000 yrs.—far beyond the 100 yrs. it would take for the reactor’s radioactive elements to decay to a safe level. The reactor would be shut down after a year, the ion engine after about three months. If successful, the test would signal the first operation in space of a light, compact, propulsion system that would produce power over long periods on small amounts of fuel for (1) surveillance and patrol satellites functioning in orbit for years, and (2) manned spaceships capable of speeds of 100,000 mph on trips to distant planets now beyond the reach of conventionally-fuelled rockets. Also orbited was U.S. Army secor iv geodetic satellite. (Hill, NYT, 4/5/65; ap, Wash. Post, 4/4/65; upi, Chic. Trib., 4/5/65; aec Release H-60; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 139; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 151)
Saturn IB booster stage (s-Ib) was successfully static-fired for 145 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—its second captive firing. In early August, the 1.6-million-lb.-thrust, 80-ft.-long stage would be taken by barge to New Orleans and transported from there to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, for launching, (msfc Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 7/28/65, 1)
Thor-Agena D launched from Vandenberg AFB orbited eight military satellites, the most in any single launch to date. Two satellites would measure solar radiation (greb vi and solrad) ; two would test stabilization methods for future spacecraft (ggse ii and ggse ill); one would be used in geodesy (secor in); two would help calibrate satellite tracking networks (surcal satellites) ; and one would transmit radio broadcasts for ham operators (oscar ill). OSCAR hi would transmit signals from 25 amateur radio channels over a 4,000-mi. radius and w^as being tracked by ham radio operators at Foothill Jr. College, Calif. Amateur tracking stations in 30 foreign countries were informally participating in the project. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 135-36; gsfc SSR, 4/15/65; Clark, NYT, 5/19/65; Wash. Post, 5/20/65, A12; ap, Omaha Eve. World-Herald, 3/10/65)
An editorial discussing space weapons appeared in the Washington Evening Star: “Secretary of State Rusk ... is on record as having warned that the ocean of space might support ‘huge nuclear-propel led dread-naughts armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy’ and there might be other equally' deadly spatial advances. The same opinion is held by highly placed military officers. “As General Ferguson of the Air Force put it a couple of years ago, in urging the swiftest possible development of an American ‘military patrol’ in space, no one even dimly foresaw the nuclear bomber when the airplane began to operate a half-century ago. “. . . if we ignore General Ferguson, we could lose everything. As a matter of prudence, our country should at least maintain a program of research and development designed to insure it against the danger of becoming second best in the military uses of space.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/5/65)
In answer to the query “Is a permanent role waiting in space for military astronauts,” Robert Brunn in the Christian Science Monitor quoted an Air Force official as saying: “No strategy is known for space as yet. We can’t use space the way the cowboys and Indians used high ground for advantage, nor the way the Air Force in World War II climbed to altitude and dove out of the sun. “Something with military importance may turn up in the next five years. The Air Force doesn’t know what the usefulness of space will be. . . .” (Brunn, CSM, 10/13/65, 14)
Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, speaking to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on “Exploring the Planets,” < :J: “Scientists interested in the solar system point out that all of the planets of the solar system present interesting challenges to the explorers. A study group at Woods Hole in Massachusetts this summer has set priorities on the exploration of the planets in the order of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter. We hope to make exploratory flights to all of these planets.” (Text)
First flight model of the s-ivb, Saturn IB second stage and Saturn V third stage, was formally presented to NASA by California Governor Edmund Brown in ceremonies at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center. A hydrogen-fueled vehicle powered by a 200,000-lb.-thrust Rocketdyne engine, the 58-ft.-long 211/2-ft.-dia. s-ivb would be shipped to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, aboard the Steel Executive. The stage had successfully undergone a 2V> min., full-power, preflight test-firing August 8. (msfc Release 65-215)
France’s first satellite, FR-1, arrived from Paris at Dulles International Airport and was taken to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for testing. The satellite, to be launched for France by NASA in a joint project to study very low frequency radio waves and the distribution of ionization in the earth’s magnetosphere, would be sent to Ling-Temco-Vought, Texas, where it would be modified to fit a Scout-type rocket. Launching was scheduled for late 1965. Memorandum of understanding for the FR-1 program was signed Feb. 18, 1963, between nasa and the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (nasa Release 65-59; Wash. Post, 9/16/65)
A sounding rocket for study of ultraviolet radiation was fired from Salto di Quirra afb in Sardinia, the Italian Defense Ministry announced. The rocket was one of 400 to be fired by the Italian Air Force in collaboration with the European Space Research Organization (esro). (ap, Wash. Post, 8/11/65, 15)
Policy shift reflected in Administration approval of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory was discussed by Howard Simons in the Washington Post: “Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy virtually ignored Air Force arguments that it had a manned role in space. “. . . President [Johnson] has not committed the Nation to a longterm Air Force manned space flight effort. But what he has done is to protect himself politically against potential political repercussions should the Russians send a six- to eight-man orbiting space station aloft, as they now appear to have the wherewithal to do. . . . “Meanwhile the Administration is very wary about destroying the image of a peaceful American manned space flight program, which it has so carefully and lovingly constructed.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 8/26/65)
Dr. Donald Hornig, President Johnson’s science adviser, told the Associated Press in Washington, D.C., that the Government planned to proceed with Project Mohole despite mounting costs. The project called for sinking a metal drill six miles through Pacific Ocean and floor about 100 mi. northeast of Maui in the Hawaiian Islands.	(Wash. Post, 9/28/65, A5)
National Park Service delivered to NASA a comprehensive report outlining ways to make Kennedy Space Center a major tourist attraction. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/2/65)
Spokesmen for some 43,000 United Aerospace Workers Union members employed by North American Aviation, Inc., announced plans for possible strike action Oct. 10 unless negotiators reached agreement on a new wages and hours contract. UAW members involved worked in plants in Los Angeles, Calif.; Tulsa, Okla.; Columbus, Ohio; and Neosho, Mo. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/16/65)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
Arthur E. Jenks, retired FAA official, received the Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award for 1965 at a luncheon in Washington, D.C., given by the Society of Automotive Engineers in conjunction with its annual meeting. The award, sponsored by the Flight Safety Foundation, was presented to Jenks because of his “contributions to improving the techniques for flight checking the accuracy of air navigational aids and improvement of landing aids on and around airports.” (faa Release 65-30)
F-l rocket engine completed its 1,000th test firing at nasa MSFc’s Rocket Engine Test Site where it operated at its full thrust of 1,500,000 lbs. for 165.6 sec. Test was conducted by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. In a cluster of five, F-l would provide 7,500,000 lbs. thrust in the s—ic first stage of the Saturn V booster that would launch Apollo lunar missions, (msfc Release 65—154; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
American Newspaper Publishers Association asked the fcc to permit wide use of communications satellites by newspapers and wire services. In a brief filed with the Commission the publishers’ group said: “Specifically, we propose that a basic policy determination be made at this time, assuring access by the press to Comsat facilities for news media determination.” (NYT, 10/31/65, 22)
m/g 0. J. Ritland (usaf), retiring Nov. 30, was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal by NASA Administrator James E. Webb. General Ritland who, as Deputy Commander for Space of the Air Force Systems Command, had been closely associated since 1962 with NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, was cited for his contributions to the Mercury and Gemini manned space flight programs, (nasa Release 65-369)
Russian communications satellite MOLNIYA i, because of its higher and sharply elongated orbit, could transmit continuously several hours longer than American Telstars, reported Tass. Tass claimed that Tel-stars could transmit uninterruptedly for only 30 min. (Reuters, NYT, 5/7/65, 3)
Second stage (s-iv) for the tenth and last Saturn I launch vehicle was delivered to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, aboard “Pregnant Guppy” aircraft. The stage was flown from Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento1, Calif., facility, (msfc Release 65-135)
North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracked a new Russian satellite (cosmos lii) for several hours before Moscow announced the launching. As of this date, norad’s space detection and tracking system was observing 488 man-made objects in space, of which 29 were actual payload satellites and the rest debris from previous launchings, (ap, Balt. Sun, 1/12/65)
Resignation of Eugene M. Zuckert as Secretary of the Air Force, effective Sept. 30, was announced by President Johnson. To succeed Zuckert, who had served since Jan. 23, 1961—longer than any previous Air Force secretary—the President named Dr. Harold Brown, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering since May 3, 1961. No replacement was named for Dr. Brown. President Johnson also accepted the resignation of Dr. Brockway McMillan as Undersecretary of the Air Force, also effective Sept. 30. (White House Release; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/65, 12)
Survey issued by the North American Air Defense Command revealed 879 objects orbiting in space: American, 672 (164 payloads, 508 pieces of debris); Soviet, 198 (53 payloads, 145 pieces of debris); Canadian, 4(2 payloads, 2 debris); British, 3 (2 payloads, 1 debris); French, 2 (1 payload, 1 debris). Except for the payload and debris from France’s recent launching, all the objects in space were launched on American or Soviet rockets. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/65, All)
A 28-day-old wage strike by 60 guards at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center ended with agreement on a two-year contract by the United Plant Guard Workers of America and Wackenhut Services, Inc., which employed the gsfc guards. (Wash. Post, 7/29/65, A18)
South African Prime Minister Hendrik F. Verwoerd said his government would not admit American Negroes if they were assigned to work in satellite tracking stations operating in South Africa. The Johannesburg Sunday Times commented: “The United States will have to decide whether it can afford morally to overlook Dr. Verwoerd’s remarks.” (Lelyveld, NYT, 6/27/65)
President Lyndon B. Johnson was inaugurated. In his Inaugural Address, he said: “For every generation, there is a destiny. For some, history decides. For this generation, the choice must be our own. “Even now, a rocket moves toward Mars. It reminds us that the world will not be the same for our children, or even for ourselves in a short span of years. The next man to stand here will look out on a scene different from our own. “Ours is a time of change—rapid and fantastic change—baring the secrets of nature—multiplying the nations—placing in uncertain hands new weapons for mastery and destruction—shaking old values and uprooting old ways. . . . “Change has brought new meaning to that old mission. We can never again stand aside, prideful in isolation. Dangers and troubles we once called ‘foreign’ now live among us. If American lives must end, and American treasure be spilled, in countries we barely know, that is the price that change has demanded of conviction. “Think of our world as it looks from that rocket heading toward Mars. “It is like a child’s globe, hanging in space, the continents stuck to its side like colored maps. We are all fellow passengers on a dot of earth. And each of us, in the span of time, has only a moment among his companions. “How incredible it is that in this fragile existence we should hate and destroy one another. There are possibilities enough for all who will abandon mastery over others to pursue mastery over nature. There is world enough for all to seek their happiness in their own way. “Our own course is clear. We aspire to nothing that belongs to others. We seek no dominion over our fellow man, but man’s dominion over tyranny and misery. . . .” (Text)
usaf scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold told the Aviation and Space Writers Meeting in Washington, D.C., that the possibility that frozen oceans beneath the surface of Mars may support life cannot be ignored. Men may even find enough moisture there to provide them water and oxygen for an expedition, “and thus a critical problem of extraterrestrial resources would no longer exist,” he said. The idea that an underground water table exists on the otherwise arid planet was only a hypothesis with no evidence at present; but a combination of older theories by other scientists plus “common horse sense” led him to speculate the water was there, Dr. Strughold said. (Text)
In testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on “the status, management, and prospects of the aeronautical and space program,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “The progress during this period in the space program has been made possible by the cooperative efforts of many organizations and people. Ninety-four per cent of our work during Fiscal Year 1964 was conducted by American industry and involved a total of about 380,000 people in industry, universities, research institutes, and government installations. Almost 250,000 separate procurement transactions were initiated during this time. “. . . the past year saw the continued strengthening of the coordination and the mutual support between NASA and the dod in space and aeronautics. The Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board has continued to be an effective medium for formal coordination. During 1964 NASA and the DOD developed procedures for the coordination of the space science programs; a national program in satellite geodesy was established by the dod, NASA, and the Department of Commerce: a standardized basis for reporting space and aeronautical sciences research and technology information has been adopted; a joint NASA-DOD study was conducted to determine the launch vehicles needed to meet projected requirements during the next decade; a joint study was conducted of the current and planned lifting reentry vehicle research and development programs; the needs of NASA, the Air Force, and the Federal Aviation Agency were incorporated into an expanded flight research program utilizing the xb-70 aircraft to confirm theoretical and wind tunnel data on supersonic flight vehicles. “All of this, Mr. Chairman, of course, is under an umbrella of policy followed closely by the [National Aeronautics and] Space Council. ...”	' Commenting on the Soviet space program, Webb said: “Our rapid rate of advance and the success we have achieved already has, we believe, denied the USSR many of the benefits and many of the options which the Soviets expected their space program to provide as a part of their forward thrust toward world domination. However, there is every evidence, on the basis of their activity during the past three years, that the Russians intend to maintain a vigorous effort in space, and, in fact, that their activities may be further increased. During 1963 and 1964 more Soviet spacecraft were put in earth orbit or deep space than in the six previous years combined. The number placed in orbit last year was double that of the year before. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 13-50)
William F. R. Ballard, chairman of the New York City Planning Commission, had proposed in a letter to Robert C. Weaver, administrator of the Federal Housing and Home Financing Agency, that a major study be made of land use problems around New York metropolitan airports. Ballard sought Federal aid for the proposed study, which called for an inquiry into methods for reducing disturbances to home owners rising from the noise of aircraft, under the Housing and Urban Redevelopment Act. (NYT, 10/30/65, 14)
The first J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine built to flight configuration was delivered to Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, for installation and testing in the Saturn S-IVB battleship stage. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine had been recently accepted by NASA from Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation, Inc. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1, 6)
Pan American Airways announced it would purchase four additional Boeing 727 jet aircraft, bringing its Boeing purchase program total to 19. {WSJ, 5/7/65,3)
Snap 10-A, first nuclear reactor to operate in space, was probably shut down prematurely May 16, 1965, because of a spurious command from a decoding device triggered by a voltage regulator failure, AEC reported. Launched April 3 from Vandenberg afb, with an Atlas-Agena booster, Snap 10-A achieved an 806-mi. circular orbit and produced over 500,000 watt-hrs. of electricity before it shut down May 16. It would orbit for more than 4,000 yrs. (aec Release H-247) November 9: usaf fired Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, to target area in the Eniwetok Lagoon, about 4,500 mi. across the Pacific. (ap, nyt, 11/10/65, 6)
Ives, Whitehead & Co., Inc., a Washington, D.C., management and trade consultant company, proposed that the Nation’s program to develop a supersonic airliner be financed by a special Government corporation similar to ComSatCorp. The plan would eliminate the necessity of asking Congress to appropriate the minimum $1 billion needed for development of the aircraft. The proposed company would be known as the sst Development Corp. and would be authorized to raise capital funds through private investment channels, by issuing and selling bonds or notes or both. The corporation would then enter into contracts with airframe and engine manufacturers whose designs had been selected by faa. The corporation’s obligations would be repaid by a predetermined percentage of the profits earned by industry by selling the planes to private airlines and by royalty payments added to the sale price of the plane by the airlines, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 42)
Weapons and Ammunition Div. of the Italian Air Force had formed a Missiles and Space Research Center at an airport outside Rome, Missiles and Rockets reported. Its establishment marked the separation of Air Force missiles and space R&D from that of the Italian National Committee on Space Research, headed by Prof. Luigi Broglio. (M&R, 7/19/65,9)	_
USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Chic. Trib., 11/9/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act, 1965, 154)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center announced it had selected four companies for feasibility studies for experiments in applications satellite technology. Contracts awarded were: Control Data Corp., $45,000 to examine a technique for determining a satellite’s orbit by using only spacecraft observation; Philco Corp., $50,000 to study a device capable of determining attitude of a spin-stabilized spacecraft from star measurements; Bell Aerospace Corp., $47,000 to study an electrostatic accelerometer which could provide information about the relative motion of a gravity gradient stabilized spacecraft; and Electro Optical Systems, Inc., $37,000 to study measuring of degradation of optical characteristics of materials in space. Studies should be completed in eight weeks, (csfc Release G-20-65)
Eight NASA astronauts began geology field training in Hawaii, where they visited lava fields of Mauna Loa and Kilauea, active volcanoes, as well as upper elevations of dormant Mauna Kea. Geologists believed that these shield volcanoes contained features similar to those of the lunar surface. Study emphasis was on mechanics of lava flow, fissure eruption, deep lava lakes; examples of hot and cold basaltic flows; physical composition of lava rock; and topographic forms of shield volcanoes. Underfoot textures theorized as being typical of lunar terrain ranged from the glassy form of “pahoehoe” lava, through the crusty snow effect of “aa” lava, to the sinking feeling of loose cinders and pumice. The study was conducted by Dr. Ted Foss, head of the Geology and Geochemistry Section at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts were Charles Conrad, Jr., Clifton C. Williams, David R. Scott, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Alan L. Bean, Donn F. Eisele, Roger Chaffee, and Richard Gordon, (upi, Houston Chron., 1/11/65; Bryan, Houston Post, 1/14/65)
Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Director of Advanced Studies of General Dynamics Corp., in a series of talks at Evanston College, predicted several “realistic possibilities” for the 1980’s and 1990’s: (1) a manned space station to handle the world’s communications needs, including global telephone calls complete with televised views of the speakers; (2) space vehicles to keep man informed of all weather developments, detect forest fires, and inform firefighters; (3) orbiting manned information centers to supply doctors and other scientists with data an any subject regardless of how distant they were from the source of material on earth; (4) orbiting hospitals or lunar hospitals to relieve persons suffering from certain ailments by providing gravityless or very low gravity conditions. (Chic. Trib., 10/10/65) During October: Dr. Walter Dornberger, Vice President for Research of Bell Aerosystems Co., former chief of German v—2 missile program, and father of the Dyna-Soar concept, was interviewed on the eve of his retirement from Bell by Claude Witze in Air Force and Space Digest. Witze said:“. . . [Although Dornberger is] the outstanding pioneer in the development of ballistic rockets, he feels strongly that we have erred in relying on this single vehicle, with its inherent limitations.” He quoted Dr. Dornberger:
Former German missile experts who helped foster American rocketry after World War II met at NASA msfc to celebrate their 20th year in the U.S. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, attended, (upi, Cocoa Trib., 11/4/65; Marshall Star, 11/10/65)
afsc announced award of five letter contracts totaling $3.8 million for conceptual phase of Mark II Avionics Svstem being considered for use on f-111a aircraft. General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft Co., Sperry Gyroscope Co., Westinghouse Electric Corp., and Autonetics Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., would perform analyses leading to system design recommendations integrating many subsystems. (afsc Release 30—65)
NASA had compromised the scientific value of the interplanetary research program by spending too little on the Deep Space Net communications system, according to Frank Drake, prof, at Cornell Univ., in Saturday Review article. Drake noted that mariner IV would only be able to relay 22 photos of Mars back to earth and that these would be of lesser quality—all because of communications limitations: “. . . one concludes that the space program could well use an array containing a hundred or more 85-ft. antennas. One array might cost $40,000,000, still only a few per cent of what will almost certainly be spent on planetary exploration in the next ten years.” (SR, 1/2/65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center hosted group of 61 Navy, Air Force, and civilian personnel from Navy Field Office for Manned Orbiting Laboratory at Los Angeles. The group received briefings on Apollo and Saturn programs and saw facilities at Marshall. They had previously visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were scheduled to tour NASA Kennedy Space Center, (msfc Release 65-52)
Brazil successfully launched the first Nike-Apache sounding rocket from its Natal Range in a joint program with NASA to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere with emphasis on the effects of cosmic rays. Launching was conducted by the Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae). Instrumentation for the rocket payload and the telemetry ground support equipment was constructed by Brazilian technicians at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 6580; nasa Release 65-328)
A new computer technique had been designed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to make repeated rapid checks of effects of a man-made radiation belt of high-energy “Starfish” electrons formed from a U.S. hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific Ocean in 1962, and subsequent tests conducted for Project Fish Bowl, a high-altitude weapon test. Starfish electrons were estimated to have a possible life of up to 20 yrs., during which time electrons in the belt would slowly decay to the energy level of ordinary electrons. E. G. Stassinopoulos, designer of the program, warned that increased solar activity in years ahead would greatly affect the lifetimes of the Starfish electrons, making the computer relatively useless after 1966. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 7/18/ 65, 27)
Dr. Roman Smoluchowski of Princeton Univ. said at the American Physical Society’s meeting in Washington, D.C., that there was no life on Mars. All seasonal changes in the color of the planet could be traced to bombardment of minerals with energetic radiation under varying temperatures. Dr. Jane Blizard of Boulder, Colo., also speaking at the APS meeting, suggested that any astronaut braving a 400-day journey to Mars would be likely to get a fatal dose of radiation. Maybe, she said, long range forecasting of solar storms can be perfected in time. Or maybe “superconductive magnetic doughnuts” could be devised to shield spacecraft from barrages of protons spewed out in solar storms. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/65)
usaf successfully launched its first Minuteman ICBM of 1965 from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. The missile was sent on a 5,000-mi. course toward a target in the Pacific, (upi, L.A. Herald Examiner, 1/21/65) January 21:	mariner IV completed nearly one-quarter of its 7%-mo. journey to Mars and was more than 10 million mi. from earth. The craft was traveling 10,680 mph relative to the earth; velocity relative to the sun was 68,255 mph; total distance traveled was over 93 million mi. After 54 days in space, all systems were functioning normally except the solar plasma probe which ceased returning intelligible data one week after launch, (nasa Release 65-17)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut and first American to orbit the earth, retired from the Marine Corps after 22 yrs. in the service. Glenn said he would spend much of his time as a consultant to nasa. He would also be a director of Royal Crown Cola Co. ( dod Release 912-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/4/65; Wash. Post, 1/5/65; Balt. Sun, 1/5/65; Chic. Trib., 1/5/65)
Robert J. Schwinghamer, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received American Society of Tool and Manufacturing Engineers’ Research Medal. Schwinghamer was cited for his research “leading to a better understanding of materials, facilities, principles, and operations, and their application to better manufacturing.” ( msfc Release 65—58; Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 6)
Civil Aeronautics Board (cab) authorized Pan American Airways and Trans World Airlines to subsidize New York Airways’ helicopter service temporarily, cab also announced that two stockholders in New York Airways, Robert G. Goelet and John Hay Whitney, had lent a total of $165,000 to the company, (ap, NYT, 6/26/65, 42)
Paraglider, in its first successful manned free flight, demonstrated it could guide a spacecraft to preselected landing site. Test pilot Donald F.	McCusker landed a Gemini-type test craft at Edwards afb, following a four-and-one-half-minute flight suspended beneath the wing. He put the previously-inflated paraglider and simulated spacecraft through a series of turn and pitch maneuvers enroute to his landing, after being towed aloft by helicopter and dropped at approximate 8,000-ft. altitude. In actual spacecraft recovery, the paraglider would be stored in a ten-cubic-foot canister onboard the spacecraft. After reentry when the vehicle would be slowed by the earth’s atmosphere and parachute drogue, the paraglider would be deployed to its full size—31 ft. long with a 31-ft. span—using an onboard nitrogen supply. The astronaut would control his glide through an onboard flight-control system. North American Aviation, Inc., was conducting the paraglider program for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, studying the feasibility of a controlled earth landing system, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 9/3/65, 1)
Jerome Lederer, director of the Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at the Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. He was cited for “35 years of distinguished service and unceasing devotion to increasing the safety of flight throughout the world . . .” (naa News; ap, L.A. Times, 11/27/65)
In an address to employees at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. Wernher von Braun expressed his appreciation for their efforts in the highly successful Saturn I program: “What you have done reflects the ability of our nation to move forward quickly. The Saturn I proved that we were correct in our heavy duty launch vehicle theories. One of the most important products of our Saturn I program is that we have built up confidence—both self confidence and the trust of the American people who are depending upon us for American progress in space exploration.” (Text)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was one of four persons named honorary chairmen of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program at Clark Univ. The other three were Mrs. Robert H. Goddard; Dr. Charles G. Abbot, former fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; and Mr. John Jeppson, executive vice president of the Norton Co. and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Clark Univ. Mr. J. L. Atwood, president of North American Aviation, was named general chairman of the Library program. (Goddard, 7/65)
AEC report said that nuclear fuel aboard a spacecraft which failed to go into orbit last April 21 had burned up harmlessly at high altitude. This was a reply to Russian and other critics who had accused the U.S. of causing radiation hazards by putting atomic generators aboard spacecraft. The generator involved was a Snap-9A aboard a Navy navigation satellite launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/8/65)
Incorporation of a severely swept delta wing on X-15 No. 3 had been proposed by NASA Flight Research Center for hypersonic (mach 5+) flight tests beginning in late 1968, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Decision on the proposal, under study at NASA Hq., was not expected for six months, x-15 program is a joint usaf-nasa venture, with the three aircraft belonging to the Air Force and NASA operating the research flights program. {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 22)
usaf launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb in test of the Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, (upi, NYT, 7/2/65)
Results o{ a recent Gallup Poll indicated that 47% of the American public believed that the United States was ahead of Russia in the “space race.” A 1961 poll had shown that most Americans viewed the space race as an even contest. Asked if they, themselves, would like to go to the moon, 87% of the people approached said no. (Wash. Post, 7/23/65, A2)
Univ. of Miami, Coral Gables, Fla., bestowed an honorary dectorate upon NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Mr. Webb said in a speech there: “. . . space science and technology are not remote and esoteric pursuits but rather are deeply woven into the fabric of our society. The space scientist does not practice a new art. He is an astronomer, a physicist, a chemist, a geologist, rooted in our university system of vigorous effort to expand our knowledge of the universe in which we live. The space technologist is an engineer of materials, structures, fuels, power sources, electronics, rooted in our industrial and government laboratory systems. Both, however, are directing their interests and talents to the newest and most exciting frontiers—where the most rapid progress is made and the breakthroughs scored. The knowledge they gain feeds back into our scientific and technical communities and into our industrial laboratories. . . . Thus, the talents, the skills, and the funds for space exploration are all drawn broadly from our society and continue to feed back into it, in the forefront of scientific and technical progress—the unique hallmark of the American way.” (Text)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/10/65)
A $2.3-million test facility expected to improve space storability of liquid and solid rocket propulsion systems would be completed at the Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards afb, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/26/65, 10)
Dr. Charles C. Price, president of the American Chemical Society, told the annual meeting of the Society in Atlantic City that the synthesis of life should be made a national goal: “We have been making fantastic strides in uncovering the basic chemistry of the life process and the structure of many of the key components of living systems. “. . . The political, social, biological and economic consequences of such a breakthrough would dwarf those of either atomic energy or the space program. Success could lead to modified plants and algae for synthesis of foods, fibers, and antibiotics, to improved growth or properties of plants and animals, or even to improved characteristics for man himself. . . .” (Text)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told members of the Overseas Writers Club in Washington, D.C., that Communist China could produce hydrogen bombs by a comparatively simple process and could possibly develop a nuclear delivery system in five years. Dr. Urey said Communist China had surprised world scientists, including himself, when it produced a nuclear bomb last fall with uranium 235— one of the technically most difficult ways to produce the nuclear bomb. (ap, NYT, 4/30/65, 3)
nasa Flight Research Center had received a flying laboratory that would be used to provide airborne simulation of advanced aircraft with particular emphasis on the proposed supersonic transport. Called the General Purpose Airborne Simulator (Gpas), the new system was a Lockheed JetStar capable of speeds greater than 550 mph and altitudes up to 40,000 ft. that had been modified by the Cornell Aeronautical Lab. under $1.3-million contract with NASA. It would enable NASA engineers and pilots to evaluate specific future aircraft designs in a wide variety of actual flight conditions, (frc Release 24-65)
President Johnson watched the GEMINI V launching on color television for seven minutes at the White House in a direct broadcast from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (ap, NYT, 8/22/65, 72)
At the aiaa Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Honors Convocation in New York, awards were made to men who had made valuable contributions to development of the aerospace industry: Dr. Eugene N. Parker, associate professor at the Enrico Fermi Institute of Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago, received the Space Science Award “for distinguished individual research on the causes and properties of the solar wind.” Arthur E. Raymond, responsible for the design of the Douglas DC series of commercial transports received the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award. He was honored for “numerous and distinguished contributions to the aeronautical sciences and the development of aircraft during the last 30 years.” Igor I. Sikorsky and Michael Gliihareff were given the 1964' Elmer A. Sperry Award. Mr. Sikorsky was cited as a helicopter pioneer for “the concept and development of a new form of aerial transportation capable of carrying and placing large external loads over any terrain.” Mr. Cluhareff was honored for his engineering contributions in the development of the multipurpose helicopter. Dr. Wallace D. Hayes, professor of aerospace engineering at Princeton University, received aiaa’s fourth annual Research Award for his leading role in the development of supersonic and hypersonic flow theory. Sir Frank Whittle, British engineer, was named first recipient of the Goddard Award for his “imagination, skill, persistence, and courage in pioneering the gas turbine as a jet propulsion aircraft engine, thus revolutionizing military and commercial aviation for all time.” Harry F. Guggenheim, who had supported aerospace endeavors, received a special commendation for his “contributions, encouragement, and personal participation in the development of aviation and rocketry.” (NYT, 1/21/65, 53M; NYT, 1/27/65, 58; NYT, 1/9/65, 50; Av. Wk., 1/25/65; Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 13; Langley Researcher 1/29/65)
Describing the size, capacity, and productivity of the c-5a aircraft, recently approved and funded by DOD and ordered by the Air Force from Lockheed Aircraft Co., Ira C. Eaker said in the San Diego Express: “A fleet of 130 c—54 aircraft, the best then available, were required for the Berlin airlift. Five c—5as could have done that job more efficiently and with a saving of 5,000 crew and support personnel.” (Eaker, San Diego Express, 10/26/65, 29)
Tribute to Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D—Nev.) was read on the floor of the Senate: “It is no surprise that Eugene Zuckert served in the office of the Secretary for longer than any other man. His leadership spans nearly 20 years, dating almost from the time that the Air Force became an independent service while Mr. Zuckert served as special assistant to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air. He served for a time on the Atomic Energy Commission and brought a high degree of competence and ability to this important operation. “After more than 4V2 years as Secretary, Eugene Zuckert has established an enviable record, and I suggest that his devotion to the service and his unique skills will make his absence from Government of very short duration. No man who has done what he has for the Air Force in the critical years when that service entered the space age can be forgotten or easily replaced.” {CR, 9/29/65, 24571)
MARINER IV set a distance record for communications from American spacecraft. The Mars probe transmitted data from 54 million miles out, exceeding the record of 53.9 million miles set by mariner ii in 1963. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 4/14/65; nasa Releases 65-111, 65-117)
Washington Post editorial comment on President Johnson’s assignment of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project to the Air Force: “. . . Anxiety arises out of the Air Force commitment to total secrecy in its space operations. . . . [nasa] has pursued a brilliantly successful open public information policy. It has made every American a participant in its exciting conquest of space, aroused the national interest in the whole world of science, stirred the youth of the country to enthusiasm and stimulated national pride. The Vandenberg Air Force Base which will become a major site for MOL launching has operated under a veil of secrecy. . . . “The Pentagon has not yet devised a policy for informing the public on the man-in-space MOL project. If it continues the Vandenberg policies of the past, the country is going to know very little about MOL. Such secrecy is bound to arouse international suspicions and alarms, particularly since the flights will be over Soviet territory. Either this is primarily a project in the peaceful penetration of space that requires little secrecy; or it is a secret military project that cannot be reconciled with our previous professions.” (Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A23)
Rains forced Princeton Univ. scientists to postpone launching from Palestine, Tex., of a Stratoscope II balloon and its telescope designed to photograph Saturn and its rings. No new launch date had been set. (Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council staff discussed future manned aerospace flight before the American Astronautical Society meeting in Chicago: “A great deal of lifting-body research is being performed by NASA and the usaf. In the not too distant future we will enter into the truly second generation manned spacecraft era by relying more on a higher l/d (lift-drag ratio) such as a hypersonic l/d of about 1.3. . . . The lifting body second generation manned spacecraft gives operational versatility for reentry from a number of orbit planes and gives a recovery capability at a number of landing sites within the United States. This versatility also increases the margin of safety for the astronauts. . . .” (Text)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb using a single Atlas-Agena D booster, (upi, Chic. Trib., 6/26/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 146)
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)
Dr. P. H. Fang, a researcher at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, had discovered that silicon solar cells damaged by electron radiation could be completely recovered any number of times when exposed to high temperatures. Report was given at a Photovoltaic Specialists Conference at gsfc Oct. 18-20. (gsfc Release G-28-65)
NASA’s actions in releasing foreign satellite information were criticized in a report by the House Committee on Government Operations, based on study by its Foreign Operations and Government Information Subcommittee. Committee stated NASA had deleted from its biweekly Satellite Situation Report certain Soviet launches because they were designated as secret information by Norad. “nasa has not once challenged these security classifications, blindly accepting the military decision. . . .” Compounding the problem, NASA had “publicized the facts about Soviet failures [Sept. 15, 1962, letter from Administrator Webb to Senate and House space committees] after those facts had been carefully deleted from its routine report of satellite information. “. . . NASA has ignored two clear requirements of law—the requirement for civilian control over nonmilitary space activities and the requirement for the fullest possible flow of public information. By yielding, automatically, to the military judgment on what the American people shall know about Soviet space activities, NASA fails to implement its legal mandate. By playing an on-again, off-again secrecy game, NASA tends to confuse the American public. . . . “Therefore, the committee recommends that, in every possible instance consistent with the dictates of national security, NASA exercise its right to challenge military-imposed restrictions by requiring justification and, thus, carry out the mandate to keep the American people informed. . . .” (House Rpt. 197)
NASA consolidated its unmanned launch activities at both the Eastern and Western Test Ranges under Kennedy Space Center, nasa. At Cape Kennedy, the Launch Operations Div., GSFC, would become an integral element of KSC; at Western Test Range, Goddard personnel permanently assigned there and NASA Pacific Launch Operations Office which logistically supported them would also be placed under KSC. Robert Gray would be Assistant Director for Unmanned Launch Operations. Checkout and launch of all NASA launch vehicles, except the solid propellant Scout rockets developed and launched by LaRC at Wallops Station and Western Test Range, would be supervised by KSC. (NASA Release 65-313)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert named Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) as Director of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program. This assignment was in addition to his duties as Commander, Air Force Systems Command. B/Gen. Harry L. Evans was named Vice Director of the Mol Program and B/Gen. Russell A. Berg was named Deputy Director, (dod Release 560-65)
Prospects for U.S.-European industrial cooperation in space were discussed in Air Force and Space Digest by Elmer P. Wheaton, Vice President of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Wheaton offered four “guiding principles” for any program of U.S.-European industrial effort: “The program to be jointly undertaken should avoid unnecessary duplication of an existing program. . . . “The project or program should contribute to a better understanding of the space environment. . . . “The program must provide a logical extension of our current space technology. . . . “The program must not require such a substantial increase of knowledge in either the space environment or the space technology that it involves a high risk of failure. . . .” Wheaton suggested: scientific areas that could be usefully investigated by Europe; advanced programs for “more distant European ex,-ploration”; and satellites that could be profitably developed by Europe —notably, applications satellites. In such company-to-company cooperation, contribution of the U.S. companies should be chiefly in space systems management. (AF Mag., 7/65, 53-57)
Command Module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard a c—133b aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
The United States . . . has gone into space for many compelling reasons,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the National Association of Retail Druggists meeting in Washington, D.C. “It is . . . imperative that the U.S. be first in space for reasons of national achievement, for the pride that goes with such achievement, and for the international prestige that accompanies both. “We must go into space to reap the benefits of scientific discovery, to stimulate our economic and social progress, to advance our technological advancement, including the civilian application and use of the products of space-oriented research, and to fulfill what has been called the compelling urge to explore and discover. . . .” (Text)
North American Air Defense Command said reported Ufo sightings from six states were probably the planet Jupiter or one of the stars Rigel, Capella, Betelgeuse, or Aldebaran. A usaf weather observer in Norman, Okla., taking issue with the Air Force’s stand, said: ‘‘What we saw was not an aircraft . . . nor was it a planet or star ... It was about 22,000 feet high and pitched at about a 45 degree angle.” He said he and a friend had observed the object, which was “moving quite rapidly,” for a little less than five minutes through a 40-power telescope. (Wash. Post, 8/3/65)
A shipment of American Hawk missiles was unloaded recently at the Israeli port of Haifa. Israel announced, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/19/65)
NASA plan for use of syncom ii in the communications link between the Gemini 3 spacecraft and Cape Kennedy was successfully tested in a GT-3 mission simulation. Telemetry signals and voice messages would come from the spacecraft to a surface ship, the USNS Coastal Sentry, in the Indian Ocean. The Coastal Sentry would transmit the signals to the Syncom surface station, USNS Kingsport, which would then be a few miles away. From there the signals would be transmitted to syncom ii, 22,300 mi. above the Indian Ocean, down to a ground station at Clark afb in the Philippines, and by cable to a Nascom (nasa Communications Network) station near Honolulu. From Honolulu the transmission w ould go by cable to the U.S. and then by landline to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and on down to Cape Kennedy. Simultaneously the signals would be transmitted from the Coastal Sentry via high frequency radio to a Nascom station near Perth, Australia. Cable would carry it to the Nascom station at Honolulu. There, the better reception of the two transmissions would be sent to the Cape. ( nasa Release 65-93)
Dr. Cyril Pomiamperuma, chief of the chemical evolution branch at NASA Ames Research Center, reported to the American Chemical Society meeting in Atlantic City that he had joined together in a laboratory two subunits (nucleotide molecules) of RNA (ribonucleic acid) under conditions simulating earth as it might have been 3 billion yrs. ago. His successful experiments offered further scientific support that life on earth might have evolved chemically. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 9/13/65, A6)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb was asked by Rep. Charles R. Jonas (R-N.C.) in NASA appropriations hearing of the Subcommittee on Independent Offices, House Committee on Appropriations, to “set to rest” the rumor that NASA was planning to phase out msfc in Huntsville, Ala. Mr. Webb explained that during his recent visit to Alabama leading Alabama businessmen had asked “questions about the future and whether the budget was going to be larger, and whether more would come to Alabama. Perhaps injudiciously, I said, ‘Unless we can recruit better and more able people for the new phase of our program, you are not going to keep what you have.’ . . . “We have a real problem in recruiting the kind of people needed to manage these contracts with American industry to go and live in Alabama, and the image of the State has been one of the problems that we have had. I pointed this out to the businessmen, and pointed out to them also that not only the problem of our recruitment was involved, that the State itself, in my opinion, was missing a valuable opportunity to use these kinds of people to build up its own economy, because the very existence of them there in the various areas could be of great benefit to the State. . . .” I Ind. Off. Approp. Hearings [Part 2], 1264-65)
PEGASUS II meteoroid detection satellite, orbited May 25 from Kennedy Space Center, had reported “hits” on panels of all three thicknesses of aluminum target material, NASA reported. 14 penetrations had been recorded on the ,016-in.-thick detection panels; five on the .008-in. panels; and 34 on the .0015-in. panels. In the first month report on pegasus n, Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of NASA Space Vehicle Research and Technology, said that although the number of penetrations varied slightly from earlier predictions, “the figures follow closely our statistical computations based on results from pegasus I and explorers xvi and xxm. Continued successful operation of PEGASUS II will give us a good base for use by spacecraft designers in predicting the frequency and size of meteoroids which constitute a hazard to space flight.” Ames referred to a new capacitor fusing arrangement which would enable project engineers to disconnect a single malfunctioning capacitor while leaving other capacitors in the same group of panels working. If a malfunction serious enough to warrant disconnection of the entire panel group occurred, this could be done by ground command. 36 capacitors on PEGASUS II were working improperly during the first four weeks and had been disconnected by ground command to prevent a drain on the spacecraft’s power supply, (nasa Release 65-219; msfc Release 65-168)
NASA announced two Radio Astronomy Explorer satellites (rae-a and rae-b) would be designed to investigate low-frequency (long wavelength) emissions from our galaxy, its planets, and the stars. These emissions are mostly intercepted by the ionosphere so that little can be learned about them from ground-based receivers. This would be the first attempt to map the galaxy for low-frequency emissions. The 280-lb. spacecraft would be launched by Thrust-Augmented Delta into circular orbits at altitudes of about 3,700 mi. and would measure the intensity of the signals, their frequency, times of emission and, within limitations, define the regions of space in which they originated. Proposed designs called for the development of two 750-ft., V-shaped antennas that would be mounted opposite each other, forming a giant X. They would be anchored to the basic spacecraft, a cylinder of about 40-by-40 in., capped by two truncated cones. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center would design, integrate, and test the two spacecraft. First launch was not expected before 1967. (nasa Release 65-20)
Immediate planning for a fourth jetport for the New York City area was advocated by Harold E. Gray, President of Pan American World Airways, at the ' Annual Aviation Luncheon of the Queens Chamber of Commerce: “Maybe the need is eight years from now. Maybe it is twelve years from now. But it would take ten years, as I understand it—starting today—to develop a fourth airport. So, tomorrow may be too late to make this start. Manana is not soon enough for me!” This was the first time a Pan Am official had stated the airline’s position on the jetport issue. (Hudson, NYT, 6/22/65, 58)
Voice of NASA Administrator James E. Webb was relayed from Washington, D.C., to Tulsa, Okla., via relay ii for the dedication of Tulsa’s Central Library. Mr. Webb spoke briefly before triggering an electronic signal that turned on the lights in the new building, (afp; Tulsa Daily World, 6/10/65)
Gemini 7 fuel cell system that would power the spacecraft during its 14-day mission was successfully turned on and was reportedly “working very well.” Original fuel cell system had suffered possible damage because of a testing error Nov. l5 and had been replaced Nov. 17. Checks of the new unit were delayed by the strike against McDonnell Aircraft Corp. by iam machinists at Kennedy Space Center. (NYT, 11/22/65, 40)
Explanation of rash of Ufo sightings was given by Howard Margolis in the Washington Post: “The latest flurry of saucer reports, according to the Air Force, seems to he based on such things as a conjunction-of the planet Jupiter and some bright stars, compounded by atmospheric conditions that produce an enhanced twinkling effect, further compounded by the annual summer meteorite showers; still further compounded by some other atmospheric effects that tend to produce bogus radar reflection, and finally compounded by the well-marked tendency of any good Ufo sighting reported in the newspapers to lead many more in the same area—in this case the Midwest—for a time thereafter.” (Margolis, Wash.- Post, 8/10/65)
A ground firing of the Saturn s—II battleship stage was conducted for 25 sec. at the Santa Susana test site of North American Aviation, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The firing—longest to date in the s—II program—was one of a series leading to full flight duration runs of nearly 400 sec. Next test, expected within a week, was planned for about two minutes, (msfc Release 65-183)
Vice President (and nasc Chairman) Hubert H. Humphrey, visiting Cape Kennedy for the day, congratulated Astronauts Grissom and Young and commended all participants throughout the world for “this tremendous flight of three orbits. . . this step forward commits us to the next project. Once we have completed the Gemini series, we move on to the Apollo Project and we move on even beyond that. . . . Let me say that the American economy is better because of the space program. American education is better because of the space program. American industry is better because of the space program and Americans are better because of the space program. We are emphasizing here one great character of American life—excellence, performance, achievement. . . . These are efforts well made and money well spent. . . .” (Transcript)
FCC rescinded an earlier order and granted a group of communications companies temporary authority to provide television service from EARLY bird i comsat. The order authorized AT&T, ITT, RCA Communications, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc., to pool their efforts and resources in a consortium which would buy the television service from ComSatCorp and then sell the service to American television networks. In its earlier order, FCC had granted temporary authority to ComSatCorp to provide the television service directly to the television networks. (Weekley, Wash. Post, 7/16/65)
First s-il-s ground test stage in the Saturn s-n program was completed by North American Aviation at Seal Beach. The stage would be used for structural tests simulating critical thrust and pressure loads anticipated during Saturn V/Apollo flight missions. This stage would not be fired—it would have no engine, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/5/65, 1)
Approval by President Johnson of USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory received editorial comment in the New York Times: “The United States Air Force has been demanding orbiting laboratories for years. The reason is essentially defensive. Such space laboratories could have the capacity to intercept and destroy enemy satellites. Their value for surveillance is obvious. As President Johnson said, they will provide ‘new knowledge about what man is able to do in space’ and ‘will enable us to relate that ability to the defense of the nation.’ “The mol’s however, will naturally he capable of offense as well as defense. It was therefore significant that President Johnson should have taken the opportunity to couple his announcement with a new peaceful gesture toward Moscow for cooperation in the space program. . . .”	(NYT, 8/26/65, 30M)
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
Pictures of Mars taken by mariner iv during the July 14 flyby received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “. . . If some people are disappointed because Mariner 4 did not produce any conclusive documentation on the existence of the long-suspected life on Mars, it should be remembered that this was not one of Mariner 4’s objectives. Even the Tiros, circling earth at far less distance from its surface than Mariner 4 was from Mars, has indicated only once in the thousands of pictures taken that the life we know exists here actually can be spotted from far out in space.” (Wash. Post, 7/31/65) During July: The support of science in the U.S. was discussed by Dael Wolfle in the Scientific American: “From 1953 until 1960 about 8 percent of the Nation’s research and development budget was devoted to basic research. The percentage has been rising since 1960, reaching almost 12 percent in 1965. As for the Federal Government’s funds, in 1953, less than 7 percent went for basic research. The figure has been rising since 1960, to about 11 percent in 1965. The universities are relatively much more prominent in basic research than in the total research and development effort, being responsible for almost half of all basic research. In contrast the industrial laboratories, which dominate in development activity, conduct only about a fourth of the basic research.” (CR, 7/14/65, A3760-61)
NASA announced that Gemini v would be launched from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Aug. 21, at 10:00 a.m., edt. Problems which had collectively postponed the launch on August 19, had been resolved: (1) the malfunctioning telemetry programer had been replaced; (2) the underground communications cable had been repaired; (3) the technique for loading the fuel cells with liquid hydrogen had been perfected; (4) security police would take extra precautions to prevent trespassing onto the launch area; and (5) the Gemini 5 computer, which officials feared had been damaged by the lightning-induced power surge, was functioning normally. (Clark, NYT, 8/21/65; Wash. Post., 8/21/65, Al; WSJ, 8/16/65, 1)
Figures compiled by nasa indicated that since Jan. 1, 1964, 75 work stoppages had cost more than 92,000 man days of work, mostly at Kennedy Space Center, Associated Press reported, (ap, NYT, 11/28/ 65, 4)	#
Senate adopted a resolution requesting President Johnson to proclaim Sept. 17 and 18 as special days in honor of the memory of James Smithson, the Englishman who willed all his property for establishment of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. 200th anniversary of his birth would be celebrated this year, (ap, NYT, 6/26/65, 20)
North American Aviation Co.’s xb-70a experimental bomber reached altitude of 59,000 ft. and speed of 1,500 mph on its tenth flight from Edwards afb. Duration of flight was 1 hr. 39 min., of which 1 hr. 14 min. was at supersonic speed, boosting its total supersonic flight time to 5 hrs. 5 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65, A7)
An ionospheric sounding probe launched by nasa on a Nike-Apache vehicle from Wallops Station, Va., reached peak altitude of 116 mi. in an experiment to measure electron density in the E region of the ionosphere. Electron profile data were obtained during both the ascent and descent portions of the flight trajectory and were telemetered to ground receiving stations during the flight. Experiment was conducted for National Bureau of Standards’ Central Radio Propagation Lab. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 65-36)
At the dedication of a new laboratory at Worcester Polytechnic Institute in memory of rocketry pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, afsc Commander General Bernard A. Schriever said that Dr. Goddard’s writings still provided guidance to 1965 rocket men. General Schriever said the nation had made significant strides since Goddard conducted his first successful rocket launch 39 years ago. “His booster and its payload reached an altitude of 41 feet and traveled 184 feet before it impacted after a flight lasting about 21/; seconds. By contrast, the first two-man Gemini orbital space shot scheduled for later this month will reach several hundred miles into space for three orbits. . . . “The Air Force Titan n booster and the Gemini capsule stand almost 110 feet—over twice the altitude achieved by Dr. Goddard’s historic rocket.” Mrs. Esther G. Goddard, Dr. Goddard’s widow, attended the ceremonies, (ap, Balt. Sun, 3/17 '65)
Operational control of U.S. weapons to intercept and destroy armed satellites had been assigned to the Space Defense Center at Colorado Springs, Denver Post reported. The Space Defense Center included the Space Detection and Tracking Systems (Spadats), which recorded the launches of all space vehicles, foreign and domestic, and logged precise orbital data until they decayed in the earth’s atmosphere. (Partner, Denver Post, 4/30/65) During April: More than 100 delegates from Eurospace toured U.S. aerospace installations, including NASA Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, and facilities of U.S. firms corresponding to Eurospace member companies. Purpose of the U.S. European Space Conference was to bring together top industrial leaders from European and American aerospace companies to review problems posed for the industry by evolution of space technology. (M&R, 4/26/65, 9)
Gemini 5 spacecraft was flown by cargo carrier to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, for the seven-day flight scheduled for Aug. 9. (upi, NYT, 6/20/65)
NASA announced completed negotiations with Aerojet-General Corp. for two-phase $11,163,051 contract to design, develop, and deliver three exhaust nozzles for use in testing the 5,000-mw Phoebus nuclear rocket reactor. Phase I would be a $1,837,971 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract and would include four-month preliminary design study of the nozzle, and evaluation of fabrication and testing methods as well as a joint design effort involving Aerojet, lasl and American Car and Foundry, Inc. Phase II would be a $9,325,080 incentive contract and, relying on the results of Phase I, Aerojet would be required to design, develop, test and deliver three nozzles to the Nuclear Rocket Development Sta., Jackass Flats, Nev., by the end of 1967. The contract would be under management of the joint aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (nasa Release 65—196)
“Early Bird should not be construed by any government as just another door to be opened when there is a self-serving point to be made, and a door to be slammed when that point is in danger of being questioned,” said Dr. Frank Stanton, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System, in a speech at the Career Services Awards dinner of the National Civil Service League in Washington, D.C. Dr. Stanton said it was agreed the peoples of the world should have an opportunity to hear foreign leaders, but that this must be done in an atmosphere of freedom “with openness and in candid discussion.” He added: “Early Bird must not be transformed from the unprecedented opportunity into the most universal and pervasive censorship—both affirmative and negative—ever known.” (NYT, 5/20/65, 75)
The launch of Oso-C was postponed from Aug. 24 to Aug. 25 because NASA’s Fort Myers tracking station might be acquiring data from EXPLORER XXVI satellite about the same time it was scheduled to conduct Oso-C’s critical first-orbit interrogation. Recent calculations at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center indicated the conflict was expected to last for only two minutes, but project officials decided to avoid jeopardizing Oso-C’s first orbital data, (nasa Release 65-227)
A bolt of lightning struck and killed Albert J. Treib, a construction superintendent at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, as he and his crew poured concrete during a misty rain. The bolt slightly injured five other workmen. (Schreiber, Miami Her., 8/4/65)
At the Spring Meeting of the American Physical Society, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, attempted to answer the question “What can the space program do for experimental sciences like physics”:	. . the impact that space techniques are having and have already had on geophysics ... is three-fold in character. First, the geophysicist finds in the space program powerful tools to use in a new approach to solving old problems. Secondly, the application of space techniques to geophysics has already turned up a number of exciting new problems, greatly broadening the scope of the discipline. Thirdly, as space probes, and eventually men. reach other bodies of the solar system such as the moon and planets, the domain of geophysics grows beyond the confines of a single body of the solar system. Let us consider each of these extensions to geophysics a little further. “. . . space techniques have provided new tools for studying old problems of geophysics. Geodesy, meteorology, upper atmospheric physics, ionospheric research, and sun-earth relationships have all benefited from the application of space techniques. In the case of geodesy, the influence of the earth upon the orbits of various artificial satellites has been measured by careful radio, radar, and optical tracking and used to obtain quantitative measures of the various harmonics in the expansion of the earth’s gravitational potential. As a consequence of such measurements it has been found that the earth’s equatorial bulge is some 70 meters greater than one would expect. . . . Other departures of the geoid from the figure of hydrostatic equilibrium have also been determined from these satellite measurements. . . . These measurements in turn have important implications for the distribution of matter within the earth, and for the internal strength of the earth’s mantle.” (Text)
The growing debate about what the next step in manned spaceflight should be was roughly divided into three schools, according to Howard Simons in the Washington Post: (1) a negative “Let’s do nothing at all after landing men on the moon” school; (2) a “wild-space-yonder” school wanting to try everything; and (3) a “school of thought that would make do with what we are now developing through modification and imagination before taking expensive new steps into the heavens.” He said the latter view would mean using Saturn IBs and Vs to launch modified Apollo spacecraft on largely scientific space ventures, possibly as early as 1968. (Simons, Wash. Post, 11/28/65) November 28-December 1: The Committee on Space of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation recommended nine possible areas of international space cooperation at the White House Conference on International Cooperation: (1) new launching sites for satellites; (2) multipurpose navigation satellite systems; (3) experimental data-gathering satellite system; (4) synoptic sounding rocket investigations; (5) applications of communications satellites; (6) mutual assistance between national and international tracking and data acquisition networks; (7) exploration of the distant planets; (8) remote sensing; and (9) international convention to govern human activity on the moon. (Text) Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, in opening remarks at the session on international space cooperation, said: “I want to support what I understand to be the central argument of the report. “We have done well so far in pursuing our objective of international cooperation. “Our cooperative projects have borne witness to our peaceful aims in space . . . involved foreign intellectual and material resources in our programs . . . and established patterns of cooperation that further our goal of a stable world. “But the future demands a new level of effort.” (Text) The Honorable Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, speaking at the White House Conference, said: “We live at a time when the whole world is being made over socially, economically, scientifically and even intellectually. Our era has witnessed such dramatic achievements as flight faster than sound, the splitting of the atom, miracle drugs, and manned satellites hurling through space. Rapid and turbulent changes in the scientific, economic, and social fields, almost too numerous to name, daily defy evaluation on the basis of prior standards and experience. Vistas of endless space have opened as man’s horizons have widened to encompass the universe. At a pace beyond dreaming the whole pattern of our existence is being reshaped. To ensure that these changes work for the benefit of mankind, law must be developed rapidly enough in the world community to cope with the problems they raise and to harness their potential for peaceful and productive ends.” (Text) The Committee on Science and Technology of the National Citizens’ Commission on International Cooperation said at the Conference that cooperation in science already “is an extensive and integral part of life” but that the same thing was not true in the development qnd application of technology. The Committee urged an international earthquake prediction program, a world oceanography organization, and a “greatly accelerated” program to disseminate technology “for improving the basic needs of man—such as nutrition, sanitation, health, shelter, and communications.” (Text) An Inter-American Skyway, linking cities in Latin America with each other and to North American centers, was suggested by the Committee on Aviation. The Skyway was needed, the Committee said, because airports, controlled airways, navigation aids, safety rules, and other services “lag behind the speed, number and variety” of aircraft on Latin American routes, as they do throughout the world. (Text) November 29: Second Orbiting Solar Observatory (oso ii), after exceeding its operational life expectancy by 50 per cent, had been placed in coasting mode by NASA. Gas supply for the pitch-control in the stabilization system had been depleted, allowing the spacecraft to exceed acceptable tolerances in pointing at the sun. Data would be collected from time to time when the spacecraft did properly observe the sun. oso II, launched Feb. 3, 1965, had completed more than 4,100 orbits and returned some 2,200,000 bits of scientific data each orbit. The nine advanced oso ii experiments were designed to further the work of oso I as well as to extend measurements of the study of solar x-rays, gamma rays, and ultraviolet radiation, (nasa Release 65-367; GSFC Historian)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. The presentation was made by the Swiss ambassador, Dr. Alfred Zehnder, at the Embassy residence in Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 65-47)
J. Gordon Vaeth of the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Weather Satellite Center told the American Meteorological Society that the Weather Bureau was developing a system in which buoys moored in the ocean would broadcast weather data to communications satellites that would rebroadcast it almost instantaneously to almost any point on earth. Mr. Vaeth said the initial optimum number of buoys would be 300, spaced about 600 mi. apart in major ocean regions. They would be moored at known, fixed points and would send data on sea and air temperature, wind direction and velocity, and barometric pressure. Relays from the satellites would be by very-high-frequency radio and would be picked up on the ground by inexpensive receiving stations, aircraft, or ships at sea. . Mr. Vaeth saw the buoy network as an ideal vehicle for international cooperation in meteorology. (Schmeck, NYT, 1/28/65, 50)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center shipped the instrument unit for the first Saturn ib launch vehicle to Kennedy Space Center, NASA aboard the barge Palaemon. First Saturn ib was scheduled for launch from ksc early next year, (msfc Release)
Successful completion of formal flight qualification tests of the uprated II—1 rocket engine for use in the Saturn tr space vehicle was announced jointly by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, under whose technical direction the engine was being developed, and by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., its manufacturer. Two engines were used for the qualification program. In 51 firings they operated successfully for 4,581 seconds—more than 75 min.—and produced 200,000 lbs. of thrust (188,000 lbs. was previous power rating). i msfc: Release 65-96)
William M. Allen, president at the Boeing Co., addressed National Defense Transportation Association in Washington, D.C.: “Our first Boeing study of a supersonic transport was made in 1952. Preliminary design effort was started more seriously in 1956 and 1957. Then in 1958 the SST became a major engineering project and it has continued in that status ever since, involving many of our top engineers. “From the start of our effort to the present, design determinations have come in an orderly and unhurried progression, as a result of the integration of mountains of test data, much of it worked out in close conjunction with NASA laboratories which, incidentally, deserve the sincere thanks of the American people for their pioneering work in this field. “In the process we explored 290 configurations, and completed wind tunnel testing on 56 different high-speed wings. . . .” (CR, 1/28/65, 1454-56)
A J-2 rocket engine had been retired from service after being test-fired a total of 10,686 sec. in 60 separate tests, msfc announced. J-2, developed for NASA by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, would burn liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen and develop 200,000	lbs. thrust at altitude. Five clustered J—2’s would provide a million lbs. thrust for the S-ii (second) stage of the Saturn V booster. A single J-2 would power the s-ivb, top stage for both the Saturn ib and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 65—177)
Missions currently performed at Vandenberg afb, reportedly now busier than Cape Kennedy, were listed by U.S. News and World Report: launching “spy” satellites into polar orbits to take detailed photos of military bases in Communist lands; testing Titan and Minute-man XCBMS over the Pacific; launching weather, mapping, navigation, and other scientific satellites; tracking space vehicles—U.S. and Soviet. Programs projected included: launching of the first Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) in 1969 or 1970, following unmanned test shots in 1968; rapid buildup of manned military flights that could reach the level of 50 military man-in-space launches a year by the early 1970s; establishment of regular shuttle service in small rockets to and from large orbiting military spacecraft. Vandenberg was described as “a nest of pads and silos, some underground and some above, from which every U.S. missile and satellite can be fired.” In the past year, there were 117 launchings at Vandenberg, compared with 93 at Cape Kennedy. {U.S. News, 12/13/65, 5)
Vice Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn) spoke before the Publishers’ Lunch Club of New York. In his speech Admiral Rickover said: “How to resolve the antithesis between technology and individual liberty; how to insure that technology will be beneficial, not harmful, to man, to society, and to our democratic institutions—this, I would say, is a public question. I raise it here because I believe the members of this audience are particularly well qualified to explore this problem. In your business the conflict between technology and liberty —so prevalent everywhere else in our society—is muted, if not absent altogether. “Improvements in the mechanics of producing and selling books have not diminished the importance of the author. Your success still depends on	him. He cannot be rendered	obsolete by automation. The human factor therefore continues to outweigh the technical. As in the past, your main function is to discover talent and help bring it to fruition. You know that liberty enhances creativity, that men with a special competence must be allowed to follow their own judgment. . . . “How to make technology most useful to ourselves and our society, yet prevent it from controlling our lives—that is the problem. The problem is aggravated by the bureau-cratization of American life, itself largely a result of technology.” . (Text, CR, 1/29/65, 1522-24)
Picket lines were established at all entrances to Kennedy Space Center, NASA as the International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers began a nationwide strike against the Boeing Co. Key issue was union demand that Boeing abandon performance analysis system of rating employees for promotion, demotion, and discharge. Union contended that seniority should be the sole factor in job security; Boeing claimed its system was necessary to keep the company competitive in the aerospace industry, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/16/65; upi, Houston Chron., 9/16/65)
U.S. would install new equipment costing an estimated $5 million at one of its three satellite tracking stations in the Pretoria area of South Africa. Arrival of the expensive new equipment was taken by observers as a sign that NASA officials were determined to hold on to the stations. Possibility that they might be closed had been raised last summer when Prime Minister Hendrik F. Verwoerd had said American Negroes could not be assigned to the stations. American officials insisted they had accepted no racial restriction on their personnel in South Africa. (NYT, 10/31/65, 12)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $500,000 contract to itt to develop a lower-altitude space weather camera for NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (ap, NYT, 12/15/65, 2)
North American Aviation, Inc., and United Aerospace Workers Union announced approval of a new three-year contract covering 35,000 workers in four states, (ap, NYT, 10/11/65, 28; ap, Wash. Post, 10/11/65, A19)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Princeton Univ. (Off. of Deputy Administrator)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (LCdr., usn) finished the last day of their general debriefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 9/2/65, 15; Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A14)
Four Nike-Apache sounding rockets would be launched from Chamical, Argentina, for the study of an ionospheric phenomenon called “Sporadic E” under an extension to a cooperative U.S.-Argentine agreement. The Argentine Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales ( cnie ) would provide the personnel for payload fabrication at nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center, procure the rockets, operate the range at Chamical, and be responsible for the reduction and analysis of data obtained. NASA would provide the equipment and facilities for construction of the payloads and a Nike-Apache launcher on loan. No exchange of funds between CNIE and NASA was contemplated. (nasa Release 65-350)
An editorial in the Washington Evening Star said: “. . . judging from Soviet cosmonaut Leonov’s spectacular ‘walk’ in the high heavens last week, the Russians seem to be well ahead of us at the moment. Interestingly enough, however, in marked contrast to the wide-open American procedure, they do not let the outside world have any look at either the launching or the landing of their spacemen. This furtiveness makes one wonder about the nature of their program and whether they’re really accomplishing as much as they claim to be. “In any case, regardless of what the Russians are hiding, there can be no doubt that the Grissom-Young flight represents an important advance for the United States in the race to the moon. Technically, we are ahead of the Reds in many respects, and it is entirely possible that we’ll make lunar landings before them.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
A brightly illuminated object in the sky near Langley afb, Va., was widely reported as a Ufo but identified by usaf as a weather balloon with the sun reflecting off its surface. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/3/65) February 3; oso li I Oso R2), nasa*s Orbiting Solar Observatory, was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy by a three-stage Delta rocket. Preliminary orbital elements: apogee, 393 mi.; perigee, 343 mi.; period, 97 min.; inclination, 33°. The 545-lh. spacecraft included parts salvaged from the Oso B. damaged last April prior to launch, and components of a spacecraft built for prototype testing. The second of eight spacecraft planned by NASA for direct observation of the sun, oso II carried eight scientific experiments and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry, command, batteries, control electronics and gas spin-control arms, and live experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and solar-pointing experiments. For the first rime, the instruments, controlled by ground command, would scan the entire solar surface. Each scan required four minutes. February 3; NASA’s Orbiting Solar Observatory, OSO 11, was launched from Cape Kennedy, Fla. oso li experiments were intended to map the frequency and energy of solar emissions and represented a joint Govern meat-university-industry effort. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center managed the project. (NASA Press Kit Release 65-11: NASA Release 65-32; Goddard News. 2/3/65. 1-2)
On the floor of the House, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, commented on the successful ranger VIII spacecraft as “yet another major American space achievement. For the second time in less than a year a Ranger spacecraft has successfully taken closeup pictures of the lunar surface and returned them to earth from a distance of a quarter of a million miles. . . .” (nasa lar iv/33-35)
USNS Croatan, which had left Balboa, Panama Canal Zone, on Mar. 6, arrived at Fima, Peru. During the interval, ten two-stage sounding rockets had been launched from the deck of the ship, carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments for the Univ. of Michigan, the Univ. of New Hampshire, and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Three single-stage Areas meteorological rockets, two of which carried experiments to measure ozone in the atmosphere, were also launched. (NASA Release 65-13)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told the National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C., that a significant announcement on the Mol program would be made in the “near future,” according to Missile/Space Daily. When asked if Mol would match the capability demonstrated by the U.S.S.R. in July 16 launch of proton i, Dr. Hall replied: “We feel a capability in the order of placing 25,000 lbs. in orbit would enable us to meet DOD needs.” Dr. Hall said that DOD was interested in the development of recoverable, reusable boosters and he felt that the reduction of problems in mating payloads to boosters had been a “significant event during the past year.” (M/S Daily, 7/21/65; nsc Release)
American Academy of Arts and Sciences awarded its Rumford Prize to Dr. William D. McElroy for his analysis and isolation of chemicals that cause bioluminescence in the firefly and other organisms. He identified luciferin, luciferase, and adenosine-5-triphosphate (atp). From his research he concluded that bioluminescence had evolved “as an accidental consequence of chemical reactions” in the organisms as they adapted to changing conditions in the environment. Dr. McElroy was head of the McCollum-Pratt Institute of Johns Hopkins Univ. and a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. (SR, 4/3/65, 45-47)
First flight of North American Aviation’s xb-70a No. 2 from Palmdale to Edwards afb was almost 100 per cent successful; the drogue chute failed to deploy on landing, but the aircraft braked to a stop in the normal distance. The No. 2 xb-70 reached a speed of mach 1.4 and an altitude of 40,000 ft. Wing tips were folded to the full 65° during the flight, the movable windshield ramp was operated, and some stability and control tests were carried out. Aircraft was piloted by Al White, chief naa test pilot, and Col. Joseph Cotton, usaf xb-70a test director.	(Av. Daily, 7/20/65)
In a report to President Johnson on the Titan II missile silo disaster of Aug. 9 which had claimed 53 lives, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert said: “The cause of death was almost exclusively asphyxiation. A number of men had attempted to escape by the emergency ladder which apparently was blocked by two men who became jammed together in trying to pass simultaneously through a restricted area on the ladder, thus denying access to those on the ladder below them.” (Text)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander for Manned Space Systems of afsc’s Space Systems Div., announced at a Washington, D.C., luncheon for Aviation/Space Writers that two used Gemini spacecraft would be flown by usaf in tests for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). This would be the first time that a Mercury or Gemini spacecraft had been flown twice. Both Air Force flights would be unmanned and would test the effect of cutting a hatch into the heat shield on the capsule’s blunt end. (NYT, 4/15/65, 8)
. . . atmospheric effects, color, seasonal changes, and the large number of locations of interest will make Martian pictures 10-50 times more difficult to interpret than lunar pictures.” Robert L. Sohn, TRW Space Technology Laboratories, stressed value of earth-return missions and recommended serious consideration of round-trip missions and multi-plan round trips using DSIF as guide. He suggested that an 800-lb. spacecraft could make a fly-by of Mars, using the Venus swing-by technique and return to earth to enable recovery of a 50-lb. capsule. Use of swing-by techniques for round trips reduces earth launch velocities to those of the favorable years and also reduces earth reentry velocities. Additional advantages were closer passage with Mars at encounter and the opportunity to gather data on two planets. Elie A. Shneour, of Stanford University, said he “. . . could not say whether it was possible to draw up a set of experiments that would definitively search for life.” He maintained, however, that “discovery of any form of extraterrestrial life will be tantamount to a basic determination of the nature of all life on that planet.” (M&R, 2/22/ 65, 39, 41)	...
Sen. A. S. Monroney (D-Okla.) told a meeting of the American Helicopter Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA was spending too small a share of its budget on aviation research. Senator Monroney, the chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, said he became angry when he compared the $43 million earmarked for aeronautics next year with the space agency’s total budget of $5.2 billion. He said that although the agency allocated less than 2 percent of its budget to solving the many flight mysteries it acknowledges still exist, the agency’s working-level scientists wanted to do more in this area. Monroney also said he disagreed with those who contended that subsidy for the helicopter airlines was wasteful and unwarranted. He said that while helicopters might not have made the progress many wished for and some had promised, commercial revenues had increased, costs had declined, equipment had improved, and capability to operate on instruments had been developed, (ap, NYT, 5/15/65)
A pressurized suit identical to that worn by Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) during his walk in space June 4, was donned by George C. Wiswell, Jr., founder and head of Marine Contracting, Inc., for a repair job 200 ft. below water at the American Electric Power Co.’s Smith Mountain Dam near Roanoke, Va. Wiswell headed a team of divers who lived in a pressurized tank for a week at the bottom of the dam, using a pressurized diving bell while making the necessary repairs. “The job could have been done by conventional methods,” Wiswell asserted, “but the divers would each have been limited at that depth to 20 min. of work a day.” With the David Clark Co.’s “aquanaut” suit, four hours work each day for each man was possible, he said. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/65, 35) During August: Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced the assignment of B/Gen. Daniel E. Riley as commander of the USAF Contract Management Div. (afcmd) at Inglewood, Calif. General Riley replaced Col. Fred L. Rennels, who had been commander of AFCMD since its activation in January 1965 and who was named vice commander to General Riley, (afsc Release 132.65)
Charles R. Able, group vice president, Missile and Space Systems, Douglas Aircraft Co., defined for the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., the reasons the U.S. must have an on-going space program. He concluded: “The most important single factor in deciding what space programs we will implement in the future ... is going to be, simply, how well we perform in the programs now going and those just getting started. “The extent to which this Nation will be willing to commit itself to new ventures in space in the years ahead depends entirely on how well we stay on schedule and within the budget set for us. “The most important task we have in preparing for the future is to do a good job now.” (Text, CR, 9/22/65, A5370-71)
First complete test model of the s—n stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle left North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., Seal Beach, aboard the U.S.S. Point Barrow for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. The 4,000-mi. trip via the Panama Canal would take about two weeks, (msfc Release 65-246)
Quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), cosmic x-ray sources, and neutron stars were discussed at NAS meeting in Washington. Jesse L.	Greenstein of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories suggested quasars were signs of galaxies forming—“the first condensation” of intergalactic gases. William A. Fowler of Cal Tech revived his earlier theory (proposed with Fred Hoyle) that these sources were huge energy masses created by explosive contractions of gigantic stars. Herbert Friedman of NRL presented new evidence that cosmic x-ray sources and neutron stars were not the same things. (Scientists at nrl had earlier suggested that some cosmic x-ray sources were the theoretical neutron stars.) Edwin E. Salpeter of Cornell Univ. reiterated the neutron star hypothesis. He suggested neutron stars could be oscillating stars which generate such great amounts of gravitational energy that the x-rays are produced. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/29/65, A5)
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on NASA’s activities in the field of international cooperation: “Nineteen sixty-four was a year in which other nations emerged clearly as friendly competitors and valuable collaborators in space science and engineering and demonstrated by emulation their endorsement of our view that energetic efforts in these fields are essential contributors to the betterment of human society. I am thinking of such things as the energetic space programs of France, the demonstrated competence of Canada and Italy, the entry of the British aircraft industry into spacecraft engineering, the formal establishment of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo), and finally of the successful first test flight of a large new booster by ELDO. . . . “A year ago I reported our plans for including foreign experiments on NASA satellites under arrangements by which foreign experiments, selected in open competition with domestic proposals, are sponsored and financed by the experimenter’s national space authority. One such experiment flew in 1964—a British ion mass spectrometer on explorer xx, the U.S. fixed-frequency topside sounder. Six additional experiments were selected for flight, bringing the total to thirteen, with ten more under active consideration. We now have opened virtually all categories of NASA spacecraft, including Gemini and Apollo, to foreign participation on this cooperative basis. Indeed, we are now inviting foreign biomedic experts to a working conference in Houston, next April, to learn directly of the opportunities and constraints which apply to this program. . . . “A noteworthy development was the fact that esro became the first foreign space agency to seek a ground station on American territory. After conducting a site survey and finding a suitable location near Fairbanks, Alaska, esro has formally requested the Department of State to begin negotiations for an agreement. The ESRO station is projected as an element in a network of tracking and data acquisition facilities. . . . France is establishing a North/South fence from France through the Canary Islands, Algeria, Upper Volta, Congo Brazzaville, and South Africa, with an injection-monitoring station in Lebanon. This chain will also serve esro, which expects to have additional stations at Spitsbergen, Brussels, and in Australia and the South Atlantic. Both the ESRO and French networks will be entirely compatible with NASA’s, to maximize possibilities for mutual assistance. This is to our advantage, and we encourage it. . . . “Let me bring you up to date on the status of our cooperation with the Soviet Union. You will recall that we have a series of agreements with the Soviet Academy of Sciences providing for three coordinated projects—in meteorology, in surveying the geomagnetic field, and use of ECHO II for communications tests. The project involving the observation and use of echo ii is completed. The Soviet side observed the critical inflation phase of the satellite optically and forwarded the data to us; although not including radar data, which would have been most desirable. Communications via echo ii between the U.K. and the U.S.S.R. were carried out in only one direction instead of two, at less interesting frequencies than we would have liked, and with some technical limitations at the ground terminals used. On the other hand, the Soviets provided very complete recordings and other data of their reception of the transmissions.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 15-37)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden told the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in Washington, D.C., that NASA planned to select 10 to 20 scientists to begin astronaut flight training this summer from over 900 applicants. Dr. Dryden said the Mercury astronauts had demonstrated man’s ability as a sensor and manipulator, and to some extent as an evaluator, in orbit. “Early Gemini and Apollo flights will further examine these capabilities so that, in the future, man’s full potential can be exploited.” (ap, NYT, 3/19/65)
Months-long breathing of pure oxygen at the pressure used in Gemini spacecraft might damage the lungs and interfere with blood cell manufacture in the body, reported Col. Harold V. Ellingson (usaf) at a meeting of the American College of Preventive Medicine in Chicago. For that reason, he said, pure oxygen would not be used in Air Force manned orbiting laboratories in which astronauts would remain in space 30-90 days. Instead a mixture of oxygen and helium was being considered. Colonel Ellingson, Commander of the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks afb, emphasized he was not referring to brief orbital trips such as the Gemini flights, but to missions of one to three months duration. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 10/28/65, G3)
In a speech to the Interact Conference of First Rotary District 696 in Orlando, Fla., ksc’s Richard E. Dutton, said: “. . . NASA’s major launch facility for space vehicles and unmanned and manned spacecraft [is] the John E. Kennedy Space Center and its new Merritt Island Spaceport. I hope you noticed that I used the term Spaceport, instead of Moonport, as it is often referred to in the news media. We call it a Spaceport because its basic concept is not to exist as a research and development facility for any one mission only; it is being created to function as an actual port, with a space vehicle launch rate that may be some day as high as one manned launch per month. “However, just as important to consider is the spaceport’s capacity for growth. It can accommodate launch vehicles with up to 40 million pounds of thrust, 32.5 million pounds more than the Saturn V here can deliver. Because of this, the United States has not invested three quarters of a billion dollars in a facility which will serve only to launch a manned lunar mission. It has acquired a permanent installation which will serve the requirements of the National Space Program for years to come. “But these facilities, like the lunar landing mission, are themselves only a manifestation of a greater entity—people. At present, 2,500 NASA and 6,300 contractor employees work at the Center. By 1967, when the spaceport becomes operational, 3,000 government employees and 10,000 contractor employees will be employed.” (Text)
Participants in the World Peace through Law Conference in Washington, D.C., agreed that advances in international communications, including early bird i communications satellite, were important milestones on the road to world peace. John A. Johnson, vice president of ComSatCorp, told the international communications panel that early bird I had provided a case study of progress in “the development of legal principles and institutions which further international cooperation.” He said global coverage in the satellite communications system was planned for 1967. Prof. Ivan A. Vlasic, McGill Univ., warned we may be facing “a proliferation of competing, possibly even antagonistic communications systems. Given the present state of international relations the chances of conflict are considerable.” Jean Evensen, Norway’s government broadcasting system adviser, felt “a pressing need for ways of enforcing international communications rules. One rebel, one nonconformist . . . can create havoc ... to the damage of the rest of the world,” he said. (Bullen, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/65)
Former faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby was appointed senior vice president of Pan American World Airways and elected to its board of directors. Halaby’s initial responsibilities would embrace the airline’s defense activities, its services for USAF at the Eastern Test Range, and its business-jets division. (NYT, 9/15/65, 77M; Wash. Post, 9/15/65, B9)
“We are already getting ready for the next manned flight,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev’s backup pilot wrote in a Soviet air force journal. “We are getting acquainted with the construction of a new ship” and “planning new flights on new courses with more complicated assignments.” {Wash. Post, 5/8/65)
gemini v astronauts Cooper and Conrad flew to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, following a night onboard the aircraft carrier Lake Champlain. Upon their arrival, Florida Governor Haydon Burns presented them with plaques in recognition of the record-setting, eight-day mission. Intensive medical examinations begun on the carrier were continued on Merritt Island. (Toth, Wash. Post, 8/31/65; Clark, NYT, 8/31/65)
The Life Sciences Committee of the National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board recommended to NASA that American astronauts returning from the moon and planets be kept in quarantine for at least three weeks to prevent possible contamination of the earth by extra-terrestrial organisms, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. Recommendation was in a report entitled “Potential Hazards of Back Contamination from the Planets.” Other recommendations included the need to avoid decontamination of returning equipment until it had been subjected to biological study; the possible need for the astronauts to shed their outer garments on the moon and Mars before returning home; the need to conduct immediate research on any samples of extraterrestrial life brought to earth; and trial runs to acquaint astronauts with methods for minimizing chance of contamination. (Simons, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
NASA Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded three contracts for equipment used on launch complexes at both Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). American Machine and Foundry Co. received $1,198,923 for umbilical devices that would provide fuel, liquid oxygen, and air conditioning to the fin section of Saturn V’s first stage. $745,601.15 was awarded Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Sales for the fabrication of bulk electrical cable for Complex 39. Spaco Inc. received $596,356 to fabricate interconnect cables for joining terminal boards in the umbilical towers of Complexes 34, 37, and 39. (ksc Release 35-65)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to peak altitude of 113 mi. (180 km.). Preliminary experimental objective was to obtain clear spectrograms of ultraviolet light from stars. Experimentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (nasa Rpt. srl; ap, NYT, 6/28/65, 2)
Telecomputing Services, Inc., was selected by NASA for negotiations leading to two-year, cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer operations and data processing services at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The contract, expected to exceed $4 million, would include an option for an additional year increasing the value by $2 million, (nasa Release 65-324)
Commenting on Dr. Warren Weaver’s Nov. 29 statement to U.S. News and World Report questioning the wisdom of spending $30 billion to get an American to the moon by 1970, the Wall Street Journal said: “Now Dr. Weaver is not against going to the moon . . . what he is against is the hell-for-leather way the moon program is being whipped along . . . where the emphasis rightly should fall is on Dr. Weaver’s assertion that ‘the great ideas that develop within the body of science —strange and improbable as this sounds—arise from curiosity and not from urgency,’ and that the moon program has caused a massive diversion of scientists and engineers from possibly more productive fields. . . .” (WSJ, 12/8/65, 16) nasa Administrator James E. Webb, addressing the Conference, warned of the possible consequences of reduction in the NASA budget request for FY 1967:	. . history should have taught us that new space capabilities, in which we have made a considerable investment, must be used or their benefits will be lost.” Webb said history should have taught us also “that plans for the future should not be drawn by a timid hand.” He quoted the late Dr. Hugh Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, as saying “the present gap in manned flight activity [between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.] is a direct consequence of a postponement of the decision to proceed beyond Project Mercury from September 1960 until May 1961.” (Text; LRC Release 65-88)
Award of the [$40 million] contract [for 28 Atlas sl.v-3s] reflects plans by the Air Force and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to use the Atlas in a variety of future space missions,” Robert Zimmerman said in an article in the San Diego Union. He continued: “Its versatility as a launching vehicle lies in the ‘plug-in’ concept which allows electronic instruments for various missions to be installed on the basic booster as requirements for the mission may dictate. “Before the Atlas was standardized into the SLV-3 it would take a year to 18 months to equip one booster for a particular mission. Now, an slv-3 can be outfitted for any mission in three to four months.” (Zimmerman, San Diego Union, 4/13/65)
In a report presented at the 55th national meeting of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers in Houston, NASA Lewis Research Center engineer E. W. Ott said that moisture in an astronaut’s breath could escape into his space capsule, accumulate and float at zero gravity, and short out electrical systems it might come into contact with. He said something like this was believed to have happened when Astronaut Gordon Cooper had had to bring his space capsule in under manual control in May 1963. “There is good evidence that water found its way into automatic control equipment and caused malfunctioning.” (Justice, Houston Post, 2/10/65)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Rep. Burt L. Talcott (R-Calif.) inserted in the Congressional Record a letter from E. J. Stecker, president of Holex, Inc., and an exhibitor at the Paris International Air Show (June 11-20) : “At Paris the Russians made us look like idiots and we cooperated so beautifully that it almost looked as though our public relations program was being directed by the Kremlin. . . . “I walked through the aircraft park where the Russian and American exhibits were practically side by side. The Russian aircraft were exclusively commercial, the American almost 100 percent military. Think of the irony of the situation. . . . “There was a long line waiting to enter the . . . space exhibit of the U.S.S.R. . . . inside was a full scale model of the Vostok space capsule and its rocket motor suspended from the ceiling, what appeared to be an operational Vostok in a glass case and Mr. Gagarin, Russia’s first man in space, who shook my hand . . . and gave me a Vostok lapel pin. This was easily the most popular exhibit at the show and I would estimate that 70 percent of the attendees had Vostok pins and were wearing them. . . . “The Russians then flew in their great misshapen 750-passenger transport aircraft which really impressed the public. I examined it and as a pilot and engineer of many years standing, I feel it economically and militarily foolish, but the publicity value was tremendous. “Then there was the announcement of the proposed U.S.S.R. SST transport which looks like a retouched Concorde. This also hit all of the front pages. “In short, the Russians stole the show with an obsolete space capsule much inferior to our Mercury, an artist’s sketch of a supersonic transport and an overgrown, awkward monstrosity of an airplane. But they could do it because everything they did was aimed at and shown to the general public. . . . “When White, McDivitt, and the Vice President finally arrived, it was a triumphant tour surrounded by Secret Service, press, public relations and photographers and the great mass of the unwashed public including the exhibitors were generally ignored and forgotten. . . . “There were a few good points. James Webb, Administrator of the NASA, visited the U.S. exhibitors. He came unheralded and alone and had time to stop and talk for a few minutes without the aid of 50 photographers. In this, Jim was unique among the U.S. officials and should be commended. The usaf Thunderbirds and the U.S. Navy Blue Angels put on fantastic flying exhibitions on Thursday evening. But it occurred around 7:30 p.m. when most of the public had departed. “The point is this: The Russians appealed to the people; we ignored the people and appealed to the press. As a result, the Russians only lost the front pages once and that was when we made them through the unfortunate crash of our 2-58.” (CR, 7/6/65, A3555-6)
Suggestion that synthesis of life should be a national goal by Dr. Charles C. Price, president of the American Chemical Society, received comment from the New York Times: “Could such an effort be added to the total national scientific enterprise or could it be fitted in only by cutting back on other sectors, particularly the very expensive programs in space or particle physics? Would mankind benefit more if the funds needed for this project were devoted instead to less exotic but perhaps more vital needs of ending the pollution of the air we breathe and the water we hope to drink? The verdict on Dr. Price’s proposal is by no means immediately obvious. “The most unfortunate result that could come from Dr. Price’s suggestion would be the mounting of a new international competition, a ‘life race’ that would produce the same tension and needless duplication that the space race has produced. Men of many nations have contributed to the progress that makes it possible now to consider the goal Dr. Price has put upon the public agenda. If any such effort is undertaken it should be as international as the common humanity that makes all men brothers.” (NYT, 9/15/65, 43)
Indonesian Air Vice Admiral Budiardjo, deputy air force chief for logistics, claimed that Indonesia had begun surveys for space flights and would be able to launch its first astronaut by 1968. (ap, Wash. Post, 1/7/65, A13)
Addressing the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “I would like to acknowledge the debt that NASA owes to the armed forces for early and continuing work that has contributed to some of our most successful space projects. As you know, NASA works closely with the Air Force in the development of launch vehicles and in the general technology of space flight. . . . “As an example—among many—of cooperative nasa-dod activities: on January 1, NASA transferred control of its operating SYNCOM II and syncom in communications satellites to the Department of Defense. . . . “When the great dod missile site construction program—which ran at one time to $2.8 billion a year—subsided, the Corps of Engineers brought its tremendous engineering capability to the construction of NASA facilities. As the Corps moved toward completion of its work for NASA, its abilities will have been enhanced by the experience of building these great new national resources. The Corps, with new skills, will be able to move to new national requirements with assurance that it has performed extraordinarily well in engineering fields never before attempted. “Today there are detailed to NASA 254 active duty military personnel. Five of our astronauts are graduates of this great Academy. Nothing could be more fitting. For the debt modern American science and technology owes to West Point is too large to be repaid. It can visibly be traced back to Sylvanus Thayer who not only is the father of this Academy but who had a tremendous influence for half a century in the field of technical and scientific education throughout the United States.” (Text)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), youngest holder of Air Force astronaut wings, was honored by his hometown of Chapman, Kansas, with a parade. Engle fle>v the x-15 to peak altitude of 282,000 ft. on June 29, qualifying for the astronaut wings, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/65, A-2)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Boy Scout Launch-O-Ree in New York City that the “future will be determined in large measure by the kind of talented and dedicated youth found in the Boy Scouts. Science and technology, which form the basis for the national space program, are pioneering areas within which many of you can find opportunities for satisfaction and service.” (Text)
Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert placed further restrictions on simulated bombing missions of b-58 Hustlers over Chicago: the supersonic bombers would fly at higher altitudes (48,000-49,000 ft. instead of 41,000-44,000-ft. range originally programed) to reduce impacts of sonic booms; flights would be canceled during bad weather. It had been announced earlier that the number of training missions per day would be reduced from a maximum of four to two. (Chic. Trib., 1/7/65)
Wall Street Journal space reporter wrote a “Memo on Space Semantics” to his editor: “I think you should be aware of some problems in semantics and etymology that are becoming acute as a result of the activities at Cape Kennedy. Unless we resolve some of these problems in the near future, I fear that a new space age neurosis may appear among our reporters and copy editors. “If you recall, since late 1957 there have been a number of hints that the advent of space exploration would create some new difficulties with our editorial style. First, there was the problem of deciding whether to italicize the Russian word ‘sputnik.’ Then we had to decide on the spelling and capitalization of ‘a-okay’ (or is it ‘A-OK’?). “Unfortunately, we are now encountering some difficulties which would tax the abilities of Clifton Fadiman, himself. . . . “Perhaps the most serious problem . . . stems apparently from an oversight on the part of our ancestors. In writing out the names of the nine planets of our solar system it became evident that we have neglected to formally name our own planet. At least this is the only conclusion one can come to when it’s noted that we capitalize the names of all the planets except our own. Webster, himself, insists on using a lower case ‘e’ for earth while dignifying tiny Mercury with a capital. Even the minor planets such as Eros carry formal names. “The neglect is even more conspicuous in the instance of our own natural satellite. While the moons of other planets have exotic names such as Phobos we refer to ours in the generic and, consequently, with a lower case ‘m\ “I suggest we either start capitalizing Earth and Moon or else ask the American Society of Newspaper Editors to convene an international conference to pick a name for our planet. While they’re at it, they might decide whether ‘marsography’ is a word and straighten out the planetary adjectives.” (Bishop, WSJ, 9/9/65, 12) September IQ: NASA began recruiting to select additional pilot/astronauts for manned space flight missions. There were presently 28 pilot/astronauts and five scientist/astronauts participating in the NASA manned space flight program. To be eligible for selection, applicants had to: (1) be a U.S. citizen, no taller than six feet, bom on or after Dec. 1, 1929; (2) have a bachelor’s degree in engineering, physical or biological science; and (3) have acquired 1,000 hrs. jet pilot time or have been graduated from an armed forces test pilot school. (NASA Release 65-288)
NASA successfully conducted an Apollo boilerplate pad abort test at White Sands Missile Range to check the launch escape system. The test simulated an abort from ground level, using the Apollo launch escape system for propulsion. This type of abort would be necessary in an actual mission if serious trouble developed with the Saturn launch vehicle just before or during ignition of the Saturn engines. Boilerplate 23A, the command module used for this test, powered by the launch escape rocket’s 155,000 lbs. of th rust, traveled 5,000 ft. above the range. Eleven sec. after ignition was signaled from the blockhouse, canards deployed near the top of the escape motor, causing the spacecraft to pitch aerodynamically to a blunt-end-forward position. Three seconds later, the tower jettison motor ignited, removing the tower and boost protective cover from the spacecraft. The forward (apex) heat shield was jettisoned .4 sec. later to uncover the parachute containers. Dual drogue parachutes were deployed by mortars from the upper deck two seconds after the LES was jettisoned. They slowed the spacecraft’s descent, then disreefed to stabilize the module in a blunt-end-forward position. When the drogue parachutes were jettisoned, three pilot chutes were deployed to extract the three main chutes from their containers. The main parachutes were deployed in reefed condition, then disreefed to lower the spacecraft to a gentle landing about one mile from the launch site. The flight sequence took about one minute. This was the first Apollo boilerplate to be reused, (nasa Release 65-202; upi, Chic. Trib., 6/30/65; msc Roundup, 6/25/65, 1) President Johnson signed the bill authorizing $5,190,396,200 for NASA during fy 1966. (ap, Wash. Post, 6/30/65) At Kennedy Space Center, NASA problems with radio frequencies forced at two-day postponement of an attempt to launch Tiros 10 weather satellite, designed to study hurricanes and typhoons. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)	_
First sounding rocket launching undertaken jointly by the U.S. and Brazil under a memorandum of understanding signed April 21, 1965, was conducted successfully at nasa Wallops Station. The Nike-Apache rocket carried a 60-lb. payload to peak altitude of about 101 mi. (162.6 km.) during the seven-minute flight. Instrumentation for payload and telemetry ground support equipment were constructed jointly by Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) and nasa engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa furnished the rocket and use of Wallops Station facilities. The Brazilian launch team, presently in training at Wallops Station, directed the launch operations and acquired telemetry data during the flight. (Wallops Release 65-51)
Dr. Charles H. Townes, provost of MIT, reported at the meeting of the American Physical Society in Washington, D.C., that a laser beam had been used to produce sound waves more than a million times higher in pitch than those audible to the human ear. Dr. Townes explained that the laser beams at MIT had been used to produce oscillations constituting sound waves in solids and liquids. Sound had been produced by means of the laser at 3,000 me in a fluid and 60,000 me in a solid. It should be possible, Dr. Townes said, to generate sound at 300,000 me in diamond. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/65)
Soviet Union gave assurances to U.S. through Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin that it was abiding, and would continue to abide, by the 1963 U.N. resolution calling on all states not to orbit weapons of mass destruction. U.S. had raised the question whether the resolution was being violated after the Nov. 7 display during a military anniversary parade of “an orbital missile” capable of delivering a surprise blow from space. Comment in Pravda on American press reaction to display of orbital rockets during the Nov. 7 parade: “By raising a racket about the Soviet orbital rocket, somebody in the USA evidently calculated to divert the attention of the world public from the American military preparations in the cosmos. The activity of the USA . . . is . . . subordinated to the idea of using space for military purposes . . . Program mol. The military equipment reviewed on Red Square on November 7 demonstrated . . . the power of our rocket weapons not in order to threaten anyone. Nuclear rocket weapons, which the Soviet Government has at its disposal, are the powerful means of guaranteeing the peace.” (Pravda, 12/8/65, dod Trans.; Finney, NYT, 12/11/65,1)
According to Dr. Colin Pittendrigh, Dean of the Graduate School and biology professor at Princeton Univ., mariner iv photographs of Mars did not provide any new evidence that life could not exist on that planet. Even though Mars appeared virtually waterless in the photographs, he pointed out, the area photographed was only a small fraction of the planet’s total area. “A scan across our Atlantic Ocean might lead some to say there is no land on earth.” (ap, Miami Her., 9/19/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) announced the activation of the Contract Management Div., Air Force Systems Command (afsc), under the command of Col. Fred L. Rennels, Jr. (usaf). Located at Los Angeles Air Force Station, the new division would be responsible for DOD contract management activities in those plants assigned to the Air Force under the dod National Plant Cognizance program, (afsc Release 61.64)
Present-day Americans are thinking, working, and risking to find ways, first to explore, and then to use, the new environment of outer space,” said NASA Administrator James E. Webb in an address to the New Mexico Chapter of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers in Albuquerque. He continued:	. . the exploration of space has brought a new force into the affairs and life of this Nation. Once more the American people confront a new environment—harsher, more demanding, more inspiring than any man has ever tried to enter before. ... We cannot yet foresee all the consequences of man’s entry into space. But the record of history is clear, that the mastery by one nation of a new environment, or of a major new technology, or the combination of the two as we now see in space, has always in the past had the most profound effects on all nations and on all the peoples of the earth.” (Text)
Aerospace Corp. was accused of practices that were “uneconomical, unnecessary, unreasonable, or unjustified” by the Special Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Forces Committee, in a report on an examination of business management and fiscal controls at Aerospace that had culminated in hearings in May 1965. The report recommended a reappraisal of the usaf concept that had led to the creation of Aerospace, the abolishment of the fee-funding system, a review and reform of Aerospace’s security procedures, and a study of personnel policies and salaries. It also said usaf exercised improper and inadequate control of its contracts with Aerospace, often resulting in fees being provided “for purposes for which they were never used,” and Aerospace using “fees for purposes never intended by the Air Force . . .” (Committee on Armed Services Report)
The House Armed Services Real Estate Subcommittee approved Air Force plans to dispose of Atlas and Titan missile sites representing an investment of $856,900,000. The 14 missile complexes, embracing 113 missile launching silos, were being declared surplus as a result of the obsolescence of the missiles they were built to accommodate, (ap, NYT, 5/29/65, 25)	_
Joseph Campbell, Comptroller General, reported to Congress that the decision of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center to lease rather than buy two electric substations from the Potomac Electric Power Co. had resulted in $174,000 of unnecessary costs thus far. Campbell explained, “We believe that the Center failed to make this determination because of the Administration’s failure to provide guidelines to its employees, setting forth pertinent factors necessary for consideration in making decisions whether to lease or purchase property.” He added, however, that NASA had agreed with GAO findings and would purchase substations as provided for in contract. The matter was nevertheless reported to Congress because it “further illustrates that significant unnecessary costs can be and are being incurred,” when agencies do not make complete lease-versus -purchase studies. (Wash. Post, 2/28/65)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told the American Society of Photogrammetry and the American Congress on Surveying and Mapping, convening in Washington: “. . . since the dawn of the Space Age—in less than eight years—one of our most important tasks has been that of mapping—mapping the surface of the world and its geodetic figure; mapping the world’s weather, as revealed in its cloud patterns as seen from above; mapping the earth’s outermost atmosphere in three dimensions, and exploring its interaction with the newly-discovered solar wind; seeing and mapping astronomical sources for the first time in ultraviolet and X-radiation from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and mapping areas of our moon to an accuracy 2,000 times better than that now achievable from earth, and preparing to map areas of Mars to an accuracy as much as 100 times better than that attainable from earth. . . .” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking at the Annual Convention of the American Trial Lawyers Association in Miami Beach, said: “I would like first to comment on what appears to be a general misconception about the overall purposes of the Apollo program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon, ahead of the Soviets, is the paramount objective. This is not so. The principal goal is to make the United States first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to the world. “Why ... is it so vital that the United States be pre-eminent in space? There are many reasons that can be cited, and they fall generally into two major categories—the imperative reasons and the ancillary, or spin-off benefits. It is imperative, in the Cold War arena, that the United States be first for reasons of national security, national pride of achievement, and the international prestige. The ancillary . . . reasons include the benefits of scientific discovery; the stimulation of economic and social progress; technological advancement, including the civilian application and utilization of the products of space-oriented research; and the compelling urge of man to explore and to discover.” (Text)
New York Times editorialized: “The Aerospace Corporation, a multimillion-dollar nonprofit organization sponsored and financed by the Air Force, has been subject to a searching scrutiny by a House Armed Services subcommittee. Its report is a devastating indictment of Aerospace’s financial management. . . . “The abuses at Aerospace are mainly the fault of the Air Force, which indulged its prodigal offspring by failing to exercise any real control. Aerospace is only one of a growing number of Government-owned non-profit companies working on important defense assignments; there is no evidence that all are as expensive in their spending practices, but we agree with the subcommittee that it would be a good idea to examine the function and the costs of the rest and bring their fees under strict regulation. There is no reason for maintaining such operations if their work can be done cheaply and effectively either by the Government itself or by private enterprise.” (NYT, 9/7/65, 34M)
NASA successfully conducted the first tethered test firing of the Apollo 009 Service Module propulsion system at Kennedy Space Center. Test was marred by failure in the master countdown clock, which—a split second after ignition-—recycled to T minus 99 sec., throwing the count out of real time. The ground computer, which operated in plus time only, was thus unable to send the signal to shut off the engine. Instead of the two planned 15-sec. firings, the system was fired only once for a total of 20 sec. and shut off with a signal from the blockhouse. For the same reason, the ground computer was unable to send the signal to gimbal the engine and this apparatus was not tested, (upi, NYT, 11/20/65, 21; M&R, 11/29/65, 28)
Sen. Ralph Yarborough (D-Tex.) said on the floor of the Senate that results of Government-sponsored research should be “freely available to the American public” and that he “viewed with . . . skepticism any proposal to create a private monopoly” over this information. (CR, 3/16/65, 5051)
The Washington Post editorialized: “Decision of the Gemini-5 space flight commanders to try for the scheduled eight-day voyage, despite the power shortages that threatened the exploit during the first two days is one that the whole country will greet with delight. The astronauts have accomplished no mean feat already, but the execution of the intended plan will prove the sophistication of the American space engineers. . . . “The power difficulties on Gemini-5 have, in a curious way, reminded us that these incredible penetrations of space are not yet so commonplace as to he devoid of risk and misadvanture. A succession of triumphant experiments by Americans and Russians have made it look easy. The powerpack troubles, like the dips and bobs and pauses of gifted high-wire performers, have succeeded in reminding the ‘audience’ that the whole act is indeed very difficult and dangerous. We may have forgotten it for a moment, but now we are convinced.” (Wash. Post, 8/24/65, A12)
NASA announced its agreement with the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) to cooperate in scientific sounding rocket program to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere, emphasizing the effects of cosmic rays. NASA would provide and cnae would launch two sounding rockets from Natal, Brazil; scientific payloads would be constructed by Brazilian technicians at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA and CNAE would combine to provide ground support equipment, to analyze data, and to publish the results of the experiment. In addition, NASA would launch one instrumented sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., in a complementary experiment. The project would contribute to observance of 1965 as International Cooperation Year, (nasa Release 65—149)
The Communist New China News Agency (ncna) said in a broadcast that Indonesia had successfully launched a two-stage scientific rocket Jan. 5 from somewhere in West Java. The rocket was reportedly made by the Indonesian air force. There were no other details, (upi, Miami Her., 1/18/65)
Pan American World Airways had ordered four Boeing 727-QC (quick change) jet aircraft that could be converted in less than half an hour from an all-cargo plane to a complete passenger aircraft or a passenger-cargo plane. Aircraft would have a psssenger capacity of 119; in an all-cargo operation the plane could carry a payload of 41,000	lbs. more than 1,400 mi. Delivery was scheduled for summer 1966. (NYT, 7/26/65, 39M)
W. A. Patterson, Chairman of the Board of United Air Lines, told the Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., that his company had refrained from ordering a supersonic transport “because it’s a phony deal. You don’t put a deposit on a plane that may cost $40 million, that you have never seen, and that you don’t know anything about.” Patterson said the deposit plan was designed to create in Congress an “atmosphere of enthusiasm” to obtain appropriations for Sst research and development, (ap, NYT, 12/9/65, 93)
Commencing on the visit to Washington, D.C., by GEMINI v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., the Washington Post wrote: “Colonel Cooper has been through all this before following his 22-orbit flight in May, 1963. The reception this time will be less spectacular. But this does not mean that the astronauts have become passe or that the American people are indifferent to their achievements. Rather it is a reflection of the public’s trust in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s space program. For if the people no longer gawk and shout, they still applaud vigorously, with their hearts as well as their hands, each monumental step in the great venture into space.” (Wash. Post, 9/14/65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $8,774,000 research and development contract modification to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued uprating of the H—1 rocket engine from 188,000 to 200,000 lbs. Uprated engines would be used in clusters of eight to provide a total thrust of 1.6 million lbs. in first stage of Saturn ib launch vehicle. Modification brought H-l contract total to $20,648,500.	(Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 6)
A six-and-one-half-minute captive test firing of Saturn V booster’s second (S—II) stage was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA announced. The test—first full-duration firing—continued until the stage’s propellants were depleted, slightly longer than normal flight duration, (msfc Release 65-203; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 7)
In an editorial titled “Loss of a Leader,” the Washington Sunday Star concluded a review of Dr. Hugh L. Dryden’s contributions to American aeronautics and astronautics: “It is in the tradition of NASA, and of NACA before it, to name its research centers and after important figures in the development of aeronautics and astronautics: Langley, Lewis, Ames, Marshall, Kennedy. One major center—the one at Houston— remains unnamed. It would be a fitting tribute to a dedicated American if that center were henceforth to bear the name of Hugh L. Dryden.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, B2)
usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell told a meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., that “any reports of the impending demise” of the flying Air Force were “slightly exaggerated.” In fact, he added, a wide variety of new and better aircraft was needed to meet “the ever-changing nature and scope of the threat to our national interests.” (Text)
In a newspaper interview, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin expressed surprise that the U.S. had shown primarily military aviation equipment at the Paris International Air Show. He said he regretted he could not meet longer with American astronauts McDivitt and White. (Tass, Zarya Vostoka, 7/4/65, 3)
Karl G. Harr, president of the Aerospace Industries Assn., told the Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., that the aerospace industry would “jump at the chance” to attack social problems such as urban congestion and water pollution. He said this was so even though space companies had lost money in the first experiment in applying their techniques to urgent public problems. (Clark, NYT, 12/26/65, 43)
Establishment of a communications satellite system for commercial purposes is a matter entrusted to the Corporation under the Communications Satellite Act,” was the reply of ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk to the FCC regarding the American Broadcasting Co.’s proposal to launch its own satellite. The fcc had requested the views of ComSatCorp on the proposal. (ComSatCorp Release)
A wage dispute involving the International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees caused a shutdown of much of the construction under way at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, as about 3,000 of some 5,700	construction workers stayed off the job because of the picket lines. (upi, NYT, 6/25/65, 28)
A new kind of scientist—an interdisciplinarian to transcend specialization— was needed to solve many of the problems created by specialists, said Dr. John H. Heller, director of the New England Institute for Medical Research, in a lecture at American Univ., sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade. He said the interdisciplinarian would receive as much training in depth as a scientific specialist but would be instructed “far more broadly in depth.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/14/65, A3)
The Agena target vehicle for Gemini 6 was delivered to Cape Kennedy by the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (Orl. Sent., 7/27/65) President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Daniel J. Haughton, speaking on “Your Role in the New Environment,” said: “American aircraft products have dominated world markets for decades. Today at least 90 percent of the airline jets flown in the free world are built in the United States. Aircraft exports, both military and civilian, are $1.2 billion a year. Imports, on the other hand, are almost negligible— $90 million last year. “But now something new has been added—and that is more thrust toward cooperative programs. . . . “Cooperative programs are increasing. Only last May Secretary of Defense McNamara proposed a common market for military hardware. If successful, it will help integrate the total NATO market, including the U.S., even more closely, and will also permit foreign firms to sell selectively in the American defense market. “The total effect of these developments means, for U.S. manufacturers, more competition, more cooperative programs, and a more flexible approach . . . but I do not believe this means we must abdicate our technological leadership. I think, on the contrary, that we must strengthen it. One of my colleagues suggests we should add a new item to our national goals—the goal of overwhelming technical strength. . . .” (Text) Brig. Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), Director of the nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Industrial Operations, told the aiaa meeting: “The progress of the Saturn ib has been excellent. We are on schedule to begin flight tests next year, to be followed by manned flights in 1967. “In the Saturn V/Apollo program we are also on schedule. . . .” (Text)
General Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, said in an address to the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference in Albuquerque: “The Air Force responsibility for our nation’s military developments in space is clearly established. This morning I would like to review our current progress in the areas of unmanned space programs, boosters and propulsion, and finally, manned space programs. . . . “In the late 1950s, a small group of Air Force officers began a program to develop a space-based missile detection and warning system. To obtain information on the background as observed from space and on the signature of ballistic missile rocket motors, the Air Force initiated a series of measurement programs. Instrumented aircraft were used to obtain data on our missile target, from many aspects and in various weather conditions. Concurrently, a spacecraft ‘piggyback’ program for background measurements was instituted. This program has resulted in information of great value and is still collecting valuable data. . . . “The second area of interest is anti-satellite defense. Last September, President Johnson announced the existence of operational U.S. anti-satellite defense systems. . . . “The third area of interest is the detection of nuclear detonations in space. The original effort was formerly known as ‘Vela Hotel,’ and has now emerged as the present Vela Satellite Program. . . . “In 1963 the first pair of Vela Satellites was launched from Cape Kennedy; the second launch occurred in 1964. Both launches were completely successful, and the four satellites are still functioning. . . . “The last area that I would like to consider in unmanned military space systems is communication satellites—commonly called comsat. Our current philosophy of controlled response has placed an additional emphasis upon communications between field commanders and the highest level of our nation. . . . “In summary, space is a new environment of activity. We need to exploit it effectively for our own purposes to prevent it from being used against us. We are aware of the many problems confronting us and do not pretend to have all the solutions. But much has been done, and we are building a broad technological base to meet the even greater challenges of the future.” (Text)
First flight model of s-ivb, second stage of NASA’s Saturn ib booster, was en route via water from Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where it might be flown as early as December in the first launch of an Apollo flight-type spacecraft. (Marshall Star, 9/22/65, 10)
NASA Lewis Research Center project officials said tracking data from jpl’s Deep Space Network on Aug. ll’s successful Atlas-Centaur launch from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, had indicated precise guidance system accuracy for lunar and planetary trajectories. Less than one-tenth of the midcourse correction capability in the Surveyor model payload would have been needed to put the spacecraft on the final trajectory for a soft landing at a preselected site on the moon. With the success of this mission, Centaur was first U.S. launch vehicle to qualify operationally an all-inertial guidance system for deep space application. (NASA Release 65-271)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
The four largest closed die forgings ever produced from maraging steel were delivered by the Wyman-Gordon Co. to Launch Complex 34 at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Weighing 15,500 lbs. each and measuring 105 in. by 36 in., they would be used to anchor the mobile service tower for the Saturn ib rocket. (NYT, 7/4/65, 25)
Alfred Gessow, Chief of Fluid Physics Research, nasa, discussed before the Compressed Gas Association in New York City the problems of spacecraft deceleration and heating involved in return through the earth’s atmosphere. He explained why the blunt shape solved deceleration and much of the heat problem in returning Mercury spacecraft from orbit through the atmosphere to earth. Looking beyond the satellite return speed (Mercury and Gemini) and lunar return speed (Apollo), return from interplanetary flight poses the problem of much higher spacecraft speed (and thus heating). Research indicates “that the more pointed shape, although it doesn’t show up too well at the lower re-entry speeds, is better than the blunt nose at the higher speeds because the bow shock is weaker, thus producing lower radiant heating losses. Thus, in a very short time scale, but taking a big leap forward in the velocity-temperature scale, we find ourselves going into another phase of the blunt vs. pointed nose cycle. “. . . The switching between slender and blunt shapes is not new in the race for higher speeds at all times of history. Going through history, compact rocks were replaced by slender arrows; the concept of powder guns created round cannonballs; the rocket age produced slender forms again, which ironically, finally got blunt noses. It is interesting to see how long it took to make such changes empirically and how rapidly these variations have been made by following scientific principles. . . .” (Text)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara directed usaf to proceed with development of a reconnaissance version of the F-111. New version would be called the HF-IIIa and would be developed by General Dynamics Corp., prime contractor for the USAF F-l1 1a and USN’s F—1 11b tactical aircraft. More than $12,000,000 had been authorized for the initial development program, which would be directed by AFSC. (OOD Release 373-65) orbit with 203-mi. (327.4-km.) apogee; 100-mi. (161.2-km.) perigee; 89-min. period; and 28.9° inclination. Immediately after spacecraft separation, Gemini vii turned blunt end forward and began stationkeeping on Titan n’s second stage at distances from 20 ft. to 50 mi. for 17 min. Several hours later Borman made the first of a series of course corrections to position gemini vii for the scheduled rendezvous with Gemini vi by firing the thruster rockets 1% min. to raise the apogee from 100 mi. to 138 mi. Apparent loss of pressure in spacecraft’s fuel cells during flight’s early stages was later determined to be faulty indicator light. On Dec. 5, the astronauts encountered difficulties at first in sighting the rectangular panels displayed near Laredo, Tex., but later they successfully identified the patterns of panels and provided evidence that their visual acuity was not degraded over the 14-aay period. On Dec. 6, Lovell removed his 16-lb. spacesuit, becoming first U.S, astronaut to fly in undergarment. The astronauts visually tracked Polaris a-3 missile fired from uss Benjamin Franklin, submerged nuclear submarine off Cape Kennedy, and successfully tested onboard radar receiving unit needed for rendezvous. On Dec. 7, Borman fired thruster rockets to achieve a higher orbit for rendezvous attempt: apogee, 197 mi. (301.7 km.); perigee, 145 mi. (233.8 km.). On Dec. 8, clouds over New Mexico caused astronauts to cancel scheduled experiment to communicate with ground by laser beam. On Dec. 9, Borman executed a posigrade maneuver to circularize GEMINI vii’s orbit, firing thruster rockets one minute 18 sec. to raise perigee to 185.8 mi. (299.7 km.); 43 min. later, he fired braking thrusters 15 sec. to lower apogee to 188.3 mi. (103.7 km.) and provide a proper target orbit for Gemini 6. Dr. Berry recommended that Borman apply ointment to ease the nasal dryness caused by the 100%-oxygen atmosphere of his spacesuit. On Dec. 10, when temperatures in gemini vii’s cabin rose to 85°, Flight Director Christopher Kraft ordered Lovell to put on his space-suit to permit Borman to remove his. One astronaut was to wear his spacesuit at all times during the mission. Dr. Berry recommended that Lovell apply antihistamine ointment to ease nasal dryness. On Dec. 11, laser experiment was conducted with partial success: the Hawaiian ground station received signals from the spacecraft when Lovell locked his hand-held laser onto the ground-based one, but contact was not precise or strong enough to carry a human voice. On Dec. 12, the astronauts tried again to establish ground laser communications over White Sands Missile Range, but were able to pick up only two quick flashes from the ground beacon. On Dec. 13, when gemini vii’s fuel cell warning light flashed on, the astronauts flushed excess water from the system by forcing in additional oxygen borrowed from the cabin’s oxygen supply, thereby correcting die difficulty. A taperecorder malfunction prevented the spacecraft from supplying automatic data on performance of its systems between tracking stations. On Dec. 14, Borman observed reentry of a Minuteman missile fired from Vandenberg afb to Eniwetok—first time a missile reentry had been sighted by an astronaut. Both gemini vii astronauts were beginning to feel the strain of their ten days in space: “Jim and I are beginning to notice the days seem to be lengthening a little,” Borman said. “We’re getting a little crummy.” On Dec. 15, gemini vii and Gemini vi achieved their historic rendezvous in orbit (see Dec. 15—16). On Dec. 16, a report from gemini vii Astronauts Borman and Lovell that three of the six fuel cell stacks were not operating aroused apprehension that the flight might end prematurely. Next day gemini vii’s fuel cells began to function satisfactorily, thereby assuring a full-duration mission. Astronauts Borman and Lovell checked out all their spacecraft’s systems and received reentry instructions. On Dec. 18, gemini vii began a normal reentry when its four retrorockets fired automatically in correct sequence above the Pacific southeast of the Philippines. After a controlled reentry to the predetermined landing point, the spacecraft splashed down in the Atlantic at 9:06 a.m. est, 700 mi. southwest of Bermuda—only 7.6 mi. from target. The astronauts, after their record-breaking 330-hr. 35-min. spaceflight, were assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen and taken to the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, (nasa Release 65-362; NASA Proj. Off.; Transcript; NYT, 12/5/65, 1, 72; 12/6/65, 1, 43; 12/7/65, 24; 12/13/65, 1, 46; 12/15/65, 23; WSJ, 12/9/65, 1; 12/13/65, 1; 12/14/65, 1; Wash. Post, 12/6/65. A3: 12/7/65. Al, A3; 12/9/65, A9; 12/10/65, Al, A3; 12/12/65, Al, A8; 12/13/65, Al; 12/14/65, A3; Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, Al, A8; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/6/65, Al, A12; 12/7/65, A3; 12/8/65, A3; 12/12/65, A7; 12/15/65, Al, A2, A6; Time, 12/24/65, 32-36; msc Gemini VII/Gemini VI Fact Sheet)
British Minister of Aviation Roy Jenkins said at a London conference on European cooperation in advanced technology that Britain might seek collaboration with France in developing the VC—10 aircraft into an “air bus” capable of carrying 265 passengers. This move was thought to be precipitated by activities of two American companies, Boeing and Douglas, both of which had approached boac with their versions of an air bus. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/6/65, 54M)
L/Col. Pavel R. Popovich, who orbited the earth 48 times in vostok IV in August 1962, said in an interview with Izvestia that the rendezvous of GEMINI vi and Gemini vii was “a great achievement of American cosmonautics on the way to exploiting space around the earth.” (Reuters, NYT, 12/22/65,19)
A New York Times editorial by Harry Schwartz concerning Soviet-American cooperation in space: “The real issues relate to the advantages and disadvantages in the moon race itself—including, of course, its propaganda aspects. “The argument that cooperation will not mean significant savings is strongest for the immediate future, but its force weakens rapidly as one extends the time horizon of both nations’ future space efforts. Even in the next year or two both countries could gain from a full pooling of space technology and knowledge because this would reduce the number of Gemini-type flights each would have to engage in. . . . “Major cost advantages can certainly be gained by agreement on a division of labor between the Soviet Union and the United States, if it is accompanied by a decision to send mixed crews on major missions. For example, a pooling of information and resources might permit one country to focus on the hardware needed for the moon trip, while the other concentrated on the equipment needed to send men to Mars. . . . “But the major savings from real Soviet-American cooperation in space might come from another direction entirely. In both countries influential voices are urging major military efforts looking to the creation of armed national space fleets . . . The time is past due for decision between space cooperation, or the extension of a rivalry that could cost both Soviet and American peoples dearly—and perhaps not solely in terms of vast sums wasted.” (Schwartz, NYT, 6/14/65, 31, 32) Dr. James H. Wakelin, Jr., president of the Scientific Engineering Institute of Boston, said in an address at the Conference: “We must look forward to undersea dwellings, laboratories and military installations in which men would live and work for the economic good and military defense of the United States.” Dr. Wakelin advised President Johnson to appoint a National Advisory Commission on the Ocean to develop a 10-yr. program for study, exploration, and use of the seas, (upi, NYT, 6/15/65, 6) Capt. Jacques-Yves Cousteau urged the organization to “preserve and protect the sea from pollution.” He also warned against conducting undersea explorations entirely with instruments and suggested: “Let us go down . . . and see for ourselves, with our eyes.” (Casey, Wash. Post, 6/16/65, A14) opening remarks, Maj. Gen. Don Ostrander, afosr Commander, said: “The purpose of these Cloudcroft meetings is to stimulate ideas—to act as an intellectual catalyst. . . . We all have a responsibility to try to understand the complex interrelationships between science and technology, and between technology and national defense; through understanding, to participate in the excitement and urgency of the creative turmoil which is such an inescapable part of the age in which we live!” Historian A. Hunter Dupree, professor of history at the Univ. of California (Berkeley) and a consultant to NASA, said that scientists with a negative attitude regarding the Nation’s manned space flight activities had a laboratory-limited view of scientific endeavor and had lost perspective of the contributions made to American and world science through exploration and survey expeditions in the field. He pointed out the relationship of the Pacific voyages of Capt. Cook to Darwin’s later theory of evolution and said: “One can as little predict the results of space exploration as Captain Cook could have predicted Darwin’s theory.” According to Dupree, it was the general expansion of knowledge that would lead to later fruitful developments. But to justify these developments immediately or to justify exploration in terms of predictable developments would be a mistake. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/16/65; afosr Release 5-65—2; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 106110) An artificial frog’s eye which could be sent to the surface of Mars to detect living organisms was described by Warren McCullough and Louis Sutro. Research had revealed there were four varieties of ganglion cells in the eye of the frog—each processing different information. The MIT scientists had proposed the following scheme to nasa: the artificial eye would be coupled to a microscope in a tiny computer. Samples of Martian soil would be seen by the frog’s eye through the microscope. When movement was detected, the eye would inform the computer, which would decide whether a picture of the moving organism should be taken for relay back to earth. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al) Theories on biological rhythms were proposed by Colin Pittendrigh of Princeton Univ. at the AFOSR seminar. He suggested that oscillations or biological rhythms were serving a fundamental function that was not yet fully identified and that all organisms undergo oscillations with a periodicity that matches that of the external world—roughly 24 hrs. Light, even in negligible amounts, could alter these oscillations. In Pittendrigh’s view, once the true face of biological clocks—time measuring mechanisms innate in all living organisms—was seen, science would have vital clues to how life developed on earth and how biological rhythms determine what it is all living things do. (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/22/65, A6) Star collisions were suggested by astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. as one way that energy now associated with a host of new objects observed throughout the universe was released. He said a prime candidate for providing the right kind of environment for star collisions was elliptical galaxies. In their predeath condition, elliptical galaxies start to lose stars that comprise the galaxies. Star loss causes the galaxies to shrink and become denser. The remaining stars rush in and out through the heats of these galaxies at speeds possibly as high as 24 million mph—greatly enhancing the chance for star collisions. The effect of collisions at these speeds would be to release amounts of energy equivalent to that calculated to be stored in the quasi-stellar radio sources. Gold had not observed such star collisions, but dense regions on the “brink of destruction” had been detected. “We must inspect each in turn,” Gold said, adding, “maybe we will learn that something totally different is involved, a new type of energy source that physics doesn’t know about.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 6/23/65)
Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) asked that NASA temporarily assign Dr. Joachim P. Kuettner, deputy director of the Technical Staff (Saturn/Apollo Systems Office) of the Research and Development Operations, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, as Chief Space Scientist of the National Weather Satellite Center. Dr. Kuettner, expected to leave for Washington, D.C., about Sept. 1, would administer ESSA’s space program, specifically, manned and unmanned advanced systems, (mfsc Release 65-207)
Britain and France signed an agreement to jointly build two supersonic military aircraft for the 1970s: (1) a strike trainer; and (2) a pivoting-wing attack plane. The strike trainer, to be based on France’s twin-engine Breguet 121, would be built by the British Air-, craft Corp. in cooperation with the Societe des Ateliers d’Aviation Louis Breguet. Rolls Royce, Ltd., and Turbomeca, a French engine concern, would supply the engines. The variable sweep wing, aircraft similar to the American F-lll fighter-bomber, but smaller, would be based on the concept of British aircraft designer Dr. Barnes Wallis and built by the British Aircraft Corp. and the Societe Generale Aero-nautique Marcelle Dassault. The agreement committed each country to an initial expenditure of $56 million, most of which would be spent on a prototype for the strike trainer. (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/18/65, 8)
Second major Saturn V milestone this month: First five-engine ignition test of the Saturn V second stage, the S-II, was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. The five J—2 engines, built by naa’s Rocketdyne Div., would produce one million pounds thrust. Short-duration firings leading to full-duration tests of nearly 400 sec. would follow the ignition firing, (msfc Release 65-99)
In a luncheon address to the National Security Industrial Association in Washington, D.C., Lt. Gen. W. A. Davis (usaf), Vice Cdr. of Air Force Systems Command, discussed AFSC accomplishments in 1964:	. . Important strides were also made in the area of space. We carried out intensive studies on the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). Last month the Secretary of Defense announced that proposals are being requested from industry for design studies to assist in developing the cost and technical information needed to proceed with full scale development of the MOL. Titan hi, the Standard Launch Vehicle 5A, completed two highly successful test launches. Systems Command also provided support to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This included the use of the Atlas-Agena combination to launch Ranger 7 on its successful photographic mission to the moon and Mariner 4 on its way to Mars. We also conducted the first launch of the man-rated Titan II. It was very successful. “There are a number of tasks ahead of us in space. One of our most promising present programs is the Titan ill space launching system. The Titan in will be used to launch the 24 satellites for the interim Defense Satellite Communications System. It will also be used to launch the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), which is designed to determine man’s capability to perform military functions in space. The mol will have an important bearing on our future space capabilities.” (afsc Release)	.
Decision to proceed with the Mol received comment in Science: “Some proponents of MOL believe that, as insurance against ‘technological surprise’ and as a test of improved methods of intelligence gathering, the project will lead to greater stability in relations between the United States and the Communist world. But skeptics fear that MOL will carry the arms race into space. Despite a long hunger, the Air Force has never before been permitted a role in manned space flight, a function heretofore reserved exclusively for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (Science, 9/17/65, 1357)
New sunspots heralding the start of a new 11-yr. cycle were discussed at sessions on the International Years of the Quiet Sun held in Washington, D.C., under auspices of the American Geophysical Union and the International Scientific Radio Union. Scientists said the asymmetrical birth of the new cycle suggested it might not reach as intense a maximum as usual. The cycle was of vital interest to planners of a manned moon landing since it had been discovered that some solar eruptions shoot out protons at so close to the speed of light they could kill an astronaut. While astronauts were on the moon, or inside the Lem, they would be poorly protected against such a proton shower. Dr. Herbert Friedman, of the Naval Research Laboratory, said during the symposium they would be comparatively safe if they could return to their orbiting command capsule. The goal, therefore, he said, was to learn enough about these events so that astronauts could have sufficient warning to take refuge in their spacecraft. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/23/65)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
First clear spectrograms of ultraviolet light from the stars were obtained on a Princeton Univ. rocket experiment originally thought to have been a failure, a spokesman for the university’s rocket program announced. The films from the June 1 flight from White Sands Missile Range had at first been feared to be fogged, but after being developed by special techniques, showed spectra of starlight with a fineness of detail never before achieved. A detailed report would be issued after the films had been studied further, (ap, NYT, 6/28/65; Wash. Post, 6/29/65)
Hsinhua, official Chinese Communist press agency, announced public display in Peking military museum of a pilotless JJ.S. reconnaissance plane, shot down over central south China, Jan. 2, 1965, “by the Air Force.” {NYT, 4/3/65, 2)
usaf Titan ni-c, launched from the Eastern Test Range, became the most powerful rocket known to have been lofted and the first liquid-fuel spacecraft to be lifted from its pad with solid-fuel rockets. Two 120-in.-dia., 86-ft.-long solid strap-on boosters generated a peak thrust of 2.647 million lbs. % sec. after ignition to propel the liquid-fuel core vehicle to an altitude of 24 mi. Less than two minutes after lift-off, the boosters were jettisoned by firing of 16 small rockets. The liquid-fuel engines of the 127-ft., three-stage core vehicle then fired a 474,000-lb. thrust burst that injected the vehicle’s third stage (tran-stage) with 29,285-lb. lead ballast and instrument payload into an orbit with apogee, 116.2 mi. (187 km.); perigee, 110.4 mi. (177.7 km.); period, 88.1 min; inclination to the equator, 32.175°. This was the heaviest payload ever orbited; insertion velocity was 25,584 fps. The solid-fuel motors, made by United Technology Center, were formed in lO-ft.-dia. segments stacked inside metal casings. Adding two segments to each of the two five-segment boosters used would permit Titan III-C to put 32,000 lbs. into orbit. Payload could be increased to 40,000 lbs, using 13-ft.-dia. segments of another type already test-fired by UTC. Liquid stages used nitrogen tetroxide and Aerozene 50 (a 50/50 mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydra-zine) as the oxidizer and fuel; the propellants ignited hypergolically. A series of twelve Titan ill—c tests was projected. Most powerful rocket previously launched was NASA’s Saturn I, which produced 1.5 million lbs. thrust. The most powerful known Soviet rocket, which orbited voskhod i and voskhod ii, had been rated by American experts at 800,000-900,000 lbs. thrust. The two-stage Titan II that launched GEMINI III and GEMINI IV into orbit produced 430,000 lbs. of thrust. (Clark, NYT, 6/19/65, 1; ap, Benedict, Wash. Post, 6/19/65, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/19/65; Av. Wk., 6/28/65, 16-19)
Nearly 390,000 visitors toured NASA Kennedy Space Center and Cape Kennedy. The Space Center’s doors were first opened to visitors Jan. 3, 1965. In its first year, the Center was host to visitors from all 50 states and 57 countries.	(NASA Space Sheet, 3/31/66)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
A commercial model of the military c—5a subsonic jet was being considered by Pan American World Airways to provide cheap air transportation, reported the Wall Street Journal. The aircraft would measure 230 ft. or more from nose to tail, weigh over 700,000 lbs., and carry a payload of over 250,000 lbs.; four jet engines would propel it at 550 mph. The passenger version would hold between 700 and 1,000 people. The jet bus could cut cargo rates 50% or more and cut fares 20 to 25%. Problems would arise, however, in that present airport runways might not be able to sustain the great weight and new procedures would have to be developed to handle the increased traffic. (Cooke, WSJ, 7/16/65,1, 8)
In first Pacific Ocean sounding rocket experiment from nasa’s Mobile Range Facility, two two-stage Nike-Apaches were launched from USNS Croatan about one mile north of the equator at 84° west longitude. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the mission of first tocket was to measure ionospheric currents and magnetic fields in “equatorial electrojet,” a system of electrical current circulating in ionosphere in the region of magnetic equator which could be responsible for intensifying equatorial magnetic field at about local noon. Second Nike-Apache, conducting an experiment for Univ. of Michigan, was launched about 2 hrs. later carrying Pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density in the region of 20 to 75 mi. altitude. (NASA Release 65-82; Wallops Release 65-12; NASA Rpts. srl)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff, was awarded the 1965 Collier Trophy, U.S. aviation’s highest honor, in a ceremony at the Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C. General LeMay was cited for “development of high performance aircraft, missiles, and space systems which in 1964 significantly expanded the frontiers of American aeronautics and astronautics.” (naa News, 10/18/65; Raymond, NYT, 10/22/65,1)
Washington Post concluded that it might be embarrassing for the Russians to refuse President Johnson’s invitation to send a representative from the Soviet Academy to view the next Gemini launching. An editorial elaborated: “It just so happens that a high-level Russian space delegation will be in New York City in mid-October to attend a meeting of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. “It just so happens, too, that the Gemini 6 launching is scheduled for late October. “And, it just so happens that Mr. Johnson knew the dates of both scheduled happenings. . . . “There is no guarantee that the Russians will accept the President’s invitation—the first formal invitation of its kind extended to them. Hitherto, the Russians have not accepted informal invitations to witness an American space launching. . . . “Experts have suggested that one reason for this Soviet shyness was the tacit implication that if the Russians accept an American invitation to Cape Kennedy, Russia would have to respond with a like invitation. . . .” (Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
Reported that Dr. William I. Donn of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory, Dr. Wilbur G. Valentine of Brooklyn College, and Dr. Bertram D. Donn of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had challenged presently accepted ages of the earth (4.5 billion yrs.) and the sun (5 billion yrs.). They had asserted that the oldest of continental rocks were so very ancient that the sun’s and the earth’s ages allowed too little time for continent formation by earthly processes and from earthly materials. Two alternative explanations were proposed:	(1) either the sun and the earth must be much older, perhaps by a half-billion years or more; or, (2) the original continents were thrown down upon the planet’s surface when objects from space— hundreds of miles across in size—crashed into the earth. Research results had been published in the Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/13/65)
Dr. John W. Salisbury and Joel Adler of Cambridge Laboratories reported to 132d meeting of the AAAS in Berkeley, Calif., that American astronauts landing on the moon might encounter lunar dust that would stick like wet snow to their windows, faceplates, and camera lenses. Salisbury and Adler said they had reached those conclusions by two separate experiments. (Wash. Post, 12/30/65, A4) Medical and physical data from the two-week GEMINI vn flight indicated that man could withstand a lunar mission without any serious harm, reported Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for NASA MSC, at the AAAS meeting. Dr. Berry revealed that the astronauts’ heart rates and blood pressures during the flight had remained within normal ranges and that within 10 hrs. after splashdown, Borman had regained 4.8 lbs. of the 9.6 lbs. he had lost; Lovell, who had lost 5.9 lbs., had regained 6.6 lbs. Berry, who doubted the astronauts could have endured 14 days in spacesuits, attributed much of the success of the mission to the freedom of flying in underwear. He reported that the electroencephalogram studies recording brain wave activity had shown no abnormalities during the first two flight days, but that the electrodes on the astronauts’ scalps had come loose before the end of the planned 4-day experiment. As to the radiation dosage hazards on the 14-day flight, Dr. Berry said the measured amounts were “peanuts.” The calcium balance studies which required measurements of calcium loss to sweat, blood, urine, and feces might take “several more months to complete,” he added. Astronaut Edward H. White (L/Col., usaf) accompanied Dr. Berry to the meeting to brief scientists on preparations necessary to plan and execute successful space missions. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 12/30/65, Al)
Discussing the problems of organizing and consolidating the vast amounts of technical and scientific data at the Congress of the International Federation for Documentation in Washington, D.C., Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is felt by many that the most highly advanced information system in the Federal Government has been and remains the program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This program has been a pace-setter lor information advances, both on the part of the Government and private sectors of our economy. The NASA contractors and grantees get the benefit of the most widely-diversified and promptest information service rendered by any government agency. The NASA attempts to cover world space literature, star [Scientific and Technical Aerospace Reports] is reproduced semi-monthly and through arrangement with the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s open literature is covered in the international aerospace abstracts. A total of more than 50,000 items a year are indexed in depth on magnetic tape for use in the NASA computer base literature research system. Tapes are updated monthly and distributed to the NASA Research Centers, a dozen major NASA contractors, and three university research centers that use them in dissemination of technological information to industry. . . .” (Text)
A contract for about $60 million would be signed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase II development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso), NASA announced. Republic would furnish two flight spacecraft and a prototype; work would also include final development and design, checkout, experiment integration, and launch support services. The Phase I portion of the project was completed in July 1965. Launching of the 1,250-lb. Aoso, planned for the late 1960’s, would be from Vandenberg afb by a thrust-augmented Thor-Agena rocket; the observatory would provide a constant search for isolated or unusual solar activity, (nasa Release 65-234)
H. Z. Hopkins, Jr., chief of North American Aviation, Inc., flight test operations at Edwards afb, Calif., was named president of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots (setp). Also honored by setp during its annual meeting in Los Angeles was A1 White, naa’s chief test pilot, who was recipient of the Ivan C. Kincheloe Award. White was cited for his role in development and testing of XB-70a research aircraft. (naa Release NL-19; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65,2)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown from Edwards AFB by North American Aviation pilots Alvin S. White and Van H. Shepard, reached 1,920 mph (mach 2.9) for five minutes. Purpose of 123-min. flight was to test the XB-70’s stability and control at nearly triple sonic speed and the effect of 556°C heat from air friction on the aircraft’s surface, (ap, Virginian-Pilot, 12/15/65)
At the request of Labor Secretary W. Willard Wirtz and chief Federal mediator William Simkin, the International Association of Machinists authorized 200 strikers to resume work on the Gemini spacecraft at Kennedy Space Center. The machinists struck McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Gemini’s builder, on Nov. 18 in a dispute over wages and working conditions. Not only had the strike threatened to ground Gemini vn, scheduled for launch December 4, it had also halted, and continued to halt, work on the f-4 Phantom jet fighter at the McDonnell St. Louis plant, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/23/65, A8; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/23/65)
An unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
American Airlines would directly support San Francisco Oakland Helicopter Airlines under the terms of an agiecment recently submit* ted to the cab for approval. (ATT, 7/28/65, 54M)
In a farewell speech at a dinner meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M.	Zuckert said that in contrast to five years ago, the Air Force today was better. He predicted it would continue to improve: “We have not reached a plateau in technology, strategy, concepts, or doctrine. All kinds of changes will continue—in both hardware and ideas.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/18/65, 5)
Soviet Marshal Vasily Sokolovsky said during a Moscow press conference held in connection with the 47th anniversary of the Red Army that the U.S.S.R. was armed with intercontinental and global rockets whose nuclear warheads were equal to 100 million tons of TNT. He claimed strategic rocket troops now formed the backbone of the Soviet armed forces so that the effectiveness of the Soviet air force had been sharply increased by supersonic planes equipped with nuclear-tipped, long-range rockets. He said the Soviet navy was now built around atomic submarines of virtually unlimited range that were equipped with powerful missiles. New Soviet antiaircraft defenses were capable of reaching targets flying at any speed at any altitude. He claimed that the Soviet Union had undertaken several measures toward the relaxation of international tension, among them a reduction of $555 million in military spending for the current year. (Sovietskaya Moldaviya, 2/18/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/65; Wash. Post, 2/18/65)
Aerobee sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station, Va. carried 317-lb. payload to 90-mi. altitude and impacted about 54 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the stellar spectroscopy experiment measured special radiation of two stars, Spica and Alkaid, utilizing an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and an input telescope with a 13-in. aperture. Performance of a gimbaled star tracker and modified attitude control (Strap) was also tested. Data were telemetered to ground station during flight. (Wallops Release 65-26)
In Saturday Review, Science Editor John Lear reviewed GSFc’s Project Firefly as “an epic experiment that will at least track the essential spark of life wherever it can be found beyond the earth.” He reviewed Dr. William D. McElroy’s pioneering research in bioluminescence [see March 11] and noted that Norman E. MacLeod, head of GSFC Bioscience Group, emphasized in interviews the contribution of the Johns Hopkins scientist. He also reviewed the flight of “robot photographer named Ranger 8,” concluding “The Russians tend to be more practical about small but crucial obstacles than Americans do. Although they are years ahead in rocketry (having now demonstrated the ability to move a man out through the hatchway of a spaceship in flight and safely back again—a preliminary step to using the hatchway to link the two spaceships that will travel as one to the moon), they have not yet been so brash as to announce a date by which they will make a manned landing on the moon. Before we become still more acutely embarrassed by our lunar braggadocio, it would seem wise for Washington to abandon the virtually impossible 1970 deadline for putting an American on the moon.” (SR, 4/3/65, 45—48)
A Cairo newspaper revealed that the United Arab Republic was training men for space flight. No date for a possible launching was given. (upi, Milwaukee ]., 4/16/65) Noting areas of disagreement among scientists, theoretical astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. tried to explain why the Ranger pictures resolved so little: “The Ranger pictures are like a mirror. Everyone sees his own theories reflected in them.” Prof. Gold saw a moon covered with dust; young craters composed of solid rock while older craters had somehow gone soft; and vast sheets of ice locked under compacted sediment beneath much of the lunar surface. Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist from the Univ. of California, referred to evidence of widespread collapse of the lunar surface, probably due to underground movement: “The ranger ix’s pictures scared me more than anything. There’s all sorts of evidence that some of these craters are sinking.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey said that chances that the moon’s surface was too soft for the 15-ton Lem were “almost vanishingly remote.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Clark, NYT, 4/16/65) Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker agreed with findings in the paper he presented for his colleague, Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Dr. Kuiper concluded that the lunar surface had a bearing strength of between one and two tons per square foot. His calculations, made from data extracted from RANGER IX photographs, was based on the size of rocks ejected from a given impact crater and the distance they traveled. Other tentative findings were that the dark portions of the maria were due to some unknown fluid flows and not lava or ash flows; that the maria were not completely covered with lunar dust; and that the moon’s surface exhibited a remarkable series of fracture patterns which could be due to polar contraction, tidal effects, or some other force. (Clark, NYT, 4/16/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Boris J. Levin, section chief of the Institute of Earth Physics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said studies based on radioactive emissions from meteorites and on lunar data indicated that the interior of the moon partially melted some two million years after the formation of that body began: “If you assume the moon is of the same material as meteorites, it is necessary to assume that the interior at one time was partly molten.” Prof. Levin said the moon was formed simultaneously with the earth and was not originally part of it. It was about 10 earth-radii distant and later shifted to the present position. He added: “We believe that there is a lava flow not covered by dust.” (Wash. Post, 4/17/65: Milwaukee /.. 4/17/65: CSM, 4/26/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Dr. John Clark, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said that a year ago nasa officials had hoped that Ranger would tell something about the topography of the moon: “That in turn would tell something about the geometry needed for the landing vehicle. Ranger has done this and now we look to the Surveyor spacecraft to tell us the bearing strength of the moon’s surface.” (ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Clark, NYT, 4/17/65) Dr. Fred Whipple of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said the moon’s surface might be lower than had been calculated: “The data indicates that ranger vii and vih, and maybe ranger ix, landed one second late because the moon was one mile small. The moon’s surface at the point of landing was lower by two kilometers fa mile and a quarter) than the average lunar radius.” ( ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Milwaukee /., 4 17 65)
Pickets were removed from entrances to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, when printing and reproduction workers voted to end their 6-day-old construction-crippling strike and submit the dispute to the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission. Removal of the pickets would enable 2,200 construction workers who had honored the lines to return to vital space projects, (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/30/65)
Hundreds of construction workers returned to their jobs, following removal of Boeing pickets from four of the five entrances at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, ending the eighth major construction work stoppage at KSC within 20 mo. Confinement of the striking IAM members to the one gate used by Boeing personnel had been ordered September 18 by nasa and usaf, (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/21/65, 10)
Soviet claim that the Gemini v spaceflight was undertaken with “haste and definite risk” received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star: “Tass, the official Soviet news agency, should feel a little bit embarrassed at the moment. It has given a big play to a story by Leonid Ponomariov [sic], its New York correspondent. The story has charged that American space officials have been ordered by the Johnson administration to ‘beat the Soviet Union at any price with regard to the duration of orbital flight.’ “. . . our country may indeed be forging ahead. But nothing could be more ridiculous than Ponomariov’s [sic] studied suggestion that Gemini 5 has been put into orbit in a slapdash manner, with callous disregard for the safety of the astronauts aboard, just to steal a space scene from the Soviets. The fuel system and everything else aboard the Cooper-Conrad vehicle are not whimsical improvisations. That has been made dramatically clear by the way in which Gemini’s initial power failure has been eliminated with help from ground control, by the craft’s built-in means of self-correction. “As a result, it seems fairly certain right now that Astronauts Cooper and Conrad will be able to complete their eight-day mission. . . . “God willing, the Gemini flight will succeed to a degree that may persuade the men of the Kremlin to pay serious attention to our country’s standing proposal for a joint Soviet-American effort to promote a manned landing on the moon.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/24/65)
Full-scale Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) weight simulator was shipped from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Poseidon. Trip would require five days. Simulator would be used in checking equipment and handling procedures at KSC’s Launch Complex 39 in preparation for arrival of the Saturn V facility vehicle early in 1966. (msfc Release 65-295)
Strongly urging greater emphasis on U.S. aeronautics and aviation than now exists. Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D—Okla.), Chairman of Senate Aviation Sub-committee, addressed Air Force Association in Dallas, Tex. “I am afraid some people, and I mean people of high stature and great influence, seem bent on relegating aeronautics to a secondary position. This I think is a crucial mistake. In aeronautics we stand on the threshold of a boundless upsurge which may well dwarf what has been achieved by aviation over the past 61 years. “Also, the economic productivity of aeronautics makes dollars . . . and sense. It means money in the bank, or rather gold in Fort Knox. On the other hand, I don’t know of any scheme . . . and I doubt that one will emerge within this century . . . for fighting the balance of payments deficit in outer space. “There simply are no dollars floating around between here and the moon. For the time being, outer space commerce just doesn’t seem to be in the cards. And as long as this is the situation, I don’t think we should banish aeronautics to the back seat ... or have a NASA budget which is better than 08 percent spacecraft and less than 2 percent aircraft. And this in spite of the fact that NASA and its forerunner, naca, were ostensibly founded to serve aeronautics! “I am not saying this to downgrade space, but to suggest that we strike a balance based on how the national interest and economy are served best. . . . This widening disparity between NASA’s space and aeronautical efforts . . . this wall flower treatment of the airplane ... is a reckless gamble, economically, politically and militarily, that will come back to haunt us in the future. My criticism, by the way, is not directed at the level of competence in that agency but at the lack of programming of aeronautical goals and the failure to mobilize this nation’s brain power on behalf of aviation. It seems to me the real deficiency is that the well qualified aeronautical talent in NASA js so far down in the hierarchy that these men rarely ever get involved in the decision making. It’s crystal clear that other nations, the Russians included, have cut this Gordian knot and are rapidly filling the vacuum which we so invitingly created for them. . . .” (Text; ap, NYT, 7/2/65)
Representatives of companies planning to buy the supersonic Concorde airliner were told in a report prepared by the joint builders, British Aircraft Corp. and Sud Aviation France, that the makers were confident, following extensive wind tunnel tests, that the Concorde represented “the best possible compromise for a supersonic transport” and would be “safe and easy to fly.” A special report on the problem of sonic boom said tests had shown that the calculated extent of these sharp detonations had been “generally pessimistic.” It said that climb and acceleration techniques were being developed that would keep the shock waves of air causing these booms as slight as possible. The experts present for the three-day talks on the airliner’s progress were from Air France, British Overseas Airways Corp., Pan American World Airways, American Airlines, Continental Airlines, Qantas, Air India, and Middle East Airlines, which had together ordered or taken options on 45 of the aircraft, valued at $560 million. (Reuters, NYT, 5/19/65, 94C)
Charles W. Harper, Director of NASA Hq. Aeronautics Div., discussed aeronautical research at a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers Association. He said: “ . . . aviation has a tremendous potential in the short-haul ‘aerial bus.’ Both vtol (vertical take-off and landing) and stol (short take-off and landing) are being considered for this job. . . . On the basis of our current knowledge I would conclude the vtol commercial transport offers tremendous potential but requires additional research . . . before it is ready for detailed feasibility study as a commercial transport. On the other hand the STOL machine is ready for a careful examination since the major problems seem to be in hand. “A 20 to 50 passenger stol machine should, or could, have a top speed of 300 to 400 knots, a steep approach with a touch down at 45 knots and an operational field length of some 1200 to 1500 feet. Allweather operation is required and, with the aid of space technology advances, this appears quite possible. We think we can display electronically to the pilot the important features of the airport so that he can approach it and land using the same information that he does in clear weather. “We see two large markets for vehicles of this type. In a smaller simple version, perhaps bearing a little sacrifice in performance, an air transport well suited for use in underdeveloped areas. Rugged, easy to fly and simple to maintain, it could enable these countries to jump from jungle or desert trails to modern transport system without building enormously expensive railways and highways. This would be a good market for U.S. industry. In a larger sophisticated version it could be the vehicle to make the present short haul feeder lines self sufficient, not depending on connecting traffic from the trunk lines. This too would be a desirable situation for American industry. NASA plans to pursue both of these potentials actively until the air industry has enough confidence in success to proceed on its own. . . .” (Text) Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, addressed the Science Teachers’ Association of Santa Clara County, Calif., at NASA Ames Research Center. He said: “The question then is, w'hat has man done in space to date? According to the eminent archaeologist, V. Gordon Childe, whatever man has done in the relatively short evolutionary history documented by his fossil remains, he has done without significantly improving his inherited equipment by bodily changes detectable in his skeleton. Moreover, this equipment is inadequately adapted for survival in any particular environment, and indeed it is inferior to that of most animals for coping with any special set of conditions. Yet in spite of his physical inferiority, man has been able to adjust himself to a greater range of environment than any other creature, to multiply much faster than any near relative amongst the higher mammals, and indeed to beat them all at their special tricks. Thus he learned to control fire, and he developed the skills to make clothes and houses, with the result that he lives and thrives from pole to pole on earth, and already he is concerned with a population explosion. He has developed trains and cars that can outstrip the fleetest cheetah, and he has developed the airplane so that he can mount higher than the eagle. Moreover, he developed telescopes to see further than the hawk, and firearms to lay low the elephant or any other animal, including himself. But whatever their use, the important point is that fire, clothes, houses, trains, airplanes, telescopes, and guns are not part of man’s body. He can set them aside at will. They are not inherited in the biological sense, but rather the skill needed for their conception, production, and use is part of our intellectual heritage, the result of a tradition built up over many generations and transmitted not in the blood but through speech and writing. “The true stepping stones to the moon are ourselves and our forefathers. The stepping stones beyond are our children, and much of what they will be and where they will lead the human race, is up to you and your kind. If you succeed in your work, you will have made an invaluable contribution to the betterment of man’s ability to make himself, to master himself, and finally to understand himself in his environment. Indeed, if you are especially successful, you may, in the words of V. R. Potter, ‘develop a new breed of scholars, men who combine a knowledge of new science and old wisdom, men who have the courage of the men of the Renaissance who thought truth was absolute and attainable,’ and who may yet be right. I submit we can do no less than find out.” (Text)
Blount Brothers Corp. had been awarded a $6,745,000 fixed-price contract for modification of Saturn IB Launch Complex 37 at NASA Kennedy Space Center, DOD announced, (dod Release 444^-65)
Final test in North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div.’s seven-month paraglider operational test program was successfully completed at Edwards afb, when Gemini boilerplate suspended beneath an inflated paraglider was towed to 9,000- to 10,000-ft. altitudes and released for free flights that averaged four and one half to five minutes. The test program, in which 12 consecutive successful flights and landings in tow-test vehicles were executed by company pilots, was not related directly to the NASA Gemini program but was an investigation in general operational aspects of manned landing using deployable maneuverable landing systems and emphasizing pilot problems. No further NASA funding was expected but naa was performing some company-funded work on adapting the paraglider for controlled delivery of air-dropped cargo and had submitted a proposal to the U.S. Army for further work on this technique, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 11/12/65, 1)
About 500 employees of the Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Operations were transferred to the Kennedy Space Center, effective today, under a realignment announced Dec. 24, 1964, by NASA Hq. Elements of the manned space flight organization were regrouped to meet the requirements imposed by concurrent Gemini and Apollo launch schedules. (msc Roundup, 1/6/65, 1)
The possible implications of President Johnson’s decision to develop a manned orbiting laboratory were discussed by Raymond Senter in The New Republic: “President Johnson’s decision to allow the Air Force to build and launch five manned orbital laboratories (mol), at a cost of $1.5 billion or more, is likely to increase tensions between the US and the USSR and to spark a similar military space program by the Russians. If so, the Air Force will certainly urge further escalation of its own military space program, raising the specter that space will become a fantastically expensive battlefield of the future. . . . “It is, however, possible that mol will demonstrate the feasibility of a few American and Soviet spacemen in their respective spacecraft operating a continuous space watch. If it does, and if both nations exercise restraint, it could have a stabilizing effect, as have our mutual unmanned reconnaissance satellites. If man can be an efficient ob; server in orbit for extended periods, the time may come when the U.S. should invite the United Nations to maintain a continuous space patrol, with a multi-national crew, to warn of any impending or surprise attack.” (Senter, The New Republic, 9/11/65, 9)
Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said at the 16th annual luncheon for Albert Lasker Medical Journalism Awards in Washington, D.C.: “The most important race is not the space race or the arms race. It is the human race. If America can get excited about putting a man on the moon in 1970, why can’t we get excited about putting a lot of people on their feet by the same date? . . . some day we will be able to tell the world that science has discovered the secrets of aging or of cancer or of muscular dystrophy or multiple sclerosis or mental retardation. That news will outrank in importance even the wonderful tidings that man has landed on the moon.” (Text)
North American and European television broadcasters met at ComSatCorp headquarters in Washington, D.C., and announced outline of inaugural broadcast between the two continents to demonstrate possibilities of Early Bird communications satellite for television use. Plans called for major part of telecast to be live transmissions of events in various countries. It would include live broadcasts from participating ground stations in Europe and North America, a short documentary history of past events carried on satellite television, and a brief explanation of how Early Bird worked and what it would mean to communications in the future. (ComSatCorp Release)
The 10 crew members of a Pan American World Airways Boeing 707 jetliner that caught fire just after take-off and lost an engine and part of a wing would receive faa’s Exceptional Service Citation and medals, faa announced. Capt. Charles H. Kimes and his crew landed the plane safely at Travis afb; all passengers were clear of the plane within the two-minute goal set by faa as a maximum safe evacuation time. (NYT, 6/30/65, 59)
Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine system had been successfully fired for the first time using flox, a combination of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen, as the oxidizer. This was the first time a complete engine system had been fired using this high-energy oxidizer. Approximately 20 firings would be conducted in the series using the standard concentration of 30'/ liquid fluorine to 70% liquid oxygen. Conditions involving thrust level, oxidant fuel ratio, and other engine variables would be run to establish engine performance limitations. The tests were being conducted under LRC contract, by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div., Canoga Park, Calif. ( LRC Release 65-211
Project Stormy Spring,” a meteorological study by the Air Force Cambridge Research,Laboratories to develop more precise forecasting techniques for specific local areas, began. AFCRL scientists would investigate mesoscale structures and weather system dynamics in New England, particularly within a mesoscale. A varying distance measure, a mesoscale in New England in March was an area about 100 mi. sq. Major storm systems would be observed and analyzed for continuous periods of 24 to 36 hrs. each. A weather satellite, U-2, and c—130 aircraft w ould provide cloud photographs. The u-2 w ould also measure ozone distributions, temperature, wind, and radiometric data; the C-130 would contribute cloud physics, temperature, and wind data. Permanent and mobile radiosonde sites 60 mi. apart would comprise one aspect of the data-gathering network; special surface linkage of 25 sites spaced 20 mi. apart would gather wind, temperature, pressure, humidity, and precipitation data. The study would continue through April 30. (usaf oar Release 3—65—51
In a congratulatory wire to President Johnson, Yugoslavia’s President Tito called the gemini v spaceflight a “major achievement of American science” and expressed hope that it would “serve peace in the world.” (upi, NYT, 9/5/65, 28)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young were honored in a White House ceremony where President Johnson conferred NASA Exceptional Service Medals on both men and pinned a cluster on the NASA Distinguished Service Medal awarded Major Grisson for his July Zl, lyoi, suDormtai mercury night. first man to ma!c€ two space flights. NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his direction of space efforts. Harris M. Schurmeier received an Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for his direction of the Ranger program. President Johnson said: “A sense of history is present strongly here today. All of us are conscious that we have crossed over the threshold of man’s first tentative and experimental ventures in space. . . . “Since we gave our program direction and purpose seven years ago, many successes have been achieved through the efforts of a great American team, which now numbers 400 thousand men and women in industry, on campuses, and in government. And this team is inspired and stimulated and led by a former Marine and a great public servant —Jim Webb.” Following the ceremony, a motorcade bearing Vice President Humphrey, the astronauts, and their party took the Pennsylvania Ave. parade route, where thousands had gathered to cheer them, to the Capitol; a luncheon in their honor was jointly sponsored by Sen. Clinton Anderson (D-N.Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller f D—Calif.), chairmen of the Senate and House space committees. At 5 p.m. the group returned to Capitol Hill for a Congressional reception hosted by House Speaker John McCormack (D-Mass.). (NASA Release 65-98; Text; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/26/65; NYT, 3/27/65, 1)
A new extraterrestrial mineral, previously unknown in nature and christened sinoite (silicon oxynitride, Si2N20), had been discovered, NASA Ames Research Center announced. Discovered in a meteorite which had fallen near the village of Jajh deh Kot Lalu in Pakistan in 1926, the mineral was grey in color and occurred in rough rectangular crystals. Scientists who made the discovery were Dr. Klaus Keil of NASA Ames Research Center; C. A. Anderson, Hasler Research Center, Goleta, Calif.; and Dr. B. H. Mason, American Museum of Natural History, New York. The meteorite had been made available for study by New York’s Museum of Natural History, (arc Release 65-5)
Freeman J. Dyson, professor of physics at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., charged official Washington with the political “murder” of Project Orion, a nuclear-pulse-powered rocket, which he said would have been far better than any other kind of propulsion for rapid exploration of the solar system. The project was ended early this year after seven years of scientific and engineering studies that had cost $10.3 million and proved, Dyson said, the feasibility of nuclear-driven spacecraft. Its “killers,” Dyson said, were DOD, NASA, the promoters of the nuclear test-ban treaty, and U.S. scientists generally. Writing in Science, Dyson continued: “The story of Orion is significant because this is the first time in modern history that a major expansion of human technology had been suppressed for political reasons.” (Science, 7/9/65)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Altair was normally the solid-fuel fourth stage of the Scout booster, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65)
Thomas W. Thompson of Cornell Univ. said in a paper presented at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that half the moon’s surface had been mapped in a lunar mapping program using the radioradar telescope at Cornell’s Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. From the radar signal returns, the hardest areas of the moon were the rim and floor of the relatively new craters. The floors of the older craters and the surface of the maria were covered by a three-to-four-meter-thick layer of highly porous material often referred to as “lunar dust.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/65; NYT, 4/22/65)
Science interest among U.S. high school students was declining, Dr. Robert Jastrow, director of the New York branch, nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies, told the New York City Youth Board, meeting to inaugurate Youth Week. Citing figures from a study covering 1958 to 1963, Jastrow reported a 30% decline in the number of semi-finalists competing for National Merit Scholarship Awards who whose physics as a career preference. He suggested that the image of science as “a dehumanized field of work open only to a gifted few” could be counteracted only if scientists “are willing to step down from this pedestal and interact with voung people.” (Whitehouse, NYT, 12/5/65, 71)	'	“ ‘ '
President Chung Hee Park of the Republic of Korea, his wife, and members of his official party visited Kennedy Space Center where they were briefed on NASA programs and toured facilities at Cape Kennedy and on Merritt Island. In a luncheon statement, President Park said: “You are now engaged in a breath-taking race with Moscow for the conquest of space. ... I should like to invite your attention to the stark reality that there are some fools engaged in utilizing space power politically, psychologically and militarily for sinister and dangerous purposes. “They are absorbed in developing space power not for the true purpose envisaged by mankind but for making it an instrument with which to conquer the world. “Needless to say, they are Communists. I believe you [Americans] have the responsibility of causing the Communists to desist from this dangerous play and of well preparing yourselves to douse a fire if it breaks out of that play. . . .” (nasa Off. Int. Aff.; Ksc Spaceport News, 5/20/65, 1, 5; ap, Miami Her., 5/23/65)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with a Thor-Able-Star booster, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 6)
NASA was negotiating with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for Oao program, to convert prototype Oao into flight-ready spacecraft. The contract was expected to exceed $8 million. The converted prototype, to be designated Oao A-2, would be the third spacecraft scheduled for launch in Oao program. First planned launch in the series was scheduled for late this year or early next year at Cape Kennedy. (nasa Release 65-115)
Dr. Eric Ogden, Chief of the Environmental Biology Division at NASA Ames Research Center, was recipient of a Research Committee Citation presented by the American Heart Association in New York. His work for the Heart Association had been primarily in planning and evaluating heart research projects, (arc Release 65-1)
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the first man to fly in space, said in an interview with Krasnaya Zvezda that an increasing number of professions would take part in future spaceflights. He noted that pilots, engineers, a scientist, and a doctor had already flown in Soviet spacecraft. Gagarin described recent American spaceflights as “a major achievement,” but said it would be a simplification to interpret U.S. accomplishments as “first steps on an unexplored way.” He said Soviet spacecraft vostok iii and vostok iv had flown in formation in August 1962. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/31/65, A2)
An explosion two minutes after launch ruined a USAF attempt to send a plastic replica of an astronaut’s body into space aboard an Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. The dummy was instrumented to measure space radiation at various depths of the body. Cause of the explosion was not immediately determined, (ap, Wash. Post, 5/29/65)
First regularly scheduled air cushion service in the U.S. was initiated between Oakland and San Francisco over San Francisco Bay in a yearlong test, authorized by the Civil Aeronautics Board, to determine feasibility of using Hovercraft in ferrying passengers in metropolitan areas. Eight round trips a day would he provided by a seven-ton, $300,000 craft by Bell Aerosystems. (NYT, 8/8/65, 74)
Formation of Institute for Oceanography, part of the Environmental Science Services Administration, was announced by Dept, of Commerce. Interaction between ocean, earth, and atmosphere would be studied in programs designed to gain new knowledge of the ocean. Headed by Dr. Harris B. Stewart, Jr., formerly chief oceanographer of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Institute had headquarters in Washington, D.C. (Dept, of Commerce pio; NYT, 12/30/65,42)	_
In an interview on the eve of his retirement as Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Curtis E. LeMay discussed the role of the military in space: “Developing military capabilities in space is a task that I think we ought to accept as an unavoidable requirement. It is the only way that we can establish control over corridors of access to our country that would otherwise be open to exploitation by aggressor forces. . . . “I am confident that man will prove useful in this medium. Just as he has adapted aircraft to tasks no one could foresee in 1903, he will undoubtedly discover uses for space systems over the years ahead that go far beyond the observation and inspection functions we envision at this time.” (ap, Haugland, Balt. Sun, 2/1/65)
At a meeting of the American Chemical Society in Atlantic City, Dr. Emmanuel Roth of the Lovelace Foundation proposed neon as a gas that astronauts might breathe during spaceflights: “Its permeation coefficient is lowest. That is, neon does not go into solution or diffuse through tissue as readily as other gases do. As a result, the deadly bubbles form at a much slower rate.” No tests of neon with human subjects had been run. (Newsweek, 9/27/65)
A “catastrophic failure” had occurred some 10 min. after launch of the Atlas-Agena for the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission, M/Gen. Ben I. Funk, commander of the Air Force Space Systems Div., revealed. M/Gen. Vincent Huston, commander of the Eastern Test Range, said radar at Patrick AFB had “picked up five pieces” of debris at the point in space where the Agena was supposed to be. G. Merritt Preston, NASA, remarked that just before ground stations lost contact with the Agena, telemetry records from the spacecraft showed a marked rise in pressure in both propellant tanks. Despite the inferred explosion of Agena, no fragments were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean where tracking radar screens had indicated the rocket should have fallen. None was seen by planes alerted to watch for their reentry. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., manufacturer of the Agena, had scheduled a news conference to try to explain the problem, the Washington Evening Star reported. Conference was canceled, reportedly on instructions from the Air Force, and a secrecy lid imposed. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/65, A6)
early bird I linked audiences at the Parke-Bernet Galleries in New York City and at Sotheby’s in London for the first trans-Atlantic art auction, ComSatCorp reported. BBC broadcasted a portion of the auction for British TV viewers. The telecast marked the fourth successive Monday on which the satellite had carried a commercial program free of charge to show its potential. (ComSatCorp Release; Esterow, NYT, 5/25/65,1)
In an article discussing major American testing sites, Howard Simons and Chalmers M. Roberts of the Washington Post said: “Indeed it is from Vandenberg and not Cape Kennedy, Fla., that the majority of American satellites are launched. Between Jan. 1, 1964, and Oct. 31, 1964, for example, 33 or three times as many satellites were successfully put into space from Vandenberg as from Cape Kennedy. “The great majority of the satellites launched from Vandenberg, the hub of what is officially called the Air Force Western Test Range, are military satellites with secret payloads or reconnaissance cameras capable of peering down on Russia and China.” (Simons and Roberts, Wash. Post, 4/17/65)
Louis Walter, geochemist at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, reported that of the 400 specimens received from “Operation Moon Harvest” none analyzed was a meteor or other non-earth fragment. It had been theorized that because of the low gravity of the moon, meteoroids striking the moon might dislodge fragments which would be attracted by earth’s gravity, and that analysis of the fragments would provide important clues to composition of the moon.	(Des Moines Register,
Sea bottom between New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, which was affecting the orbits of artificial satellites, had become subject of a survey by British and American geophysicists on the British survey vessel, Dampier. Gravitational pull of exceptionally dense rock about 24,000 ft. below the surface was so strong it tended to drag the satellites out of their intended orbits. {NYT, 11/23/65, 23)
Extraterrestrial dust particles would be collected by U.S. and foreign scientists using five rockets launched into the extreme upper atmosphere from Churchill Research Range, Canada, by the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl), NASA and USAF announced jointly. Each of the five Aerobee 150 rockets would carry a recoverable device called a “Venus Flytrap” designed to capture micrometeoroids and noctilucent cloud particles at various altitudes for laboratory inspection. NASA had provided partial funding for the project and had arranged for participation of organizations from abroad: the Commonw'ealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Radio Physics Laboratory, Sydney, Australia; the National Center for Radioactivity Research (CNRS), France; the Meteorological Institute, Stockholm Univ., Sweden; Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany; and the Univ. of Tel Aviv, Israel, (nasa Release 65-223; afoar Release 7-65-1)
The Federal Communications Commission confirmed it expected to rule soon on who should own the initial American ground stations providing access to communications satellites. The established international carriers, including AT&T, RCA Communications, Western Union International, and ITT World Communications, had accused ComSat-Corp of exceeding its statutory authority and demanded the right to share in the ownership of the ground stations. (Gould, NYT, 4/27/65, 1, 25)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Alfred Eggers, speaking to the Aviation Space Writers Association in Washington, D.C., said one of the basic programs now underway in oart was to establish a mission capability flexible enough to satisfy most mission requirements for the balance of the century. Describing the capability as a “platform” that could support whatever mission the Nation wanted, he cited the present indecision over the mission that should be undertaken after the lunar landing. Given the difficulty of obtaining a consensus from the American public and government in the matter, the only useful alternative was to develop such a platform. He said the present oart program would enable this country to go to Mars, Venus, the asteroids, or the moons of Jupiter before the end of the 20th century. (Text)
North American Aviation’s xb—70a made its fifth flight from Palmdale, Calif. Maximum speed was mach 1.6; maximum altitude 45,000 ft.; duration of flight, 1 hr. 10 min. During the flight the wingtips were folded to 25° and then to the full-down position of 65°. It was the first time this total deflection had been attempted. Flutter and stability characteristics, the inlet control system, and the air inlet bypass door system were investigated during the flight. Although the emergency landing parachute system did not function during landing at Edwards afb, the aircraft completed a normal landing with normal braking. The drag chute had deployed, but the three-chute pack did not deploy. (Av. Wk„ 2/22/65, 22; upi, NYT, 2/17/65, 74)
A projection of the U.S. space program was outlined by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, at the Building Products Executives Conference in Washington, D.C.: “1. After we have made initial landings on the moon, we will, if conditions warrant, make many other trips to explore the various parts of the lunar surface and possibly to establish one or more bases there. “2. Not only will unmanned probes be sent throughout the solar system, but manned expeditions will visit the planets whenever that becomes scientifically promising and practicable. “3. We will develop a family of useful manned earth-orbiting stations, growing from relatively small orbiting laboratories to large multi-manned permanent stations. Regular ferry service will transfer personnel and supplies to and from such spacecraft. “4. Global communications via satellites will become a fact in the very near future and will be followed by direct broadcast of both voice and TV by satellite to home receivers throughout large sections of the world. “5. Orbiting spacecraft will increase annually in numbers, in size, and in sophistication. Through such activity we will greatly increase our knowledge about the earth as well as about the heavens. “6. We can expect a marriage of the major features of both aeronautics and astronautics . . . lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry ability will be launched into near and distant space by means of recoverable and re-usable launch vehicles. Drastic reduction in the mileage cost of space travel will result. “7. Spaceports for the coming and going of spacecraft will be built in a number of parts of this country as well as elsewhere. “8. Improved propulsion—faster, more powerful rockets using nuclear as well as chemical energy—will characterize space transportation. Planetary trips which today would take many months will be done in perhaps a week’s time or less, while carrying substantial payloads of passengers, equipment, and supplies. And, “9. As competence in space increases ... we can expect to see greater economic progress and international cooperation. Then we can truly say that our space efforts have made major contributions to world peace. . . .” (Text)
NASA announced it would negotiate an approximate $12-million contract with Douglas Aircraft Corp. for Delta launch support services that would cover an anticipated 15 launchings from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and the Eastern Test Range for a 12-month period beginning Jan. 1, 1966. The contract would provide for inspection and checkout in addition to actual launching operation, (nasa Release 65—237)
European contributions to international space communications were recommended by Dalimil Kybal, Senior Consulting Scientist, Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Summary of his article in Air Force and Space Digest: “Contrary to the views of those Europeans who tend to think of European and American space communications systems as separate entities, existing international agreements clearly call for a global system. Europe, as it develops space technology skills, ought to concentrate on developing next-generation satellites as replacements for existing hardware, in keeping with the competitive approaches contemplated in the international agreement. . . .” (AF Mag., 7/65, 60-61)
Rep. James C. Corman (D-Calif.) announced that a poll taken among his constituents showed that 68.7% supported a program to land an American on the moon by 1970; 14% felt the program should be slowed down; 17.3% disapproved of the program. (CR, 5/10/65, A2275)
New York’s Mayor-elect John V. Lindsay announced formation of a Science and Technology Advisory Council composed of representatives of universities, foundations, and corporations. Council would attempt to attract science-oriented industries into New York City and assist those already there. It would meet monthly with the Mayor and conduct studies into the scientific and technological advances that might affect industries in the city. {NYT, 12/22/65, 12)
An S-ivb facility vehicle and an S—II simulator arrived in New Orleans aboard the usns Point Barrow enroute to NASA Kennedy Space Center. Both the s-ivb and S-n were upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle. The s-ivb would also serve as the second stage of the Saturn IB booster, (msfc Release 65-161; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
Laser beams could be used to track satellites, a group of scientists reported at a news briefing at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. The briefing followed a two-day meeting discussing efforts to track explorer xxii and explorer xxvii satellites which were orbiting the earth at a height of about 700 mi. Dr. Henry Plotkin, Head of Gsfc’s Optical Systems Branch, said the experiments had indicated that: 1) a beam of laser light from the ground could be directed with sufficient accuracy to strike satellite reflectors; 2) turbulence in the atmosphere would not break the beam enough to interfere with its lighting up the satellite; 3) very short bursts of light from lasers could be used to measure the range of a satellite precisely by means of timing the flight and rebound of the pulse; 4) reflected light could be photographed against a stellar background to provide angles by which the satellite could be identified very accurately. (Transcript)
M/Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), director of the Apollo program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the American Bar Association’s Seminar of the Committee on the Law of Outer Space in Miami Beach: “In many respects, the Gemini iv flight of Jim Mc-Divitt and Ed White could well be viewed as a turning point in the American manned space program. The success of this mission has given us greatly increased confidence that we will be able to carry out our national goal of a manned landing on the moon in this decade. “It is a pleasure to report that the Apollo Program is also moving ahead very rapidly, and we are meeting our key milestones on schedule. The progress on Apollo is especially rewarding since it is the largest and most complex single research and development project ever undertaken. This is a crucial year for Apollo, but our prospects look good and we are becoming increasingly confident that the lunar landings will take place before the end of 1969.” (Text)
Describing the growing space role of Woomera, Australia’s equivalent to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, R. N. Hughes-Jones said is Missile Space Daily: “Cooperation between Australia and the United States in the field of space research began [in 1957] when installations were set up at Woomera for the International Geophysical Year. They occupied a couple of caravans. “In 1960, in a formal exchange of notes, the governments of the two countries affirmed their intention to extend the cooperative program to space flight operations. “Under it, the Australian Department of Supply establishes and operates stations on behalf of NASA, for tracking, communicating with and obtaining telemetered information from U.S. space vehicles. “Establishment of the station at Carnarvon . . . consolidated at one site nasa’s ground support facilities for the Gemini project. “Tidbinbilla was officially opened on March 19 of this year, and is the first of three NASA facilities programed for the Australian Capital Territory. “The second of the three is at Orroral Valley and is currently under construction. It will track the larger and the more complex of the U.S. scientific satellites, while the third, at Honeysuckle Creek, will support the U.S. Lunar Manned Space-flight Project.” (Hughes-Jones, M/S Daily, 7/27/65)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $17 million increment to a previous contract for the xb-70 flight test program. USAF Aeronautical Systems Div. was the contracting agency, (dod Release 374-65)
usaf announced that first firing of an operationally configured Minuteman II icbm from an operational silo was “100 percent successful with all research and development objectives achieved” and that Min-uteman II performed with “accuracy and reliability,” impacting more than 5,000 mi. downrange from the launch site at Vandenberg afb. (afsc Release)
A detailed report on the progress of the Mars-bound mariner IV spacecraft was presented at annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C.: mariner iv, launched Nov. 28, 1964, was on course to fly by Mars shortly after 9 p.m. edt on July 14. Four of mariner iv’s six experiments were still working well. The ionization experiment had ceased to function and data from the solar plasma probe were only partially interpretable. At 3 p.m., mariner iv was 58,176,037 mi. from the earth. It had traveled 221,330,000 mi. on its journey of 325 million miles. mariner iv had returned a considerable amount of scientific data. A cosmic ray telescope aboard the 575-lb. spacecraft had, for example, “observed” more solar protons than alpha particles from the sun. John A. Simpson of Univ. of Chicago said this indicated there was a “different kind of mechanism operating on the sun for accelerating these particles in space.” A report from a team of scientists from NASA GSFC and Temple Univ. indicated that mariner iv was encountering increasing amounts of cosmic dust as it moved further away from the sun. mariner iv’s cosmic dust detector had been hit 95 times. Dr. James A. Van Allen predicted that if Mars had a magnetic field no stronger than '/sod1 the intensity of the earth’s, MARINER iv would detect it in July. Richard Sloan of JPL said he and his colleagues planned to try to establish a radio lock with mariner iv in September 1967 after it had journeyed through space and come back to within 40-50 million miles of earth, (nasa Releases 65-117, 65-117-A, 65-117-B, 65-117-C, 65-117-D, 65-117-E, 65—117-F; Transcript)
Bell Telephone Laboratories astronomers detected radio waves that seemed to be “flying in all directions through the universe.” Dr. Arno A. Penzias and Dr. Robert W. Wilson made the observations with the horn antenna developed for communications satellite research at Holmdel, NJ. Princeton Univ. scientists led by Dr. Robert H. Dicke, Prof, of Physics, unaware of the btl observation, reached a prediction of the existence of such waves, which they theorized were remnants of light waves from the primordial explosion giving birth to the universe. In this theory of the universe’s origin—the “big bang” theory—the galaxies all originated at a single point, shooting outward ever since the cataclysmic event. According to the theory, the light waves were stretched into radio waves by the expansion of the universe. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/21/65)
NASA ceased operation of RELAY II communications satellite after a final demonstration broadcast during which Sen. B. Everett Jordon (D-N.C.) spoke via the satellite from Exposition Hall in Atlantic City in opening the week-long International Exposition of the American Textile Machinery Assn, there. After the demonstration, the Mojave Desert Ground Station, the only one in the world equipped to communicate with relay Ii, was closed to begin modifications for use in the Ats (Applications Technology Satellite) program. Since its launch Jan. 21, 1964, relay ii had performed experiments demonstrating the feasibility of a worldwide system of communications by spacecraft and the technology for such a system, (nasa Release 65-306)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, described to members of the Charlotte, N.C., Chamber of Commerce the development of the U.S. ballistic missile program: “In the ballistic missile program, of course, we were not concerned with the missile alone—complicatd as it was—but also had the problem of constructing the facilities to test the missiles; building the ground support equipment; and training crews to install, service, and launch the missiles. This was a $17 billion program, and was larger in scope than the Manhattan Project which produced the atomic bomb during World War ii. “To give you some idea of the size of the task, imagine that Henry Ford in the early days had not only had the problem of designing and building his automobiles, but at the same time had to construct all the highways and bridges, build all the service stations and garages, and plan and conduct driver training programs. . . .” (Text)
“A manned expedition to Mars within 15 years seems entirely feasible,” North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div. President Harrison Storms told William Hines of the Washington Evening Star. In charge of building the spacecraft for the Apollo moon landings, Storms offered an approximate timetable for a Mars expedition: “Start planning for it in 1970, start cutting metal in 1975 and go in 1980.” A recent report from the National Academy of Sciences had suggested 1985 as a feasible target date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
The large “crawler-transporter” scheduled to move the 500,000-Ib. Saturn V booster and an 11-million-Ib. launching tower from the assembly area at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to the launching site tnree and a half miles away, had been crippled by repeated failure of roller bearings. Eight tractor trucks equipped with treads and rollers like those of a bulldozer would propel the crawler. It was the bearings in 88 rollers that had caused the problem. Tests of the $6-million vehicle, manufactured by Marion Power Shovel Co., had been suspended until a solution could be found. A NASA spokesman stated that neither tests nor launchings of the Saturn V boosters should be delayed. (Clark, NYT, 8/18/65, C13)
Dr. Warren Weaver, former president of the aaas, said in an interview with U.S. News & World Report that it was wrong to spend $30 billion on getting an American to the moon by 1970 when so much else to benefit the human race could be done with the money. He suggested: “We could give every teacher in the U.S. a ten percent raise a year for ten years; endow 200 small colleges with $10 million each; finance the education through graduate school of 50,000 scientists at $4,000-a-year; build ten new medical schools at $200 million each; build and endow complete universities for more than 50 developing countries; create three new Rockefeller Foundations worth $50 million each.” {U.S. News, 11/29/65)
Australia was negotiating with the U.S. to use American Redstone rockets instead of Britain’s Blue Streak for research at Woomera on rocket reentry into the atmosphere. National Development Minister Allen Fairhall told the Australian Parliament that the Redstone, though obsolete for orbital purposes, would be more suitable because it achieved greater altitude. (Reuters, NYT, 12/9/65)
Full-duration test firing of the second flight S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was conducted at Sacramento by Douglas Aircraft Co. The 73/2-min. acceptance test was run to check engine performance, propellant tank pressurization systems, data acquisition systems, power and control systems, and structural reliability of the rocket stage. Following detailed post-test evaluation, the s-ivb would be shipped to Kennedy Space Center for launch as part of a complete Saturn ib vehicle in 1966. (Marshall Star, 12/8/65, 4)
Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill, Dr. Rolf H. Dyce, and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., reported to the meeting of the American Geophysical Union that through radar studies with Cornell’s l,000-ft.-diameter radiotelescope at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, they had found an apparent “flat spot” on the planet Mars that seemed to correspond to markings seen there through telescopes. They also reported that radar observations indicated the planet Mercury rotated on its own axis once each 54 to 64 days, exposing all sides to the sun in a year. Its full day, corresponding to a 24-hr. earth cycle, would be about 180 earth days long. It was inconclusive whether Mercury rotated in the opposite direction from its orbit—a retrograde rotation—or in the same direction as its orbit—a direct rotation. Dr. Gold also speculated that Mercury could not have been in its present orbit for much longer than 400 million years. Otherwise, he postulated, the sun would have held the planet over a long enough period of time to force it into a synchronous or 88-day rotation. This suggested to Gold that Mercury might once have been a moon of Venus but broke away or was tugged away to establish its own orbit around the sun. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65; Clark, NYT, 4/21/65, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/21/65)
Prof. Robert H. Dicke of Princeton Univ. suggested in the Astronomical Journal that a way to map the sun’s shape as a test of Einstein’s theory of relativity would be to use measurements of the orbit of the asteroid Icarus as it passed within 4 million mi. of earth on June 15, 1968. Two peculiarities would make Icarus, discovered in 1949, valuable for such an experiment: (1) Icarus was the only body in the solar system known to pass inside the orbit of Mercury; and (2) Icarus’ orbit was highly inclined to that of the other planets. Dr. Dicke proposed that measurements be taken when the planet cut across the plane of the earth’s orbit. If the two measured points changed with each close passage to the sun, then the sun would be known to be less than a perfect sphere. And, the amount by which it was not truly spherical would be known precisely. If the sun’s radius at the equator exceeded its polar radius by as little as 0.005%, the distortion of the sun’s gravitational field that this would cause would be enough to account for 10% of the predicted effect on Mercury’s orbit. But the general theory of relativity had already accounted for the peculiarities in Mercury’s orbit. Therefore, if the distortion were found, the theory must be incorrect. In other words, said Dr. Dicke, gravitational attraction of one body for another must be accounted for, not by relativity, but by some other mechanism. (AIP News, 8/28/65)
ComSatCorp asked nine foreign companies to propose studies of launch vehicles for medium altitude communications satellites in addition to the 16 American companies approached a month ago. The deadline for submitting proposals was extended from Jan. 11 to Feb. 1. (ComSatCorp)
Positive action must soon replace delay and procrastination” on the development of an American supersonic airliner, Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, told a Washington, D.C., meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers. Monroney said that U.S. failure to build the plane could “choke off” 375,000 jobs within several years. Sen. Monroney added that if U.S. carriers did not fly supersonic planes as early as foreign airlines, it could mean a loss of $1 billion a year in passenger revenues. “If we capitulate, it would mean the eventual loss of technical superiority and a second class airline industry,” he said. (NYT, 4/15/65, 15)	.	.
Firefly, a new life detection instrument containing an extract of common firefly’s lamp, had been developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to help determine how far out and how much life existed in earth’s atmosphere. This information would be essential to prevent contamination of sterilized probes enroute through earth’s atmosphere. Firefly, containing luciferin, luciferase, and oxygen, would glow whenever it encountered adenosine triphosphate, a chemical essential to all life known on earth. Report of any encounter with live microorganisms would be immediate, precluding need for recovering detector, (gsfc Release G-5-65)
Dr. Robert H. Goddard was posthumously awarded the Daniel Guggenheim Medal by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Mrs. Goddard accepted the medal. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 13)
Concern regarding the secrecy shrouding the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “The President has given assurances that although information gained through MOL will relate to America’s defense capability, the thrust of the project is peaceful. On the other hand mol’s director seems quite willing to provoke a military race in space. There is one easy, proven method by which the doubts and misgivings about MOL can be allayed. The Air Force should adopt NASA’s open public information policies at once and apply them to every stage of MOL.” {Wash. Post, 10/22/65, 24)
In his defense message to Congress, President Johnson cited major new developments in strategic weapon systems slated to begin this year: “A new missile system, the Poseidon [new name for Polaris B—3], to increase the striking power of our missile-carrying nuclear submarines. The Poseidon missile will have double the payload of the highly successful Polaris a-3. The increased accuracy and flexibility of the Poseidon will permit its use effectively against a broader range of penetration of enemy defenses. “A new Short Range Attack Missile (sram) that can, if needed, be deployed operationally with the b-52 or other bombers. This aerodynamic missile—a vast improvement over existing systems—would permit the bomber to attack a far larger number of targets and to do so from beyond the range of their local defenses. “A series of remarkable new payloads for strategic missiles. These include: penetration aids, to assure that the missile reaches its target through any defense; guidance and re-entry vehicle designs, to increase many-fold the effectiveness of our missiles against various kinds of targets; and methods of reporting the arrival of our missiles on target, up to and even including the time of explosion.” In addition, he said that development of the C-5A (formerly the cx) cargo transport and procurement of the Air Force F-lll fighter-bomber and new a-7 Navy attack aircraft would begin. Finally, regarding the role of science and technology in the Nation’s security, the President said: “We are currently investing more than $6 billion per year for military research and development. . . . About $2 billion a year of this program is invested in innovations in technology and in experimental programs. Thus, we provide full play for the ingenuity and inventiveness of the best scientific and technical talent in our Nation and the Free World. “American science, industry, and technology are foremost in the world. Their resources represent a prime asset to our national security.” (Text, Wash. Post, 1/19/65; ap, NYT, 1/19/65, 16; Norris, Wash. Post, 1/22/65)
NASA Ames Research Center had let a $1,382,000 contract to the American Machine and Foundry Co. for fabrication of an advanced flight simulator which could simulate nearly all flight situations for aircraft and spacecraft except cases involving either high acceleration forces on the pilot or aerobatics. Designed by the Research Facilities and Equipment Div. at Ames, the simulator would have “six degrees of freedom,” the capability to move in all possible axes of motion: fore and aft, vertical, and side-to-side; also pitch, roll, and yaw. It would be unique in having 100 ft. of lateral motion. This would be needed to simulate supersonic transport (Sst) flight since the crew would be far forward of the center of rotation of the aircraft, (arc Release 65-12)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $41 million cost-plus-award-fee supplement to the Chrysler Corp. for support services on the Saturn I and Saturn IB space programs. Chrysler would provide prelaunch, launch, and post-launch services at Complexes 34 and 37 through June 30, 1968. (ksc Release 43-650)
Much has been done in an effort to alleviate aircraft noise. Annual expenditures have risen from $100,000 in 1961 to $1.3 million to be spent by faa alone in 1965,” faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told a National Aircraft Noise Symposium in New York City. He warned: “If we fail to make progress in reducing noise . . . pressure may perhaps ultimately exclude the availability of aviation facilities to our centers of trade and commerce. I feel it is essential that we all recognize the price that we may be forced to pay for a tolerable environment next door to our airports.” (Text)
Richard E. Horner, former Associate Administrator of NASA (1959-60), was installed as 1965 president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 13)
faa announced that Gordon Bain, Deputy Administrator for Supersonic Transport Development, had resigned for personal reasons effective Sept. 15, and that M/Gen. M.S. White, Federal Air Surgeon, was returning to the Air Force. B/Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of the usaf Western Test Range, had been assigned to faa on active duty to replace Bain and Dr. Peter Siegel, Chief, Aeromedical Certification Div., Office of Aviation Medicine, would replace Dr. White, (faa Release 65-65)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in an address to the American Ordnance Association:	. . In the case of the most recently announced space project, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, we again have an example of a highly valuable exchange of technology and experience by two operating agencies of the Government. In this instance, NASA’s considerable success in manned space flight and in the development of spacecraft will assist the Air Force substantially in carrying out the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project. Such interagency cooperation will tend to improve rather than impair the peaceful image which this country has established. “Since I have mentioned the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, it is worth pausing right now to challenge forthrightly those who have asserted or intimated that it has something to do with a weapons race. We expect misinterpretations of that sort to come from unfriendly countries and sometimes from ignorant domestic critics. However, I was disappointed to find that a few otherwise well informed publications and invididuals have asserted that the MOL is a weapons carrier and a project contrary to our peaceful progress in space. “I assert as positively as I can that the MOL is not a weapons system, is not a means by which aggressive actions can be perpetrated, and is in no way in conflict with the established peaceful policies, objectives, or methods of the United States. Rather, it is a program that will increase our knowledge of man’s usefulness in space and will relate that ability to our national defense.” (Text)
Two workmen were killed and three were injured in an explosion and fire in the propellant preparation building at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Minuteman missile facility. The accident occurred at Minuteman Plant 78, an Air Force facility operated by Thiokol. An investigation was underway to determine the cause, (ap, NYT, 10/28/65, 43M)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, editor Robert Hotz said: “The trail-blazing mission of the Soviet Voskhod 2 still is continuing as these lines are written, but it has already opened a new chapter in the history of man’s conquest of space. It also has emphasized again that, unless some drastic changes are made, this history will be written primarily in the Russian Cyrillic alphabet with only an occasional U.S. footnote technically necessary. . . . “All of this Soviet progress again emphasizes strongly the ultra-conservatism of the U.S. manned space flight program and the utter inadequacy of the tiny step-by-step approach that sounds so convincing when defending under-funded programs. This approach is sounding more and more idiotic in the face of Soviet space achievements. . . . “Each Soviet manned space flight makes it clearer that the Russians are widening their lead over the U.S. in this vital area. It also makes it clear that the many billions the American people have poured willingly into our national space program for the purpose of wresting this leadership from the Soviets are not going to achieve that goal under the present management. . . .”	( Hotz, Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 11)
North American Aviation’s xr-70a supersonic bomber reached 2,000 mph and 60,000-ft. in a one-hr. 47-min. experimental flight from Edwards afb across Calif., Ida., Nev., Utah, and Ariz. The aircraft was powered by six 1,500-lb. turbojet engines, each with more than 30,000-lb. thrust. XB-70a flights were being used to obtain data valuable for design of the supersonic transport (Sst) now in the design study phase. (NYT, 10/15/65, 45)
Some highlights of the year in physics: Planet Mars has no substantial magnetic field, according to scientific experiments by mariner IV Mars probe. Because of this, Martian life-forms would have to be able to withstand intense radiation, but possibility of Martian life was not ruled out. mariner iv also reported Mars’ atmosphere was too thin to readily support parachute or glider-type descents for soft landings on the planet. Comet Ikeya-Seki, the brightest comet to enter the solar system this century, was discovered Sept. 18 and subsequently studied from the ground, airplanes, and rockets. The comet passed within 300,000 mi. of the sun and made a hairpin turn Oct. 21, when it broke into three pieces. Results of NASA’s testing of public reaction to sonic booms, begun in 1961, showed that no serious psychological or physiological effects result from sonic booms. Commercial use of the supersonic transport, to begin in early 1970’s, was expected to create sonic booms that, when Sst’s come into full use in the U.S., would be heard by everyone about once a day. On the subject of antimatter, two items: Swedish physicist Hannes Alfven theorized such cosmic phenomena as quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), radio stars, and supernovae may be powered by matter-antimatter annihilations; and, antideutrons were produced in the laboratory by scientists of Columbia Univ. Unwanted noise from a BTL horn-reflector antenna being used in comsat research may have been radiation from the birth of the universe. This interpretation was based on the “big bang” theory of the universe’s formation and was propounded by a group of Princeton Univ. scientists. Decision was believed near on which of the three principal models of the universe was correct—the steady-state, expanding, or oscillating universe theory. Results in astronomy based on red-shifts of “blue-galaxies” (discovered in 1965) and quasars hinted at an oscillating universe, (aip News, 12/22/65) During 1965: Among highlights in the U.S. communications satellite program were: initiation of commercial comsat operations, with EARLY BIRD I in synchronous orbit over the Atlantic; initiation of a synchronous-orbit comsat program to furnish communications for Project Apollo and for expanded commercial service; and growth of the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium to 48 member nations, representing every continent. Communications Satellite Corp. represented the U.S. and served as manager for the consortium. (Com-SatCorp Release)
At the Honors Convocation of the aiaa meeting in San Francisco the following presentations were made: Rodney C. Wingrove, Research Scientist at nasa Ames Research Center, received the Lawrence Sperry Award for his contribution to controlled reentry and precise landings of U.S. manned spacecraft; Dinsmore Alter, Director Emeritus of Griffith Observatory, received the G. Edward Pendray Award for an “outstanding contribution to aeronautical and astronautical literature”; Lloyd L. Kelly, President, Link Group, General Precision, Inc., received the DeFlorez Training Award for “an outstanding improvement in aerospace training”; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received the premier Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award “for significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space flight.” This award included a $5,000 honorarium, (arc Release 65-15; msfc Release 65-151; aiaa Honors Convocation Program)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent six hours visiting Cape Kennedy launching pads, talking to space experts, and looking over NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). “I’m sure the American people can feel this program is in good hands,” he said before returning to Washington. At one point, Humphrey rode to the top of the 100-ft. launching vehicle to be used in next month’s manned orbital flight and exclaimed: “Man, oh man, what a fantastic job!” (NASA Release 65-57; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/65)
geminis vii and vi apparently approached within one foot of each other during their rendezvous, Robert Aller, NASA Chief of Mission Planning, told the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., when he narrated films of the rendezvous. Aller also reported that GEMINI vii command pilot Borman appeared to have reentered the earth’s atmosphere without his helmet on. Mission rules ordinarily required astronauts to wear their suits and helmets during launchings, space maneuvers, and reentry. (Clark, NYT, 12/24/65,1)
An editorial in the New York Herald Tribune referred to the U.S.-U.S.S.R. race for the moon: “The moon remains an elusive target, but it gets closer all the time. . . . “Ideally, this should be a cooperative venture, enlisting the common efforts of the peoples of all nations; instead, so far at least, it is a race between the United States and the Soviet Union. Because it is a race; because space technology is, in major part, inseparable from military technology; because space prestige is, however illogically, a factor in the struggle to keep the earth free, we have to compete. NASA’s ambitious program of a manned Gemini flight every three months promises a vigorous competitive effort. But the American effort does not parallel that of the Soviets; each is giving priority to different techniques, and the comparative standings in the race are hard to measure. What is clear, however, is that the Grissom-Young flight has carried the American program a long way forward—and beyond that, and more importantly in the long perspective of history, it has brought closer the day when man, not American man or Soviet man, finally breaks the terrestrial bonds that hold him to his native planet.” (N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/24/65)
“The Americans had not planned to let a man out until the end of this year. But after our flight they became bolder. A small group of American specialists, with the permission of our government, came to the Soviet Union and talked with cosmonauts [Col. Pavel I.] Belyayev and [L/Col. Aleksey] Leonov about their flight and we didn’t hide anything.” Questioned by newsman about the visit by “American specialists,” Kamanin said either three or five persons had interviewed the Russian cosmonauts for several days, but he could not recall their names. Kamanin was asked if the visitors were officials of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “I don’t know,” he replied. “Officially they were here with a television company—allegedly.” NASA categorically denied General Kamanin’s allegation, UPI reported. A spokesman said: “We have been unable to uncover any United States delegation of scientists addressed by the Soviet cosmonauts.” Reuters, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; upi, NYT, 8/26/65, 40; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/25/65, 1)
Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara confirmed that the U.S. had given Great Britain option to purchase F-lll aircraft and spare parts totaling more than $1 billion for its Royal Air Force. Delivery orders for the F-lll were expected to be placed after completion of the British defense review, (dod Release 210-65)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
usaf launched a 100-lb. arv (Aerospace Research Vehicle) satellite pickaback aboard an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif. The satellite, carrying instrumentation to sample radiation and micrometeoroids, was the first to be sent toward westward orbit around the earth. Satellite Situation Report for January 31, 1965, did not indicate that the satellite had achieved orbit, (ap, Wash. Post, 1/22/65; M&R, 2/1/65, 9; SSR, 1/31/65,13)
boac announced in its annual report that it had asked British and American aircraft manufacturers to submit plans for a subsonic airliner accommodating up to 250 passengers. Sud Aviation of France and Hawker-Siddeley of Great Britain told the Corporation they were not interested in the project. (Reuters, NYT, 7/29/65,48)
Techniques for weather predictions reliable up to two weeks were discussed at Geophysics Corp. of America in Bedford, Mass., by Dr. D. Q. Wark of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Dr. William Nordberg of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and Dr. Jean I. F. King of gca. These scientists had successfully utilized radio waves to collect weather data and were planning to build a new weather satellite which could log greater amounts of data and provide constant coverage. They proposed placing weather buoys in the oceans and weather balloons in the atmosphere equipped to relay data to the orbiting satellite which, in turn, would relay data to ground stations. (Hughes, CSM, 5/6/65)
Prime Minister Harold Wilson announced plans to buy American military aircraft to replace British aircraft, an action he said would save more than $840 million over a 10-yr. period. The two U.K. projects being dropped were the P-1154 vertical take-off supersonic strike aircraft and the hs-681 short take-off military transport. Both were made by the Hawker Siddeley group. American Phantom iTs, made by McDonnell Aircraft, would be ordered to replace the P-1154. Phantoms were already on order to replace the Royal Navy’s Sea Vixens. Lockheed’s C-130’s would replace the hs-681. The American planes would be equipped with British engines. On the question of the tsr-2, which the U.K. was considering replacing with General Dynamics’ F-lll, Mr. Wilson said there was not enough information yet to make a final decision. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/3/65, 9; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 2/3/65)
American Broadcasting Co. requested permission from fcc to own and operate a communications satellite system linking an estimated 200 affiliated television stations. The proposed $21.5-million system would use a synchronous orbit satellite similar to EARLY BIRD I. ABC’s request challenged the right of ComSatCorp to be sole operator of U.S.-launched commercial communications satellites, (abc Release)
A Centaur rocket similar to the vehicle launched successfully into a simulated lunaT-transfer trajectory Aug. 11 from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and a model of mariner iv photographic Mars probe were being exhibited in the NASA display at Cleveland’s Natural Science Museum. NASA had contributed displays to the museum for about 10 yrs. (lrc Release 65-60)
S—IVB second stage for the first Saturn IB launch vehicle to be launched arrived at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the cargo vessel Steel Executive. (Orl. Sent., 9/20/65)
The Space Act of 1958 may have unwittingly provided competition that is getting results, said an editorial in the Cleveland Plain Dealer: “There was conjecture then, and there is conjecture now, that NASA and the Air Force duplicate efforts in the parallel development of rockets. There are rumors of smouldering controversy. “But yesterday’s dramatic blastoff of the triple-barrelled Titan 3-C by the Air Force, coming closely on the heejs of NASA’s sensational Gemini performance, indicates the competition, thus far is beneficial to both.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 6/19/65, 23)
Sir William Hildred, Director General of the International Air Transport Association, said in an address at the Association’s 21st annual meeting that proposed supersonic jet airliners would face stiff competition from giant subsonic jets expected on international airways by 1967. Sir William said the airlines favored supersonic airliners, such as the planned British-French Concorde, if they could provide faster transportation “without insuperable financial, technical or operational problems.” He said the Concorde was likely to be available in 1971-72, and its American counterpart in 1973-74. But before that, Sir William continued, giant air buses, “stretched” subsonic jets seating up to 250 passengers, would be available. (NYT, 10/25/65, 66) During week of October 25: First two H-l rocket engines uprated to 205.000	lbs. thrust were delivered from Rocketdyne’s Neosho, Mo., plant to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Division in New Orleans. Later, at the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, H-l engines would be installed in Saturn ib vehicles to be used in the early stages of the Apollo program. The uprated engines would add a total of about 40.000 lbs. thrust to nasa’s Saturn ib booster, increasing the total thrust of the eight-engine cluster to 1,640,000 lbs. (msfc Release 65-269)
Soviet cosmonaut commander Air Force Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kaminin denied foreign newspaper reports that some of his men had died in unannounced space shots. Kaminin, writing in Krasnaya Zvezda, said:	“The names of people who have allegedly died listed in foreign papers are mostly names of nonexistent cosmonauts.” He said the aim of the reports “is to weaken the tremendous impressions made by the achievements of Soviet science and technology in space.” ( ap, Huntsville Times, 4/7/65)
An article in The Economist questioned the political wisdom of the State Dept.’s ban on exchange of communications satellite information between Hughes Aircraft Co. and the British Aircraft Co.; it suggested that unfavorable repercussions to Anglo-American relations could resuit: “The reason had little to do with military security. The State Dept, appeared to think that American industry has a valuable monopoly in commercial satellites which should be exploited for maximum profit, which means keeping the know-how in America. . . . The first commercial satellite of Comsat happens to be the Hughes-built Early Bird due to be launched in the first half of April. Comsat is obliged ... to distribute its orders among member countries on a basis proportional to the shares they hold. . . . Britain is the largest shareholder after the United States. So the less satellite know-how there is, particularly in Britain, the more work goes to the United States . . . this ... is precisely what some people have been declaring the Americans would do whenever they found themselves in a position of technical superiority. . . .” {Economist, 3/13/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, named B/Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier as commander of the usaf Western Test Range with headquarters at Vandenberg afb. Presently deputy commander for manned systems at afsc Space Systems Div., General Bleymaier replaced B/Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, recently named head of the faa Supersonic Transport Program. In his new command, General Bleymaier would be responsible for maintaining, operating, and modifying as needed, the western portion of the national range in support of dod, NASA, and other agency programs, (afsc Release 130.65)
In his column in the New York Journal American, Bob Considine cited an item written about Soviet failures in space by Julius Epstein, a research associate with the Hoover Institute of War, Revolution, and Peace, Stanford Univ.: “According to reliable reports in Washington, the Soviets have lost at least three cosmonauts on their way to the moon. My first publication of these assertions in 1962 met with no denial from our National Aeronautical and Space Agency when I forwarded a copy and asked for comment. A free-lance writer, researching the possibility of Soviet failures, tells me that NASA informed him that all such information had been classified as top secret. They recommended that he use my material! Isn’t that a reasonable indication for the veracity of this record?” (Considine, N.Y. J. Amer., 6/27/65)
FCC approved ComSatCorp’s proposal to build a ground station at Brewster Flat, Wash.—a U.S. link in their proposed worldwide communications system. The approval applied only to transmission and receiving facilities; other portions of the application such as ownership of the station and establishment of its links with San Francisco were still under consideration. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A17; WSJ, 10/14/65)
Six of eight oso II experiments had been turned on and gave “excellent” data, NASA reported. The two experiments not yet operating were the ultraviolet scanning spectrometer provided by Harvard Univ. and the ultraviolet spectrophotometer provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Both had been turned on but were turned off to prevent damage to themselves or to the satellite when irregularities in the data received were noted. All other functions of the satellite— such as solar power supply, telemetry system, tape recorder, temperature control, and command system—were normal. (NASA Release 65-37)
A strike by 86 members of the International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees carried work stoppage at Kennedy Space Center into the fifth day. They had walked out in a wage dispute with a firm providing printing and reproduction services for NASA; about half the 5,300	construction workers at ksc had honored their picket lines, halting work on $178 million worth of projects. (Wash. Post, 6/29/65)
Service module of Apollo spacecraft 009 was delivered to KSC from North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant aboard the Pregnant Guppy aircraft. (KSC Historical Office)
Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div. was awarded a $10,600,000 Navy contract to continue production of packaged liquid rocket engines for the Navy and Air Force Rull Pup missile. (Thiokol Release; WSJ, 7/6/65)
Najeeb Halaby, faa Administrator, announced that he would ask Congress for enabling legislation authorizing a ten-day, federally-sponsored International Aerospace and Science Exposition, to be held the summer of 1966 at Dulles International Airport, Washington, D.C. The Exposition, approved by President Johnson March 31, 1965, would attempt to stimulate export sales of U.S. products and to demonstrate U.S. accomplishments in aerospace and related sciences, (faa Release 65-25)
ogo n Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-C) was launched by NASA from Vandenberg afb with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster. Because of a slight malfunction in the launch vehicle’s primary guidance system, orbit achieved had the following parameters: apogee, 939 mi. (1,511 km.); perigee, 250 mi. (403.1 km.); period, one hour 45 min.; inclination, 87°. Planned orbit had been somewhat lower: 575-mi. (925-km.) apogee, 207-mi. (333.3-km.) perigee, one-hour 37-min. period, and 86° inclination. Most of the 20 onboard experiments were not expected to be affected by the malfunction; OGO n’s solar panels and instrumented booms deployed as planned and the spacecraft achieved three-axis stabilization. Second of the seven spacecraft programed for NASA’s Ogo program, OGO II weighed 1,150 lb. and contained more than 100,000 parts, including a communications system capable of transmitting 64,000 bits per second in real time and 128,000 bits of information per second from tape playback. Its mission was to concentrate on near-earth space phenomena with emphasis on global mapping of the geomagnetic field, measurements of the neutral, ionic, and electronic composition of the earth’s atmosphere. Data would be correlated with solar ultraviolet and x-ray emissions, and such events as particle dumping in the auroral zones and airglow. Although it returned good experiment data, OGO II was to be considered a failure (see Oct. 24). (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 65-314, 65-368; ap; NYT, 10/15/65, 14; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/65, A8; ap, Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
Need for creation of a “Buck Rogers rescue squad” with trained men and equipment to give aid on short notice to spacemen stranded or stricken in orbit was discussed by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. Hines said a persuasive case had been made by Michael Stoiko of the Martin Co.: “Stoiko estimated that in the next 20 years there will be about 280 manned space flights involving about 800 men. Half of each—men and flights—will be American, half Russian. Total flight time will be about 2.4 million man hours, compared with the world-wide total of about 1,200 man hours to date.” Stoiko projected “a 62 percent probability of at least seven emergency situations involving 22 men in the next 20 years; a 58 percent probability of two or three emergencies in the coming decade.” Hines said that now “astronauts stranded in orbit would have no hope of rescue and only a melancholy choice between two fatal alternatives: to sweat it out until the oxygen finally was gone, or to make a quick end of it by explosively decompressing both spacecraft and suit.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/2/65)
NASA launched a scientific payload for the Univ. of Michigan from Wallops Station using a two-stage Nike-Tomahawk. The 122-lb. payload, consisting primarily of a thermosphere probe in the form of a 32-in. ejectable cylinder, was boosted to a peak altitude of 315 km. (196 mi.). Purpose of the experiment, a joint project of the Univ. of Michigan and Goddard Space Flight Center, was to measure density and temperature of electrons and neutral particles at 75-200 mi. altitude and to test a solar aspect sensor. This was the first firing of Nike-Tomahawk configuration from Wallops Island, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Wallops Release 65—16)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Public Affairs Officer, Paul Haney, announced that daily newspapers might have VoAit. interviews with the crew of the GT^l flight on the same basis as television networks and wire news services. Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would spend two full days in personal interviews at MSC early in May. There would be a mass press conference for all news media in Washington, D.C., on April 30. Without such an arrangement, the only newspapers that would have had personal interviews would be those that subscribed to the service that paid astronauts for their stories. (Houston Post, 4/23/65)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Apollo Program manager at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced at a press conference at North American Aviation’s Tulsa facilities that the Tulsa plant would build 16 Apollo service modules. Apollo contract work there totaled more than $61 million. (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 4/15/65)
Modest turnout of spectators at the Sept. 14 motorcade in Washington, D.C., for Astronauts Cooper and Conrad received editorial comment in the Washington Evening Star:	. . We think it is an encouraging trend. Just possibly the lack of hoopla and gapers suggests that America has accepted the space program as serious business instead of a circus of stunt men.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/16/65)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Brig. Gen. Charles A. Lindbergh (usafr) was elected to the Board of Pan American World Airways. During his 36-year association with the airline, he had helped develop several aircraft from the Fokker and Sikorsky to the Boeing and Douglas jets. Recently he had worked on the supersonic transport and the fan jet Falcon. He was also a member of the naca from 1931 to 1939. {NYT, 3/18/65, 47)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, NASA, said in an address at the First World Exhibition of Transport and Communications in Munich: “It is my personal opinion, shared by some colleagues, that space flight will logically follow the pattern of historical development which has characterized the transportation industry. That is, the exploitation of the system is an outgrowth of its invention. “This pattern is vividly demonstrated by the popular American legend that Henry Ford invented the automobile, when in fact the automobile is not really an American invention at all. For one thing, it was not invented by any one man, but by a host of inventors—most of them Europeans. “However, Henry Ford did initiate the exploitation of this invention as a means of transportation for almost every family in America. Ford was a man of great inventive genius who strove to mass produce a highly reliable automobile at low unit cost. So Ford took advantage of this once-novel invention, the automobile, by developing to a high degree the arts of mass production with interchangeable parts, line assembly, and finally conveyor assembly; and thus he ushered in a new age of public transportation. “The automobile also serves as an excellent example that even the farsighted and visionary inventor often cannot visualize the ultimate utilization of his invention by the public. For the modern automobile is a combination of many inventions—the wheel, the pneumatic tire which in turn depended upon the discovery of vulcanized rubber, the internal combustion engine and gasoline—to name a few. To illustrate an extreme case, I seriously doubt if the inventor of the wheel could visualize its use in such a supernatural machine as the automobile! In the more recent past, Benjamin Silliman, Jr., a brilliant American petrochemist of the late-nineteenth century, considered gasoline a useless and dangerous byproduct of his process for refining lamp kerosene. “The thing to remember is that the automotive industry did not spring from public demand. It came about because there were inventors who braved ridicule and worse and because others were quick to seize upon their creations. There was no expressed requirement for the airplane, nor for the trans-Atlantic air travel opened up by Charles Lindbergh. The novel products of inventive minds become the everyday products of our society. The full impact of these products is unpredictable at the time of their invention. “The American scientist, Robert Goddard, who created the first liquid-fueled rockets in the United States, remarked that ‘Every vision is a joke until the first man accomplishes it.’ “The men who dreamed up and worked out methods of efficient transportation unwittingly opened up broad new vistas, and touched off the growth of tremendous production and service industries. They showed the way to expedite the movement of people and goods, and they also accelerated the exchange of ideas and customs and thus promoted understanding and cooperation. “Robert Goddard in America, like Hermann Oberth in Europe, were scorned and laughed at in their time. But while we are meeting here, men are preparing more journeys into the limitless areas beyond Earth’s atmosphere, working with much the same theories and techniques proposed by Oberth and Goddard.” (Text)
In an article entitled “The Pentagon, the ‘Madmen,’ and the Moon,” Maj. Gen. of the Soviet Air Force B. Teplinskiy said: “Sober voices in the United States call for collaboration with the U.S.S.R. in space research. The Saturday Evening Post said: ‘When we reach the moon and the stars, we shall find the solutions to the most profound secrets of the universe. How much more easily accessible all this would be if we would fly there together.’ “It is known throughout the entire world that the lag in this respect does not depend on the Soviet Union. It is the spiteful policy of those U.S. circles, which do not hide their military space plans, which constitute the obstacle. These plans are widely trumpeted by the press, television, and radio. Such a position is not accidental. On the one hand it allegedly pursues the aim of enhancing U.S. prestige while it actually is aimed at blowing up the psychosis around the space armaments race and at trying to provoke the Soviet Union into retalatory measures or to intimidate it by the alleged U.S. possibilities. A naive scheme.”	(Krasnaya Zvezda, 1/10/65, 3)
NASA and dod announced a memorandum of agreement to establish a Delta launch capability at the Western Test Range (wtr). Costs would be shared, based on the estimated use of the vehicle by each agency. Existing USAF Thor-Able-Star launch sites would be adapted for Delta use wherever practicable. Launch pads and blockhouses would be used on a shared basis, with each agency responsible for its own missions. NASA would exercise launch vehicle control over all wtr Delta launches. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and USAF Space Systems Division would be responsible for carrying out the agreement. NASA would be responsible for developing an improved Delta launch vehicle to meet both agencies’ mission requirements for use at both wtr and etr. DOD was planning to phase out the Thor-Able-Star and use the improved Delta for payloads carried by this vehicle class. (nasa Release 65-51)
Israel, to reassure U.S. of her peaceful intentions for use of atomic energy, had permitted two aec commissioners to inspect Dimona reactor, a natural uranium, heavy-water-moderated type, capable of producing enough plutonium for several relatively small atomic weapons. Israel had imposed strict secrecy on the inspections, one a year ago and a second last month. U.S. tentatively concluded that Dimona was not being used to produce plutonium for atomic weapons but suggested that reactor be placed under inspection by International Atomic Energy Agency. Israel refused, explaining: (1) she should not be forced to place her national development under agency inspection until international inspection had been accepted by all nations, and (2) the Agency had discriminated against her in favor of Arab states in membership of its board and location of research centers. Many American and British specialists feared that Israel could be “keeping the option open” to develop atomic deterrent against Arab nations. (Finney, NYT, 3/14/65, 1)
USAF launched a Thor-Agena D booster with an unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. (upi, Denver Post, 1/17/65)
President’s message sending budget for Fiscal Year 1966 included the following remarks: “Space research and technology: This Nation has embarked on a bold program of space exploration and research which holds promise of rich rewards in many fields of American life. Our boldness is clearly indicated by the broad scope of our program and by our intent to send men to the moon within this decade. “The costs are high—as we knew they would be when we launched this effort. We have seen a rise in annual expenditures for the space program from less than one-half billion dollars in 1960 to over $4 billion in 1964. “Expenditures are continuing to increase. However, we have built up momentum and are concentrating on our highest priority goals. Therefore, we will no longer need to increase space out-lays by huge sums each year in order to meet our present objectives. “This budget proposes that expenditures increase by $22 million in 1966 over 1965. This is the smallest annual increase since 1959. The new obligational authority requested is about the same as enacted for 1965.” (nasa lar iv/16)
In answer to the query, “What is an orbital analyst?” an article in The Airman said: “The complex tasks of the analyst involve the use of a high order of mathematics, laws of celestial mechanics, and adaptation of orbital analysis problems to high-speed scientific computer solutions. These highly specialized activities are absolutely essential to carrying out the vast mission of the Air Force SPACETRACK system: detection, tracking, and identification of all man-made objects orbiting the earth.” (Airman, 7/65, 24) During July: Fortune magazine recounted the story of the development of the Lear jet—a small jet aircraft for the corporate market. William Lear, said the article, became the first man in history to design, build, and win certification for a jet airplane—all with his own money. {Fortune, 7/65, 137-140, 185)
usaf orbited two unidentified satellites with a single Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle launched from Vandenberg afb. (ap, NYT, 4/30/65, 40; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 140)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, with Thor-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 8/18/65, 19)
A new telescope on Mt. Wilson, after surveying more than half the sky visible from that site, had detected from 400-1,000 celestial objects cooler than 1,500° F, reported Dr. Bruce T. Ulrich of Cal Tech at a meeting of the American Physical Society in Chicago. Since between 70% and 80% of them lay along the Milky Way, it was theorized that they were “very large—probably thousands of times larger than the sun, very distant, and quite rare.” The new telescope was novel in several ways: its concave mirror was of an epoxy plastic coated with aluminum; the mirror rocked back and forth at 20 cps, so that light from an infrared source in the sky would sweep across detectors of lead sulphide and silicon; the detectors, kept at —320° F, were sensitive enough to detect the slight increase in the infrared as the arm of the telescope swept past one of these objects. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
U.S. and Argentina jointly announced plans to collaborate in launching weather rockets to gain information about hemispheric weather patterns. Under terms of an agreement, Argentina would provide launching facilities, would transport rockets and equipment from the U.S. where they would be manufactured, and would assemble and launch the rockets. U.S. launchings would be made from Wallops Station; launching pads in Argentina would be at Chamical. Other Latin American countries had been invited to participate in the program, (ap, NYT, 5/22/65)
Apollo Spacecraft 009, first Apollo flight spacecraft of the type that would carry three U.S. astronauts to the moon and back, was accepted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center during informal ceremonies at North American Aviation, Inc.’s, Downey, Calif., facility. Largest U.S. manned spacecraft built to date, Spacecraft 009 included a command module, service module, launch escape system, and adapter. {Marshall Star, 10/27/65, 1, 10; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/22/65, 1)
Distinguished Lecture Series sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade was opened by Dr. James A. Van Allen, head of the Univ. of Iowa’s physics and astronomy department. Dr. Van Allen discussed “Space Science.: Past, Present, and Future” at the Univ. of Maryland. Series of seven lectures was designed “to foster bettef understanding between industry and local universities in an effort to create a research community in the Washington [D.C.] area equivalent to the Harvard-MIT complex in the Boston area.” (Wash. Post, 10/3/65, B2)
First S—IB flight model stage for the Saturn IB booster which left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Assembly Facility for Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the barge Promise, was scheduled to arrive at KSC August 14. The 80-ft.-long S-IB stage would be joined with S—IVB second stage to make up the first Saturn ib launch vehicle. NASA planned to launch the 225-ft.-long booster in 1966. (msfc Release 65-206)
Federal Urban Renewal Administration would approve location of the NASA Electronics Research Center in the Kendall Sq. area of Cambridge by declaring the area eligible for an urban renewal project, the Boston Globe reported. According to an unidentified Federal official, an eligibility report prepared by the Cambridge Redevelopment Authority had been approved by the New York regional office and approval from Washington, D.C., was expected soon. (Boston Globe, 4/15/65)
William Hines commented on the economy of low bidding in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “The lowest bidder still produces hardware for Uncle Sam’s space effort, and this arrangement does not always prove the most economical in either time or money. A glaring example has developed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where America’s moonport is rapidly nearing completion. “The lowest bidder has built two huge tank-like vehicles called ‘crawler-transporters’ there, at a saving of almost $3 million below a competitive bidder’s price. The only trouble is that the crawlers will not do the job they were designed for, which is to carry a Saturn V moon rocket on a mobile launching tower some three miles from an assembly building to where the rocket will actually blast. “Trouble has been traced to some tapered roller bearings. . . . “There seems to be nothing wrong with the bearings, which are produced by the biggest and best known manufacturer of such items. The fault apparently lies in incorrect design assumptions which result in overloads sometimes being imposed on the bearings, causing them to fail. “Since the design—offered by the contractor, Marion Power Shovel Co.—was approved by NASA technical experts, the government will probably have to pay for the redesign necessary to make the crawler work. These redesign costs could well wipe out the difference between Marion’s bid and the higher proposal of Bucyrus-Erie, another large builder of heavy mobile equipment. . . . “As it turns out, the false economy of low bidding in this instance may cause the United States to miss its stated goal in space: men on the moon in the ’60s. Entirely aside from whether this is a worthwhile goal, it is a national objective and the national prestige is riding on it. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/9/65)
NASA signed a one-year $70,000 contract with Flight Safety Foundation to report and evaluate research and development projects and events related to' rough air in the atmosphere. The study would be conducted from fsf Offices in New York City, Phoenix, Ariz., and Los Angeles, (nasa Release 65-10)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, National Aeronautics and Space Council Staff, in NASC compilation of international space programs, predicted that future Soviet activities in space would include: manned circumlunar flight; development of a Soviet version of Mol; large manned stations maintained for indefinite periods by supply ferries; manned lunar landing; major new version of an interplanetary probe, notably on using Venus as a target this fall. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 10/11/65, 32) During October: USAF had formed a seven-member, top-level policy committee to function as chief advisory group of manned orbital laboratory (Mol) objectives and problems, reported Aviation Week and Space T echnology. Chaired by Air Force Secretary Harold Brown, the committee would establish program objectives, plans, schedules, milestones, and development and test goals; make program and system changes; define major technical developments; and identify management and fiscal problems, as well as problems that affect other military departments and Government agencies. (Av. Wk., 10/4/65, 25)
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. made the first formal bid to become a customer of ComSatCorp. In a filing with the FCC, AT&T asked for the right to lease 100 voice-grade channels that would operate through early bird I comsat and connect with European telephone companies. AT&T also asked that it be allowed to acquire a television channel for use from time to time in providing TV service to and from Europe in ventures with various European communications carriers. (WSJ, 6/3/65, 4)
U.S. launched eight military satellites into orbit from Vandenberg afb March 9 with a Thor-Agena D booster, nasa disclosed. This was the greatest number of payloads the U.S. had ever orbited with a single launch vehicle and was believed to exceed any multiple launching made by the Soviet Union. Orbital parameters: apogee, 585 mi. (942 km.) ; perigee, 561 mi. (903 km.) ; inclination to the equator, 70°. Two payloads would measure solar radiation; two would test stabilization methods for future spacecraft; one would map the earth’s surface; another, Surcal (Space Surveillance Calibration), would help improve precision of satellite tracking networks; another, Oscar (Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), would broadcast on frequencies that amateur radio operators could track. The satellites had been unidentified until NASA listed them in its periodic satellite summary. The summary also showed that unmanned cosmos LXI, cosmos lxii, and cosmos lxiii, launched by U.S.S.R. March 15 with a single launch vehicle, had become 26 satellites or pieces of satellites. COSMOS LXVI, and two companions, launched May 7, had fallen out of orbit, (gsfc SSR, 4/15/65; Clark, NYT, 5/19/65; Wash. Post, 5/20/65, A12)
The President has taken the moderate and, in this case, wise course in deciding to speed up the development of an American supersonic commercial airliner with an additional $140 million in research over the next IV2 years,” said a Washington Post editorial. It continued: “He could have called a halt to the program and abdicated America’s aviation industry leadership to France and Britain, who already are developing their Concorde, or to the Soviets with their TU-144. Or he could have followed the recommendation of some of his advisers and spent even greater sums of money to build two competing types of planes which both might end up as impractical white elephants. . . the President’s moderate speed-up decision certainly is justified on scientific grounds, for research invariably turns up new ideas for progress. And it is justified on political grounds as well, for this country must maintain its pioneering leadership in all forms of transportation.” {Wash. Post, 7/17/65)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the annual Robert Thurston Lecture of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in Chicago, said that man woud probably never explore the stars since a round trip to the nearest would take 160,000 yrs. Dr. Dryden spoke on the impact of man-in-space on engineering. This was to be his last public appearance. (Manly, Chic. Trib., 11/ 11/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (afsc), in talk on “Materials and Tomorrow’s Air Force” at the Air Force Materials Symposium in Miami Beach, said: “The rate of progress in materials will be measured by accomplishments in four areas. First, the acquisition of new fundamental knowledge which will lead either to new materials or to the utilization of existing materials to meet specific needs. Second, the exploratory development of materials in advance of specific system requirements. Third, the evaluation of new materials for potential applications. And fourth, the investigation of economical manufacturing techniques and equipment. The importance of vigorous efforts in all of these areas is obvious when we remember that it takes from 5 to 10 years to translate a laboratory result into hardware. “. . . the people of the Air Force Materials Laboratory are making significant contributions to present and future Air Force systems. Their recent accomplishments include development of methods for ultrasonic detection of corrosion in aircraft fuel tanks and for installation of corrosion-resistant rivets in aircraft skins. They have done important work with reinforced structural composites; with graphites for leading edges, nose cones, and rocket nozzles; and with chemically resistant seals for liquid rocket propulsion systems.” (Text)
One of TIROS ix’s two cameras had stopped returning useful photographs, NASA announced, possibly because of malfunction of a diode. Second camera was taking about 250 pictures daily of the earth’s cover. Project engineers at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center had begun a “turnabout” maneuver to prevent the meteorological satellite from overheating and to ensure continued solar power. Maneuver would not affect satellite’s picture-taking ability. Launched into polar orbit Jan. 22, 1965, tiros ix had apogee of 1,605 mi. and perigee of 435 mi. The “cartwheel satellite,” so called because it was moving through space like a rolling wheel with the cameras mounted opposite each other on the perimeter, had taken more than 32,000 pictures, 92% of them useful to weather forecasters. (nasa Release 65-120)
“If Major Edward H. White leaves his space capsule during next Thursday’s Gemini 4 flight, it will only be a ‘space spectacular’ stunt,” said Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) during a news conference in San Francisco. Rep. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had made the same comment at the time of a similar feat by the Soviet Union. (NYT, 5/28/65)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 188.5 km. (117 mi.). Primary experimental objective was to study the group of stars of Orion in the ultraviolet. Because of a failure with the attitude control system the experiment had no chance to operate. Experiment instrumentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
The earth has four vast bulges roughly in the design of a pyramid and four equally large depressions, reported scientists from Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. “They are as big as the North American continent,” said Dr. Robert R. Newton, Supervisor of Space Research and Analysis at the Laboratory. Discoveries announced were credited to anna ib geodetic satellite, launched Oct. 31, 1962, and a number of USN research satellites. By studying rises and dips in their orbits, scientists were able to determine gravitational highs and lows. One high point centers over Ireland in the northern hemisphere and sprawls northward toward the pole. Another extends across the equator from New Guinea northward toward Japan. Another is south of Africa centered about half way to Antarctica, and the fourth is west of South America with its apex off Peru. (Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Lab. Release; Myler, upi, Wash. Post, 6/9/65, A3; ap, NYT, 6/10/65, 17)
Two groups of youths were apprehended by a security patrol at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, for trespassing near Gemini 5 on Launch Complex 37. Unauthorized entry to the site is a Federal offense. (Wash. Post, 8/20/65)	_
Tabulations prepared by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center showed that more than 1,000 man-made objects—satellites, spacecraft, capsules, and assorted bits and pieces of them—had been placed in orbit since Oct. 4, 1957. Of these objects 243 were satellites launched by the United States or its allies and 94 were Soviet-launched satellites. 103 U.S.-sponsored satellites and 16 Soviet satellites were still in orbit. Of those no longer in orbit, 140 were U.S. and 78 Soviet. Many satellites had separated into two or more space objects or had broken apart accidentally or by design to produce space junk. GSFC records identified 469 hunks of junk of U.S. origin and 182 of Soviet as having orbited the earth at one time or another. Of these, 372 U.S. and 16 Soviet objects were still in orbit, (ap, NYT, 2/7/65, 80)
Kansas City Star editorial: “In the long book of history, the 20th century is likely to have a place alongside the 15th and 16th centuries that saw historic explorations of the surface of the earth. Today, man is on the edge of the conquest of another world—the world of space. He now possesses the capability of leaving this planet and setting foot on the moon or another body of the solar system. “In fact, it now begins to appear that American astronauts will settle gently onto the surface of the moon in 1969. It will be an exploit that knows no counterpart in more than 4 billion years of earth’s history. . . .”	(Kansas City Star, 9/12/65)
Gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn) were briefly united with their families at Ellington afb near Houston. The astronauts had flown to Ellington from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where they had been undergoing medical debriefing. After a short visit at Manned Spacecraft Center, the astronauts left their families for more debriefing sessions and tests, (upi, NYT, 9/3/65, 10)
The first stage of the first Saturn IB launch vehicle to be flown arrived at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the barge Promise. This was the first transit of the new Port Canaveral locks, due for formal dedication Aug. 21.	(Brevard Sentinel, 8/15/65)
NASA approved inclusion of three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes on the first Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) and rescheduled the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s celescope experiment for the third Oao. The three x-ray and gamma ray telescopes, already fabricated, contained experiments for surveying the sky proposed by: MIT, to detect high-energy gamma rays that did not originate from earth; Lockheed Missiles and Space Div., to seek new sources of low-energy (soft) x-rays and to study those recently developed; and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, to detect low-energy gamma rays. The celescope experiment was designed to map the stars and nebulae through observations in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum but had encountered development problems. Unaffected by the change and proceeding on schedule for a 1965 launch was the Univ. of Wisconsin’s photometer-telescope system to measure the energy distribution and emission intensities of stars. (nasa Release 65-49)
Former astronaut Col. John Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was suffering no effects from last year’s ear injury, reported the Wilford Hall Air Force Hospital in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
The Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V and most of the day’s coverage would be televised in color by all three major networks—the American Broadcasting Co., the Columbia Broadcasting System, and the National Broadcasting Co. The only previous color broadcast of a space flight had been nbc’s telecast of the Gemini iv launch. (Adams, NYT, 8/18/65, 55M)
Radio station wtop in Washington, D.C., assisted NASA in conducting a radio signal interaction experiment employing a Nike-Apache rocket launched from Wallops Sta., Va., with a 55-lb. instrumented payload. WTOP transmitted a steady modulated tone for several minutes during the flight to enable Univ. of Illinois scientists to measure interaction of the WTOP signal on a signal of a different frequency broadcast from Wallops Sta. Both were received by instruments in the payload as the rocket rose to peak altitude of 110 mi. (NASA Release 65-195; Wallops Release 65—35)
Commenting on blockade to prevent Negroes from using North Merritt Island ocean beach—federally-owned property released for public use by NASA—Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said:	“If difficulty should continue to arise in implementing a basic public policy of non-discrimination, the Kennedy Space Center would be obligated to withdraw the beach from public use.” (Miami Her., 4/13/65)
GEMINI VI Astronauts Schirra and Stafford were made honorary members of the American Federation of Musicians for their rendition of Jingle Bells during the Gemini vii-vi mission, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/21/65, A2)
dod announced Peter Kiewit Sons Company had received a $9,495,000 contract for modification of Titan II launch facilities in the vicinity of Davis-Monthan afb, Ariz.; Little Rock afb, Ark.; McConnell afb, Kan.; and at Vandenberg afb, Calif. The Army Corps of Engineers awarded the contract, (dod Release 18-65)
In a 6,087-to-2,84I vote, machinists at the McDonnell Aircraft Corp. approved a new three-year contract with McDonnell Aircraft which had been worked out by McDonnell, IAM, and the Federal Mediation Board to end the six-day walkout of 17,000 workers. The strike had only lasted four days for the 200 iam members at Kennedy Space Center who had been allowed to return to work Nov. 22 on preparations for the Gemini 7-6 launch, (ap, NYT, 11/25/65, 56)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., that the time had come for the Administration to decide on what goals it wanted to set for the period after landing astronauts on the moon. The U.S. must use the tremendous space capability it had carefully built up since sputnik I, he said, “or see its value erode. If we do not use what we have created, continued expansion of the Soviet program will likely lead to future Soviet missions that will have the impact of Sputnik I.” (Text)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 48 additional 3—2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engines would be purchased from Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., under an amendment which converted the engine production contract to a cost-plus-incentive-award-fee agreement. The initial contract was a cost-plus-fixed-fee agreement. Cost of amendment was $75.8 million which brought the total value of the contract to approximately $206 million. A total of 103 J-2 engines was now on order for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicle program, (msfc Release 65—289)
Commercial aviation’s first nonstop crossing of the Pacific was made by Qantas Airlines Boeing 707: San Francisco to Sydney in 14 hrs., 33 min. (Wash. Daily News, 3/8/65)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address before American Nuclear Society-Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington, D.C.: “If anyone doubts the impact that science and technology have had on society, in just the past 20 years, he need look only at the new industries employing many thousands of people which have come into existence during that time—industries based solely on the evolution of new products and services. These include—and i mention only a few —television, the computer, the jet engine and nuclear energy. “Some of these industries have sprung from the application of a single invention or chain of scientific thoughts. “During these past 20 years, too, we have seen in the United States the creation of a constructive partnership unknown in our previous history—a partnership of government, university, management, labor, science and citizen—a partnership devoted to maximum development of science and technology not for the narrow interest of any single group, but for the common good. “To witness the space launchings at Cape Kennedy, as I have, is to see this partnership in action. . . .” Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said; “As chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, I am particularly concerned with the atom’s work in space. “In 1961 our first operating space radioisotopic power source was orbited. And in 1965 our first space reactor was operated in orbit. “The atom will soon become a major power source for our space program—an auxiliary source for spacecraft and life support systems and a necessary source of propulsion for extended space exploration. “I can, in fact, foresee the time when our space efforts will be able to continue only through use of rocket and nuclear power units transported and assembled in space. . . .” (Text)
President Johnson’s order for the Air Force to proceed with development of a Manned Orbital Laboratory produced a quick reaction in Wall Street: stock of the companies involved registered rapid and sometimes sizable gains. {NYT, 8/26/65, 46)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of six firms for contract negotiations to provide nonpersonal scientific and engineering support services for GSFC. Final negotiations were expected to result in cost-plus-award-fee contracts for two years at a total cost of about $16 million. Contracts would cover requirements for ten divisions at GSFC; although requirements of a single division would be fulfilled through a single contract, one contractor might service more than one division in several cases. Firms selected: Fairchild Hiller Corp.; Vitro Corp. of America; Electro-Mechanical Research, Inc.; Consultants and Designers, Inc.; Lockheed Electronics Co.; and Melpar, Inc. (nasa Release 65-216; gsfc Release 15-65)
Gemini gt-3 spacecraft arrived at NASA Kennedy Space Center for final flight preparations before the nation’s first two-man flight this spring, (ksc Release 3-65)
The U.S. should take the lead in establishing an international patent system, Dept, of Commerce Deputy Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology William W. Eaton said at a patent conference in Washington, D.C. At present, an inventor must take out separate patents in each of several foreign countries or run the risk of his idea being exploited. The new system would eliminate this problem by having one international patent cover each invention, Mr. Eaton said. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/27/65, 53)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster. (Wash. Post, 12/10/65, A29)
Canadian alouette ii and American explorer xxxi (Direct Measurement Explorer) were launched in a pick-a-back configuration by nasa from the Western Test Range with a single Thor-Agena B booster. Their orbital parameters were nearly identical: apogee, 1,837 mi. (2,958 km.); perigee, 329 mi. (516.8 km.); period, 121 min.; inclinations, 80°. The two satellites would make related studies of the earth’s ionosphere as they orbited in close proximity. Both the 323-lb. alouette II and the 218-lb. explorer xxxi were performing well. Called Isis-X, the double-launch project was first in a new NASA-DRB (Canadian Defense Research Board) program for International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies (Isis). (NASA Release 65—355; gsfc)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, addressed meeting of Eurospace in Washington, D.C. “Launch vehicle and propulsion requirements for more distant applications have led us to establish the feasibility of nuclear reactors for space propulsion purposes, and continuing attention will be given to this field. Data obtained in 10 years of extensive technical effort have now experimentally verified the analytical predictions of performance for this type of propulsion. And, of course, the supporting technologies which would be necessary for difficult and distant future missions must also be considered, the power sources, including fuel cells, radio isotope sources, reactor power plants, vastly improved communications technology, pointing and orientation technology, highly reliable and long-lived componentry, and life support systems, including closed ecological systems. In this wide range of prospects for the more distant future, we are not committed to a particular line of development nor to given systems. We are too early in the space age to make such commitments. . . .” (Text)
Construction workers at NASA Kennedy Space Center returned to work, ending a two-day walkout which NASA spokesman said cost the government $200,000 a day. Pickets of United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters were withdrawn when Assistant Secretary of Labor James Reynolds agreed to meet with union representatives Apr. 5. (upi, Cocoa Trib., 3/31/65)
Laser beam was bounced off nasa’s explorer xxii ionosphere satellite and photographed by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists Robert Iliff and Theodore Wittanen. This was first such photo and was important verification of feasibility of use of laser for both satellite tracking and geodetic purposes. When such laser reflections off satellites were photographed against a star background’from two ground stations of known locations and other ground stations in the field, triangulation of the simultaneous photos would locate the position of field stations with an accuracy hitherto not possible by other means. This success with Largos (Laser Activated Reflecting Geodetic Optical Satellite) also set a distance record for photo or photoelectric detection of reflected laser signals; slant range to satellite was 950 mi. (afcrl Release 2-65-2)
Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., had demonstrated during their August 21-29 GEMINI v flight that a manned weather satellite could become a valuable part of Weather Bureau forecasting, Howard Simons reported in the Washington Post. U.S. weather forecasters needed information on tropical storm Doreen moving through the Pacific. Cooper and Conrad observed the storm and fixed its position, acquiring the information earlier than tiros x meteorological satellite and more precisely than a ship 150 mi. from the storm. The San Francisco Weather Bureau Office had been able to combine GEMINI v data with that from tiros X to prepare an advisory on Doreen. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/2/65, A3)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert Gilruth received the China-Burma-India World War li service group’s annual Americanism award at the national convention in Houston as “the man who has contributed the most during the past year to the American way of life.” (Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
Commenting on the U.S. need for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol), Lt. Gen. Ira C. Eaker (usaf, Ret.) said in the San Antonio Express: “The nearly simultaneous launch of NASA’s Gemini and Air Force’s Titan ill—c caused some commentators to suggest that there is competition and rivalry in the space effort. Investigation convinces me that there is complete collaboration and accord between NASA and the military in the space program. “There is now little reason to doubt that NASA will succeed with Apollo, the Moon mission. Our continued leadership in the exploration of the peaceful uses of space seems assured. “It is now time to survey where we stand in the military implications and dangers from space. . . . “The first step in a needed military space program, which the Air Force earnestly and urgently proposes, is a manned orbiting laboratory (mol). It is visualized as an experimental space station in low orbit to determine what man can profitably do in space. “The anti-MOL advocates have suggested that the fall-out from the NASA space program will provide all the building blocks to produce military space vehicles quickly when the need is more clearly evident. Fall-out from the automobile industry did not provide the Patton tank. It was necessary to cut and try, build and test many experimental tanks over a period of 25 years. “Building blocks from civil air transports did not produce the b-52 bomber. We had to build and test 51 earlier bomber models. Effective space weapons will never come solely from the fall-out from the NASA program. “mol is said to be held up until the Air Force can precisely define and defend a military mission which MOL can be certain to accomplish. To require anyone to visualize and indicate definitely and in detail now, all that man may ultimately do in space, would be like having asked the Wright brothers in 1910 to lay down the specifications for a supersonic transport.” (Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/14/65, 18)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
Man can withstand spaceflights as long as 30 days without suffering serious biological damage, L/Col. Edward C. Knohlock, director of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and member of the medical debriefing team for Project Mercury flights, told the annual convention of the American Association of Clinical Chemists in Chicago. Although gemini v relayed signals on the rate of breathing, body temperature, heart beat, and perspiration, the more sophisticated equipment needed to reflect the astronauts’ body chemistry would be available on the proposed 14-day flight of a larger manned orbital laboratory. (Powers, Chic. Trib., 9/2/65)
President Johnson nominated John S. Foster as Director of Defense Research and Engineering. Dr. Foster, formerly director of the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, would replace Dr. Harold Brown, who would become Secretary of the Air Force on Oct. 1. (White House Release)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, retiring Air Force Chief of Staff, received a fourth Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at the White House. Later, during formal retirement ceremonies at Andrews AFB, a letter from the President was read: “All the world can be grateful to you for your courage, tenacity and exacting standards of professionalism.” Gen. LeMay was succeeded by Gen. John Paul McConnell. (Loftus, NYT, 2/2 ^5, 13; NYT, 2/2/65, 13)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara administered the oath of office to four new defense officials in a Pentagon ceremony: Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering; Norman S. Paul, Undersecretary of the Air Force; and Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, (dod Release 666-65)
SlO-million seismometer post was dedicated in Billings, Mont., at ceremonies attended by more than 60 scientists from 30 nations who would tour the 525 seismometer sites in Montana. President Johnson, in Washington, D.C., said: “This new Department of Defense installation, the first of its kind, will help detect and identify earthquakes. It brings us closer to the day when science can distinguish with certainty between underground nuclear explosions and other forms of seismic disturbances.” Scientific data would be made available to the world, Johnson added, (ap, NYT, 10/14/65, 3)
Professor Fred Hoyle, British astronomer, might accept U.S. position if U.K. Department of Scientific and Industrial Research determined not to build new Institute of Theoretical Astronomy which would house an American computer essential to his work. Hoyle complained last year that he had been prevented from using the only American-built computer in Britain that would do his work properly. (Feron, NYT, 3/8/65, 9; Wash. Post, 3/9/65 ) Week of March 7: Drop tests at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant demonstrated that substructure of Apollo spacecraft could withstand maximum Apollo water-landing conditions. A series of 18 more drop tests was planned. (M&R, 3/15/65, 7)
AFSC announced that an airspace surveillance and weapons control system had been proposed for installation in the Ryukyu islands, southwest of Japan. Through use of semi-automatic data processing, the Ryukyu Air Defense System (Rads) would pick up airspace intruders in its area almost instantly, enhancing defense capabilities of the Pacific Air Force in that area. The system would consist of radars, ultra-fast communications, data processors, display consoles and command posts where decision makers could direct manned or unmanned weapon interception. Returning aircraft could be directed home or to alternate bases through the system, (afsc Release 54.65)
By a 45%-to-42% margin, the American people believed the space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure, according to a Harris poll. By a 50%-to-38% margin, the public would oppose continuing the program at the present rate of expenditure if it were not for Russian exploits in space. (Harris, Wash. Post, 11/1/65, A2)
65-ton Saturn s-ivb “battleship” tankage and associated vehicle equipment were shipped from San Francisco by msfc to usaf Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma, Tenn., for use in high-altitude tests of the stage’s J-2 engine, (msfc Release 65-291)
A working model of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc.’s new 100-lb., 15in.dia. ion engine, using accelerated ions to gain thrust, was presented to Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for display in the Arts and Industries building. {Wash. Post, 5/27/65, F3) May 27-29:	Forty educators from Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee attended a NASA-Univ. of Alabama Educational Symposium whose prime purpose was to determine the impact upon the curriculum of secondary schools of new knowledge and developments in science, sociology, and human relations created by NASA MSFC activities. Symposium and workshop were conducted by the University under a msfc contract, (msfc Release 65-129)
G. Mervin Ault, Associate Chief of Material and Structures Div., nasa Lewis Research Center, discussed refractory metals in an honors lecture before American Society for Testing and Materials (astm) meeting at Purdue Univ. Refractory metals—such as tungsten, tantalum, molybdenum, columbium—have strength at high temperatures and corrosion resistance to alkali metals. “The past decade has resulted in greater progress in refractory metals than ever before achieved for any one class of structural materials,” Ault said. The lecture commemorated metallurgist Horace W. Gillett and was sponsored jointly by astm and Battelle Memorial Institute, (lrc Release 65-44)
Operation Firefly ended as some 3,000 fireflies snared by Rockville, Md., children were turned over to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. An extract of the firefly’s lamp would be used in a life detection instrument under development at GSFC. Goddard’s “Firefly” instrument would contain a mixture of all the contents of the insect’s glow system except atp (adenosine triphosphate), a high-energy compound essential to all life as it is known on earth. Thus, when the instrument encountered a live microorganism in space, the atp contained therein would complete the circuit and a glow would be produced. (gsfc Release G-19-65; Wash. Post, 8/7/65)
NASA had awarded Brown Engineering Co. a $3,630,000 contract for building nine discrete control equipment systems for use with Saturn V	launch vehicle. Two of the systems would be installed in a Saturn V	systems development facility at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville. The other seven would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Launch Complex 39: three systems would be placed in launch control centers; four would be installed on Saturn V mobile launchers, (msfc Release 65-176)
In response to newsmen’s questions, a spokesman for the State Dept, said the U.S. planned to continue operating its two satellite tracking stations in South Africa despite the warning by South African Prime Minister Hendrick Verwoerd that Negro Americans cannot be employed there. Of the two tracking stations, dod operated one and NASA the other. The dod station employed about 50 American technicians, almost all civilians, and about 25 South Africans. The NASA station had only one American, a liaison officer; other employees were South Africans—some of them non-white. (Halloran, Wash. Post, 6/29/65, A16)
Evidence that the bright areas of the Martian surface contained iron oxides in a loose combination with water was reported by Dr. Carl Sagan of Harvard Univ. to the Biophysical Society’s annual meeting in San Francisco. He said reflected light of hydrated iron oxides in an earth-bound laboratory matched the sunlight reflected from the Martian surface when viewed in the ultraviolet and infrared. Dr. Sagan believed that confirmation of the iron-water compounds on Martian deserts, which showed up as bright areas to earth astronomers, suggested conditions were once right for life to originate on Mars. He said he was convinced that when life of a primitive form had started, the chances were it had survived. (Balt. Sun, 10/18/65)
NASA named an Agena Review Board to try to identify the causes of the failure which prevented the Agena stage from fulfilling its mission in the Gemini vi flight Oct. 25. Board would be headed by co-chairmen Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, Air Force Systems Command, (nasa Release 65-342) October 27: x-15 No. 3 was flown to 236,900-ft. altitude and top speed of 3,477 mph (mach 5.06) by nasa research pilot John B. McKay to obtain data on the NSL scanner, boundary layer noise, and horizontal stabilizer loads, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
NASA, at DOD’s request, had halted syncom Il’s westward drift at 68° east longitude over the Indian Ocean. Under the direction of project managers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the command signals had been sent from the Syncom station in Salisbury, Australia, beginning Feb. 20 and ending Feb. 24. No future major locational corrections were anticipated; SYNCOM II should remain in same general area indefinitely, (nasa Release 65-72)
Paul Haney, Chief of Public Affairs for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, addressed Oklahoma members of the American Legion to open their state convention: “Although we are not pursuing any military objectives as such, every once in a while somebody turns over a rock and finds something which could be of immense military value. “As Detroit learned to produce millions of cars in a hurry by production line development and thus was able to convert without a bobble to tank production in World War II, so could our entire manned space flight program be converted.” (ap, Houston Post, 8/8/65)
A “Dictionary of Scientific Biography” containing essays on careers of scientists and mathematicians would be published by Scribner with a National Science Foundation grant of more than $250,000. Dr. Charles C. Gillispie, Princeton professor of History of Science, had been named Editor-in-Chief. {NYT, 3/7/65, Book Review Sec., 8)
Fuel cells used in the Gemini v mission August 21-29 were being developed by General Electric Co. for commercial use, Dr. Arthur M. Bueche, ge vice president for research and development, told a news conference in New York City. The first models, expected to be ready next year, would provide only 12 watts [gemini v cells provided 2,000 watts] but could power remote television cameras and other communications equipment. Larger units might soon provide emergency power to homes, Dr. Bueche said. (NYT, 9/2/65, 38C)
Studies on flight handling qualities of a manned lifting body reentry vehicle during the later stages of reentry and during the landing approach were being jointly conducted by NASA and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory at nasa’s Flight Research Center using a t-33 jet aircraft specifically modified for af Systems Command by Cornell. Cornell was working under a NASA-funded $231,000 contract which also included human transfer-function studies and ground simulation of the lifting body, (fro Release 12-65)
X-22a vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft (V/Stol) was inspected by Government and military representatives at the Bell Aerosystems plant in Niagara Falls. Its unique characteristic was the ducted fan concept of propulsion consisting of four shrouded propellers—two forward and two on the tips of the 39-ft. wing aft—driven by four T-58 turbine engines. The four engines, expected to propel the aircraft at a cruising speed of 300 mph, were run for about five minutes. X-22a was constructed for the Army, Navy, and Air Force under a Navy-administered contract for $25 million. First flight test would be made in September 1965. (dod Release 341-65: ap, NYT, 5/26/65, 94)
Pegasus C, third meteoroid detection satellite, arrived at NASA Kennedy Space Center aboard the aircraft “Pregnant Guppy.” Pegasus C was scheduled for launch during summer of 1965 by SA-10, the last Saturn I vehicle, (msfc Release 65-159; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
Joint plans for higher wage and improved fringe benefits negotiations in 29 agreements with major aerospace companies were formulated at a conference in Washington, D.C., between leaders of the United Automobile Workers and the International Association of Machinists. Contracts discussed would expire within the next six months, (ap, NYT, 6/24/65, 21)
During a luncheon speech at the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Mai. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, formerly NASA Director of Launch Vehicle Programs, said it was now generally agreed that the near-earth space area “looks more promising from the standpoint of potential military applications” than lunar bases, Mars flights, and other projects suggested earlier. USAF was seeking refinement of its knowledge in astronomy, geophysics, geodesy, and other areas. More pressing, he said, was to study the space environment as related to weapon systems and orbiting satellites. (Partner, Denver Post, 2/29/65)
Sealed brushless DC motor, originally developed to power instrumentation on unmanned spacecraft, was selected for use in the Apollo two-man Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) and the Gemini two-man spacecraft. The new motor utilized photo-optical detectors and transistorized switching elements which duplicated the functions of conventional brushes and commutator without physical contact of the rotating parts. Environmental tests had shown the brushless motor had a predicted operational life of one year. A barrier to DC motors had been the short life of conventional brushes in the space vacuum because of the lack of lubricating moisture necessary to prevent excessive friction. Motor was developed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under contract with Sperry Farragut. (gsfc Release G—2—65)
Employees of nasa Kennedy Space Center began moving into the new headquarters building on Merritt Island. The move of more than 1,700	employees would be completed by mid-August, (ksc Spaceport Neivs, 4/22/65, 1)
usaf was reported to be considering the use of surplus Wing 1 Minuteman ICBMS as Guidance Error Analysis Vehicles (Geav). According to Air Force Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility (cigtf), surplus Minuteman boosters could be the cheapest means to evaluate future inertial guidance systems in a true missile environment. ETR was selected for Geav because no other range could measure missile velocity in three axes to the required accuracy. The Minuteman guidance system itself would be reprogramed and located in a recoverable payload for reasons of economy. (M&R, 1/25/65, 34)
President Johnson approved the following policy on the promotion and decoration of astronauts: “1. Each military astronaut will receive a one grade promotion as a direct result of the first successful space flight, but not beyond the grade of colonel in the Air Force and Marine Corps or captain in the Navy. Promotions to general officer rank will be accomplished through usual military selection board process. “2. Each Gemini astronaut will be awarded the NASA Medal for Exceptional Service (or Cluster) after completion of a successful space flight. The NASA Medal for Distinguished Service, the highest award which can be given by that agency, will be awarded for exceptional accomplishments in the Gemini program, including but not limited to accomplishments in actual flight. “3. Military decorations associated with space flights, such as awards for exceptional heroism or other distinguished service, will be determined on an individual basis consistent with general policy governing the award of traditional military decorations.” (Text, Pres. Doc., 9/6/65, 183-84) During August: Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn., wrote in Aerospace: “Almost every aspect of our national life has begun to show a positive and beneficial impact of this nation’s decision to be a major participant in man’s greatest adventure. “There has been the direct economic impact on the communities and regions where the major parts of this large national event are centered. There has been introduced into our national economy a wide variety of radically new industrial techniques. There have evolved new standards of excellence in engineering, testing, design, reliability, environment, control, and the skill and dedication of personnel . . . “In space research, development and exploration, the identity becomes . . . more imperative. Aerospace companies go many routes attempting to achieve that goal. Leading aerospace companies, for example, developed a ‘Zero Defects’ program aimed at reminding, rewinding, and emphasizing to the worker that rejects are expensive and, if undetected, would contribute to tragedy. Other companies have instituted variations of the zero defects promotional program. “A second motivation campaign called ‘The Critical Parts Program,’ to insure that all 98 subsystem assemblies that go into a major space booster system will work, precisely in sequence, has been sold as an industry wide concept. “Another company reports that employes were amused and, more importantly, impressed, when a sign was tacked above the door of its main assembly room that reads: ‘In NASA we trust. Everything else we check . . .’” (Aerospace, Summer 1965, 25)
President Johnson announced he had approved dod development of a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) at a cost of $1.5 billion. At a White House news conference, the President said: “This program will bring us new knowledge about what man is able to do in space. It will enable us to relate that ability to the defense of America. It will develop technology and equipment which will help advance manned and unmanned space flight and it will make it possible to perform very new and rewarding experiments with that technology and equipment. . . . “Unmanned flights to test launching, recovery and other basic parts of the system will begin late next year or early 1967. The initial unmanned launch of a fully equipped laboratory is scheduled for 1968. This will be followed later that year by the first of five flights with two-man crews. “The Air Force has selected the Douglas Aircraft Company to design and to build the spacecraft in which the crew of the laboratory will live and operate. The General Electric Company will plan and develop the space experiments. “The Titan 3C booster will launch the laboratory into space and a’ modified version of the NASA Gemini capsule will be the vehicle in which the astronauts return to earth.” President Johnson emphasized that the U.S. would “live up to our agreement not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and we will continue to hold to all nations, including the Soviet Union, the hand of cooperation in the exciting years of space exploration which lie ahead for all of us. . . .” He directed NASA Administrator James E. Webb “to' invite the Soviet Academy of Sciences to send a very high level representative next month here to observe the launching of Gemini 6.” (Transcript, Pres. Doc., 8/30/65, 142,- dod Release 551-65)
Dr. John D. Nicolaides, Chairman of Notre Dame’s Aerospace Engineering Dept., formerly Special Assistant to the NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told National Space Club at a Washington, D.C., luncheon that we must realize we were “not yet first in the race for space supremacy. . . . The [Soviet] lead in both numbers and weights of unmanned launchings continues to increase. They are publishing just as many scientific papers as we are and they are just as good.” Nicolaides added that he was not including their work in life sciences “which is well ahead of ours by virtue of the simple fact that they have been experimenting in space.” Dr. Nicolaides said he was alarmed by the U.S.S.R.’s “extensive planetary program.” They started early and continued a truly massive effort compared to ours, he said. “They are launching their heavy spacecraft at each opportunity to both Mars and Venus, while we have abandoned Venus completely and are only studying scientific measurement on Mars in 1971. . . .” (nsc Newsletter, 2/65)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center, NASA, received the Pioneer of the Wind-Rose Award, Order of the Diamond, in Munich, Germany. Dr. Debus, first recipient of the award, was cited for his historical contribution to rocket launch technology and for his contributions to science through his work in rocketry. Award was made at the First International Transport Exhibit. (Brevard Sent., 8/1/65)
Planning Research Corp. of Los Angeles received a one-year, $48,229 contract from NASA Goddard Space Flight Center to conduct an independent reliability assessment of the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/65, D6)
Dr. Edmund Klein of Roswell Park Memorial Institute for Cancer Research and Dr. Samuel Fine, Northeastern Univ. professor, in a report prepared for the 149th national meeting of the American Chemical Society, disclosed that laser beams may cause damage to the eyes, brain, and other organs in a way that may not be immediately apparent. Klein recommended that researchers “err on the side of safety in precautionary measures.” Lasers are devices for concentrating light into extremely powerful beams; researchers were exploring their usage in fields of communications, eye surgery, cancer treatment, and in chemical and other industrial applications, (ap, Houston Post, 4/5/65)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineer John H. Kimzey told a meeting of American Institute of Chemical Engineers that fires during simulated spaceflight had the puzzling habit of burning fiercely initially, dying out so the flame disappeared, but flaring to life when force of gravity took over. Kimzey speculated that in weightless conditions, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and water vapor created by the fire might surround the flame and cut off both oxygen and fuel. Motion pictures of the “dead” fires had shown no indication of either light or infrared heat energy coming from fire locations. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 2/10/65)
NASA Kennedy Space Center had extended for the second year two of the major contracts under which the NASA Merritt Island Launch Area was being operated. Extensions were negotiated with TransWorld Airlines, for base support services, and Ling-Temco-Vought, information services, (ksc Release 58-65)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller announced that the New York State Atomic and Space Development Authority had selected American Machine and Foundry Co. for a $2.75-million fixed-price contract to design and build a nuclear-powered plant which would produce a million gallons of fresh water daily from seawater. Named Surfside (Small Unified Reactor Facility with Systems for Isotopes, Desalting and Electricity), the plant would be constructed on Long Island and would also be able to generate 2,500 kw. of electricity and produce high-energy radioactive isotopes. (Sibley, NYT, 7/20/65, 1, 14)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
USAF presented a Lockheed Agena-B to the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., for permanent display in the National Air Museum. The Agena had performed as an orbital injection vehicle, space satellite (first to achieve circular and polar orbits), and as an intermediate stage booster for deep space probes. (Smithsonian Release)
For more than six years, U.S. nuclear warheads had been mounted secretly on planes and missiles of West Germany and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, the New York Times reported. Through a combination of physical and electronic controls, the warheads had remained under American custody, and the allies could not use the weapons without specific approval of the U.S. (Finney, NYT, 11/21/65, 1)
osc—C was launched from Eastern Test Range, with a Delta booster, fell into the south Atlantic Ocean after failing to achieve orbit. First two stages of the launch vehicle performed perfectly: following second stage cutoff and an approximate 7-min. coast period, small rockets mounted on a table between the second and third stage ignited and spun the table up to 120 rpm; second stage separated, but the third stage ignited about 5/4 sec. prematurely, was not properly aimed, and did not attain orbital speed. oso-c was third in a series of eight orbiting solar observatories planned by NASA. First two satellites were launched from Kennedy Space Center, nasa, March 7, 1962, and February 3, 1965. oso-c I had provided more than 2,000 hrs. of scientific information during its lifetime; oso II was still operating. The Orbiting Solar Observatory program was designed to advance understanding of the sun’s structure and behavior and to determine the physical processes by which the sun influences the earth. Next Oso launch would occur in mid-1966. (NASA Release 65-261; Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A 4; N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/26/65)
Refined data on Martian atmosphere’s density, ionization, and composition, based on analysis of radio signals from mariner IV during its occultation experiment, were reported by scientists at American Geophysical Union meeting held at Southern Methodist Univ., Dallas, Tex. Martian atmosphere was now thought to be much thinner than previously believed: it now seemed that air pressure at Martian surface was only about one-5,000th that of earth. Theory that Martian atmosphere was more dense at heights of 25 mi. or more above the surface than earth’s at comparable elevations was not upheld; observations reported today indicated Martian atmosphere was thinner than earth’s at all elevations. Temperature was about —250° at location of maximum ionization in Martian atmosphere (78-mi. altitude, about one-fourth the expected height). In earth’s ionosphere, temperature is higher than 2,200° F. Atmospheric composition that would account for the mariner iv observations, the scientists said, would be largely carbon dioxide. (Earth-based observations of Mars had shown the presence of carbon dioxide in its atmosphere.) Only scant amount of carbon dioxide is present in earth’s nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere. The scientists making this report were Dr. A. J. Kliore of jpl and Dr. Von R. Eshleman of Stanford Univ. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/4/65,1,12)
afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. had awarded to North American Aviation, Inc., an $8,150,000 increment to previously awarded contract for the xb-70 aircraft, dod announced, (dod Release 100-65)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc Ret.), speaking at a National Space Club luncheon, said: “Looking back over the 3 years since the flight of Friendship 7, I am impressed most of all by the tremendous progress the United States has made in space science and technology. “I am proud of the determination the American people have shown to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. . . . “Three years ago, Mercury spacecraft were limited in weight to about 3,000 pounds. Today, the Saturn I booster is operational and can put 22,500 pounds into Earth orbit, or seven times the weight of Mercury. Saturn i-b, which will begin flying next year, will be able to orbit a payload equal to 11 Mercury spacecraft. Saturn V, which will fly in 1967, will be able to orbit a payload equal to more than 80 Mercuries. That’s some jump—but it is no more than typical of the great gains we are making in national space capabilities. “The accuracy requirements for all these missions are almost incomprehensible and are one of the least understood parts of the space program. A good case in point was the launch of Friendship 7 3 years ago. The speed at insertion into orbit was over 25,000 feet per second or 5 miles per second, and the booster and spacecraft were accelerating at approximately 240 feet per second at a steadily increasing rate. At booster cutoff, each error of 1.4 feet per second resulted in a difference of approximately 1 mile in apogee on the far side of the Earth. When you consider that before the onboard signal for cutoff was received, information had to be obtained by radar at the Cape, transmitted by landline to Goddard, run through the computers, returned by landline to the Cape, checked against Cape data and then transmitted 350 miles down range to the spacecraft, still allowing time for onboard delays in operation of relays, valves, and thrust termination, it looks like an almost impossibly accurate requirement. “Those accuracies, however, are rather crude compared with some now being obtained on the deep space probes. “Now we have Mariner IV which at 6 o’clock tonight will be 20,194,023 miles out from Earth on an extremely difficult and significant mission. As you know, there was a checkout of equipment aboard the spacecraft last week that indicates the chances are still good that we will get revealing pictures of Mars next July, when Mariner IV will be 134 million miles from Earth, so far it will take 12)/> seconds to get a radio signal back. “To wax philosophical for a moment, we might liken our space program to one of Plttto?s ollsgories. fie told of prisoners ciisined in s cave for so long they had lost touch with reality and felt that their whole existence was wrapped up in the shadows they could see on the wall ahead of them. He goes on to say that if one escaped to the outside world and returned to tell the others of what really lay outside the dark cave, they would probably think him completely crazy. “Even though we have seen such tremendous break-throughs in scientific knowledge in recent years, our knowledge has necessarily been limited to such a cave, for practically all we know has been limited to this one tiny speck of earth in a much larger environment. But that is in the process of becoming changed and with a rapidity no one can forecast.” (Text, CR, 2/22/65, A751-531 February 19: Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.) said in an interview that if commercial airlines would voluntarily join the Federal Government in subsidizing helicopter lines, these services might be saved. Commercial helicopter lines operating in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco had received Federal subsidies since 1947, but President Johnson proposed in his budget message that they be cut off after Dec. 31. Sen. Monroney said: “Congress isn’t going to appropriate any more money. We haven’t a chance of selling them or continuing the subsidy without added help from the airlines.” His plan involved artificially lowering helicopter fares so that a greater portion of the flying public would use them. This higher load factor, combined with the use of larger, more economical aircraft and hoped-for improvements in helicopter technology might lead to self-sustaining helicopter service in a few years, the Senator said.	(NYT, 2/19/65, 69)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg aFB on a ThorAgena D booster. It also fired its 85th Minuteman icbm. (upi, Phil. Inq., 3/26/65)
mariner iv, 78,277,013 mi. from earth at 9 a.m. est, had covered 251,691,170 mi. along its orbit. The Mars probe was travelling 46,214 mph relative to earth and was returning data and scientific information continuously, (nasa Release 65-159) President Johnson transmitted to Congress a plan to merge the Weather Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards into an Environmental Science Services Administration. “The new administration will then provide a single national focus for our efforts to describe, understand, and predict the state of the oceans, the state of the lower and upper atmospheres and the size and shape of the earth ... as well as enhance our ability to develop an adequate warning system for the severe hazards of nature . . . which have proved so disastrous to the Nation in recent years.” He added that Federal agencies “concerned with the national defense [and the] exploration of outer space” would receive improved services and that combining of offices and technical facilities would save money, (White House Release) Gemini GT—4 countdown rehearsal at KSC with Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) was delayed because of a minor fueling problem. Launch of the GT—4 mission was scheduled for June 3. (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 5/14/65) An Emeraude rocket was successfully fired by France from the Hamma-guir range, Algerian Sahara, to a planned altitude of 112 mi. It was topped by a mockup of the Topaze rocket which was to be the second stage of the Diamant launcher that France was developing. (Reuters, NYT, 5/18/65; Root, Wash. Post, 5/18/65; M&R, 5/31/65, 11) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center researchers Dr. John B. Schutt and Charles M. Shai announced development of a new series of inorganic spacecraft paints with promise of commercial application; report given at a meeting of the Philadelphia Society for Paint Technology and the Philadelphia Section of the American Chemical Society. The paints would utilize an alkali-metal silicate as a binder and an inorganic phosphate as a wetting agent. They would adhere to most metals and non-metals; would not crack, peel, chalk, flake, or fade when subjected to temperatures between 1,800°F and —320°F; would be washable; could be made in any color; and would have a long shelf life, (gsfc Release G-13-65) American Broadcasting Co. notified the Fee it was preparing plans for a domestic communications satellite to relay network television programs to affiliated stations for rebroadcast, thereby raising for the first time the question of a company other than ComSatCorp owning and operating a comsat. (Gould, NYT, 5/14/65, 1) NBC announced it would televise the June 3 Gemini GT^l spaceflight in color. It would be the first live-color coverage of a space flight, (Doan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/14/65) Cornell Univ, astronomers at Arecibo radiotelescope facility revealed that their radar observations of the planet Mercury April 25 indicated that Mercury rotated on its axis once every 59 days, rotating in the same direction as its orbit. This new study confirmed clearly that Mercury did not have a retrograde rotation and laid to rest the classic view that Mercury did not rotate on its axis at all. The astronomers had reported their findings on Mercury’s rotation in Washington last
20th anniversary of the United Nations celebrated in San Francisco. President Lyndon B. Johnson said in an address to the General Assembly: “The movement of history is glacial. On two decades of experience none can presume to speak with certainty of the destiny of man?s affairs. But this we do know and this we believe: Futility and failure are not the truths of this organization brought into being here 20 years ago. “Where historically man has moved fitfully from war toward war, in these last two decades man has moved steadily away from war as either an instrument of national policy or a means of international decision. . . . “The promise of the future lies in what science, the ever more productive industrial machine, the ever more productive, fertile and usable lands, the computer, the miracle drug and the man in space all spread before us. The promise of the future lies in what the religions and the philosophies, the cultures and the wisdoms of 5,000 years of civilization have finally distilled and confined to us—the promise of abundant life and the brotherhood of man.” (Text, NYT, 6/26/65)
Address by James G. Allen of the Univ. of Colorado before the American Astronautical Society on the impact of space exploration was inserted in the Congressional Record by Sen. Peter H. Dominick (R-Colo.) : “The space revolution of the mid-20th century must be regarded as the most significant of all those great revolutions of history which have affected the fate of man. By definition, a revolution does produce a series of pyramiding effects, one building up on another. But, in the last analysis, these effects focus upon, and culminate in, truly significant changes in the social and economic relationships which shape one society. “The space revolution of the mid-twentieth century thus is unique, as its course and direction will affect every individual on each of the five continents. Moreover, its effects will lie in an entirely new dimension—beyond the physical realm of man’s earthly existence and into the boundless areas of space itself. The space revolution of our day has resulted from the theories, hypotheses and observations of the scientists as their conclusions were tested and applied by the eingineers and technicians.” {CR, 10/22/65, 27886-88)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center awarded rca a $4.6-million contract to provide a real-time deep space tracking and data acquisition system for support of Project Apollo missions. Contract called for installation, checkout, and documentation of rca’s long-range (32,000 mi.) FPQ radar on land made available near a NASA site on Cooper’s Island, Bermuda, through a land-lease agreement with dod. The “Q—6” radar would have a flexible capability to support NASA programs other than manned flight, (gsfc Release G-9-65; gsfc Release G-10-65)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was named chairman of the International Sponsors Committee for Clark Univ.’s $5.4 million Robert Hutchings Goddard memorial library scheduled for completion by 1968. Several nuclear-powered, self-supporting lunar bases and a wide variety of space stations would be in operation by the year 2000, Dr. von Braun told the luncheon meeting of the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He made his predictions during the question and answer period following his speech on Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s contributions to American rocketry. The greatest activity in space 35 yrs. hence would be in earth orbits, von Braun felt, and space would provide a “tremendous military field.” This field would not be the science fiction concept of orbiting hydrogen bombs, but rather a broad program of military reconnaissance. Photography and direct observation of foreign military developments were cited. Space stations would be in a variety of orbits and many would be manned by scientists and repairmen shuttling back and forth in reusable vehicles. Scientists would spend up to six weeks at a time in the stations to make their observations. The use of reusable boosters would cut the cost of delivering payloads to orbit down to some 10% of today’s costs, von Braun added, (nsc Newsletter, 5/65, 6/65)
North American Aviation President J. L. Atwood discussed “dramatic strides” made in civil aviation, at the dedication of the Albuquerque Sunport, N. Mex.: “In just 35 years—from 1929 to 1964—the number of passenger-miles traveled annually on the world’s civil airlines increased from 105 million to 105 billion—almost a thousandfold. . . . In only 15 years, between 1949 and 1964, the annual number of passengers on world civil airlines increased from 27 million to 154 million —nearly sixfold ... A Stanford Research Institute study predicts that passenger-miles on the free world’s scheduled airlines—which were 105 billion in 1964—will reach approximately 229 billion in 1975. . . (Text)
Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
Selection of Radiation, Inc., to negotiate a fixed-price contract for Pulse Code Modulation (Pern) Data Handling Equipment Systems was announced by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. The proposed $1,700,000 contract would call for design, manufacture, and spare parts for 11 PCM systems, ( gsfc Release 6/14/65)
New York World’s Fair opened for its second season. It featured NASADOD U.S. Space Park, containing two and one half acres of full-scale rockets and spacecraft. Among the exhibits were a full-scale Gemini model, an X-15 model, full-scale reproductions of Tiros, Nimbus, Relay, Telstar, and Syncom satellites, and aurora 7 Mercury spacecraft. An honorary astronaut card signed by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn), the first American in space, and Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf), the first astronaut to make two trips into space, was available at the U.S. Space Park to young visitors taking a ride in the full-scale animated Mercury spacecraft on display there. (Press Release)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced it would negotiate with Radiation, Inc., of Melbourne, Florida, for a contract to develop a new weather measuring system to be tested aboard the Nimbus B meteorological satellite. The new equipment, Interrogation Recording and Location System (IRLS), would tie together weather observations made on the ground and in space as well as oceanographic measurements. (gsfc Release G-l-65)
American Institute of Physics established a Center for History and Philosophy of Physics, which was the merging of aip’s Niels Bohr Library of the History of Physics, History of Physics Archives, and Project on the History of Recent Physics in the United States, (aip Release)
U.S. News and World Report suggested that the success of the Gemini GT—4 flight should prompt reassessment of the U.S. position in the race with the Soviet Union. Two conclusions were noted: “1. In the civilian space race, White’s self-propelled ‘space walk’ and McDivitt’s ability to maneuver the spaceship put the U.S. ahead in at least two key areas and gave the U.S. a fighting chance eventually to overtake the Russians in the race to the moon. . . . “2. In the military space race, maneuvering of the Gemini spacecraft demonstrated that the region just above the earth—the inner space belt—could soon become vital to American security.” {U.S. News., 6/14/65)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, in Munich for the International Transport Fair, said at a press conference: “The fact is that never to date has a manned American satellite flown over even one square centimeter of Soviet soil.” Von Braun denied rumors that he might accept a position with a European aeronautics and space organization. He was presented with the international aviation decoration, Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card with Diamonds, while at the Fair. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 9/3/65)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., carried instrumented payload to 125 mi. (200 km.) altitude. Payload was a spectroheliograph to obtain a monochromatic picture of the sun. Experiment was conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. srl)
French Ambassador-designate Charles Lucet awarded gold medals and citations to French and American scientists who had worked on the FR-1 project. The French satellite was launched from the Western Test Range Dec. 6 with a nasa Scout booster, nasa officials honored at the French Embassy ceremony in Washington included Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert C. Baumann, Chief of Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., gsfc; and Dr. Robert W. Rochelle, Chief of Flight Data Systems Branch, Spacecraft Technology Div., gsfc. (Ross, Wash. Post, 12/9/65, Kl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb reported to President Johnson and the Cabinet on both the two-man gt—3 flight and the ranger IX photographic mission. Mr. Webb made these points:	“The most significant accomplishment of the GT-3 flight was that ... it provided verification of the basic design, development, test and operations procedures NASA is using to develop manned spacecraft, man-rated launch vehicles and a world-wide operational network. . . . “We now know that at least two spots, and perhaps three, when we look more carefully at the ranger ix pictures, are at least smooth enough for the Lem [manned moon landing], . . .” An American astronaut probably would be able to open his spacecraft and partly emerge from the cabin during the gt-5 flight. Mr. Webb said under questioning that there might be some possibility of achieving this in the next Gemini flight, but that gt-5 was more likely. He regarded a Russian cosmonaut’s leaving a space vehicle briefly as spectacular but said the U.S. was more intent on developing a space suit that would enable American astronauts to work outside on space vehicles and develop or put together space centers. (Text; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/26/65)
A new theory for the behavior of matter, called SU-6, was presented in New York at the annual meeting of the American Physical Society by Dr. Abraham Pais of the Rockefeller Institute. The concept, based on a branch of mathematics known as symmetry group theory, supported views that all matter might be composed of basic building blocks, or “quarks,” that could be either real fragments or mathematical entities smaller than the electron. It grouped the 100+ known fragments of matter into groups and then predicted behavior. A modification makes the theory also compatible with Einstein’s relativity theory. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/28/65, 1, 10)
Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) expressed concern on the floor of the Senate about advances in Soviet strategic weaponry and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which compared Soviet and American development of large solid rocket motors: “First, the development of rockets has received a high priority continuously in the Soviet Union for 20 years, since the end of World War II. “Second, the Soviet effort has been broadly based and produced several generations of vehicles with increasing performance capability. “Third, solid-propellant rocketry is playing a major role in current Soviet operations and in their future plans. “Fourth, U.S. intelligence has suffered a major failure if the Soviet missiles in the May 9 parade were not fake. “An early review of U.S. intelligence and military planning operations by both the Congress and the administration definitely is in order if the Soviets are operating large solid rockets.” {CR, 7/8/65, 15359-61)	"
A Titan II icbm was fired from Vandenberg afb underground silo on a routine flight down the Western Test Range by a Strategic Air Command (sac) crew, (upi, Boston Globe, 6/30/65)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 141)
