D. Brainerd Holmes, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight (1961-1963) and now with Raytheon Co., reflected upon his NASA experience at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C. "nasa has done well” to date but today decisions must be shaping up for continuing space exploration beyond the lunar landing by an American by 1970. "Whither now NASA?” was the question, Holmes said, and in the democratic process of decision an informed public must play a vital part. He asserted that it was not only NASA’s job to inform but the duty of everyone aware of the significance and challenge of space exploration to the future of the U.S. (EH)
New York Times characterized 1966: "In all future histories of lunar exploration the year 1966 will hold an honored and important place. In effect, it was the year of the moon, the year in which a dazzling array of Soviet and American instrumented capsules photographed, measured and probed the moon to an extent never before known. As a result of the successful flights of the Soviet Luna vehicles and of the American Surveyor and Lunar Orbiters, it is probable that more detailed information about earth’s natural satellite was gained in 1966 than in all the rest of human history. . . .” (NYT, 12/31/66, 18C)
During White House meeting with President Johnson, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed current status of national space program and showed President two previously unreleased color photographs—one of southern Texas, the other of Baja California— taken from 180-mi. altitude during Sept. 12-15 Gemini xi mission. Following meeting, Webb announced that Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Neil A. Armstrong would leave Oct. 7 for three-week tour of 10 Latin American nations: Venezuela, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/66, A4)
Gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space, told AP that the most important word of advice he had given Astronaut David Scott, scheduled for extravehicular activity during the March 15 Gemini VIII mission, was: "Don’t get in a hurry. "Take things slow and try not to hurry and rush, because you can’t do things in a real rapid manner up tliere. It’s better to go on the slow, deliberate approach.” (AP, Chic.Trib., 3/11/66)
Communist China conducted "a nuclear explosion that contained thermonuclear material” over its western areas, Hsinhua, Chinese Communist press agency, reported. U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., surmised that explosion indicated China was on the verge of developing a thermonuclear or hydrogen bomb. (AP, NYT, 5/10/66, 4; Topping, NYT, 5/10/66, 1)
Hourly bus tours—for a fee—began at ksc. Announcing the new service, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said: "We want to provide the public with as meaningful a tour as can be permitted without interference with mission operational requirements. On Sundays, the public will continue to have the option of the free drive-through, in private vehicles, of the [nasa] center and the Cape Kennedy Air Force Station.” (NYT, 5/12/66, 21; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/13/66, El)
gemini xii pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told msc news conference that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue—if he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of msc, ksc, nasa Hq., and industry Gemini program participants flew to lbj Ranch for visit with President Johnson, who said: "The splendid performance of man and machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its best. "The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon.... But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will overcome the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to MSC for formal awards ceremony. Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were Gemini xii crewmen James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert (usaf), etr; Osro H. Covington, gsfc; and John D. Hodge, MSC. NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, omsf; and Charles W. Mathews, MSC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, msc; John J. Williams, ksc; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (usaf), etr. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Chamberlin, MSC. NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell; Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed; William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta; B/G Paul T. Cooper, afsc Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton, Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell, McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root, Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin Marietta. NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J. Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff, and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi. NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini Support Team at msc. (msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT, 11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
zvaa’s Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards afb was struck by afl-cio United Auto Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A9)	_ During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA msc’s Landing and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery. Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder receiver onboard a usaf HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf. Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft, (msc Roundup, 1/21/66,3) During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, nasa Director of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force and Space Digest: Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: "Hugh Dryden was a deeply religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would often remind his listeners that: 'I am not one of those few who believe that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world ... than military weakness.’ "In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult—radically new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leadership, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period 1947-58 became what might be truly called naca’s golden age. "With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of which naca was the nucleus), he undertook the role of scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his unexcelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years valued and used to their fullest.” Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: "In widening circles, the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative ^researcher. The United States Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly—in air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AF/SD, 1/66) During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accomplishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the naca, under Dr. Dryden’s leadership, "produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possible routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion competence for theoretical research within the naca contributed, in the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66, 1-5)
First full-scale Apollo/Saturn V booster-spacecraft combination rolled out at nasa Kennedy Space Center exactly five years after President Kennedy committed U.S. to manned lunar landing by 1969. Designated AS-500-F, the 365-ft., 500,000-lb. facilities vehicle was moved from Vehicle Assembly Building (Vab) on 3,000-ton, diesel-powered, steel-link-tread crawler transporter to Pad A for use to verify launch facilities, train launch crews, and develop test and checkout procedures, (msfc Release 66-114)
In speech at Univ. of Missouri on impact of Federal research and development expenditures on American colleges and universities, Leo S. Tonkin, Executive Director of D.C. Commissioners’ Council on Higher Education, cited statement by two NASA employees on problems involved in awarding research grants. Dr. Thomas P. Murphy, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legal Affairs, and Dr. Thomas W. Adams, Socio-Political Specialist for Office of Policy Planning, said in a paper presented at 1965 annual apsa meeting: "Can a mission-oriented agency use geography as a criterion in awarding grants, recognizing full well that it concomitantly will sacrifice time, quality, and money in the process? When grants are given to one institution on grounds other than merit, there is little basis for denying similar grants to other universities which would not normally merit them.” (Text; CR, 2/23/66)
William R. Berry reached 19,000-ft, altitude before landing his hotair balloon "City of San Francisco” near Antioch, Calif., after 65-min., 30-mi. flight from Livermore, Calif. If endorsed by National Aeronautic Assn., altitude would break 15,600-ft. world record for hot-air balloons set by Don Piccard in 1965. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66, A8)
msfc awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $23,438,532 modification to an existing contract for "additional work in building and testing the Saturn V launch vehicle’s second stage [S-II].” Work would include redesign of stage’s umbilical system and additional testing of stage’s hardware under simulated flight conditions, (msfc Release 66-181)
A phased-out Bomarc missile, serving as target for USAF and USN missiles, exploded shortly after it was fired from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 8/27/66, A3)	...
Striking members of International Union of Electrical Workers (afl-cio) picketed all gates of Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in wage dispute with United Technology Center, builder of solid-fuel boosters for usaf Titan III launch vehicle. UTC had about 175 workers at ksc, one-third of whom were iuew members. Some 300 of a total force of 366 construction workers honored the picket lines and failed to show up for work on the Saturn V mobile service structure and Vertical Assembly Building (Vab). Strike was first at ksc during 1966, but the ninth in 27 mos. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66, Al; AP, NYT, 4/19/66, i8)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller spoke of reliability and quality assurance in the manned space flight program at the Annual Symposium on Reliability in San Francisco: "We have . . . had to organize our mission reliability around the concept of a very exhaustive ground test program, with a detailed, recorded tracking of the history and experience of every part, from the original developer-fabricator’s plant, through the entire chain of subcontractor and contractor activities, to the final, completed article on the launch pad. By this thorough and repeated testing under every environmental condition that it is possible to simulate, and by understanding and correcting each test failure or performance discrepancy, we believe we can achieve the required high reliability whereby we will be justified in conducting major missions on the second, third or fourth vehicle, rather than on the thirtieth or the hundredth as in Gemini and Mercury.” (Text)
nasa awarded two nine-month study contracts to determine the impact of a proposed improved J-2 rocket engine on the S-II and S-IVB stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle: (1) $148,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., developer of S-II stage; and (2) $225,000 modification to an existing contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. msfc Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory was seeking to simplify the J-2 and give it, and the stages it powered, more flexibility, (msfc Release 66-1)
cab study revealed that in 153 U.S. air carrier accidents between 1955 and 1964 caused by or resulting in fire, 297 of 1,955 fatalities would not have occurred had fire been prevented. 1,628 persons died of impact forces, and 30 for other-reasons. All fire victims were involved in 13 of the accidents. Report recommended strengthening of structures to withstand impact, improvement of onboard and ground fire-fighting and rescue equipment, continued improvement of exit facilities, development of emergency communication systems, and more detailed passenger briefings. (cab, bosp, 7-6-3) During April: Men and women engaged in the national space program should reverse defensive and apologetic attitudes toward the commitment to space exploration, according to Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., addressing American Astronautical Society annual meeting in San Diego. "If we were the only nation in the world that had the capability to proceed into this new dimension, we should do it,” Harr said. "We should do it as part of a national renaissance on all fronts; for a great society . . . cannot confine its attention to certain challenges selected under past conditions, but must . . . move comprehensively to accept the challenge of the future. ".. . As the huge challenge of space generates and consumes and then regenerates our material and human resources, so does it widen the scope of the environment in which our citizens will exist and make their contribution in the years ahead.” (Aerospace, 4/66, 7-9)
In a press interview, Capt. Charles Oglesby (usaf) of the North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracking center in Moorestown, N.J., said scanners were checking on 1,100 items in orbit, including functioning payloads and debris. 95% of items in orbit were from the U.S. Of payloads, the U.S. had 167; U.S.S.R., 43; U.K. and Canada, two each; and France, three. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
ComSatCorp requested fcc permission to launch satellite which would relay network television programs from their point of broadcast to affiliated stations for transmission to home sets. Request also asked that similar proposal submitted to fcc by American Broadcasting Co. (abc) May 13, 1965, be dismissed. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/5/66, A5)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) commented on collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft: "This accident must serve as a reminder to the American public and to the world that all of the potential hazards of aircraft and space flight can never be entirely eliminated from our experimental program. The phenomenal success of our manned space flight programs Mercury and Gemini and the remaining flights of Gemini and the flights of Apollo . . . share the risk that Walker, White, and Cross faced each time they flew to test the XB-70.” (CR, 6/8/66)
Lockheed-California Co. revealed that F-104 Starfighter had taken off from a Zero Length Launch (Zell) platform in 1963 at Edwards afb, using a Rocketdyne booster rocket in combination with aircraft’s General Electric J-79 engine. After 80-min. flight, Lockheed’s pilot Ed Brown said of no-runway takeoff: "It was one of the easiest... I ever made.” The secret tests, conducted under contract to the German Air Force, had been made public following Luftwaffe announcement that new series of Super Starfighter Zell tests would be carried out at Lagerlechfeld Base, near Munich. (Lockheed Release, 3/21/66)
NASA announced sponsorship during 1967 of seven specialized summer programs of research and study for about 245 college and university faculty members in engineering and science. Developed by nasa and American Society for Engineering Education, programs would combine space research at NASA centers and parallel seminar-type studies at adjacent universities. Fellowships would be available for about 225 faculty members. Participating were: (1) Univ. of Alabama, Auburn Univ., and MSFC; (2) Case Institute of Technology and LRC; (3) Univ. of Houston, Texas a&m Univ., and MSC; (4) Univ. of Maryland, Catholic Univ., and gsfc; (5) Virginia Associated Research Center (Univ. of Virginia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, and College of William and Mary) and LaRC. Also, NASA would sponsor five-week summer faculty program in space physics at Yeshiva Univ. in cooperation with Goddard Institute of Space Studies, (nasa Release 66-305)
Rufus E. Miles, Jr., director of mid-career programs at Princeton Univ.’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and former hew Assistant Secretary for Administration, was sworn in as a NASA consultant on management operations, (nasa Release 66-277)
Military should increase its interest in the Nation’s technological base rather than rely so heavily on the civilian sector for basic and exploratory research, suggested William Coughlin in Technology Week. He noted the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program: ". . . . much of the technology on which this military effort is based was developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on programs deliberately tied to the peaceful uses of space. It is a fair question to ask where a military space program would be today vis-a-vis the Soviet Union if the technological base had not been developed under NASA funding. "Other areas of military importance have not been as fortunate because they lack a civilian counterpart. Steps must be taken to see that development of a technical base in these areas is not overlooked. It is not easy to justify expenditure of manpower and funds in this somewhat invisible arena. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 11/14/66, 54) During week of November 14: Increasing application of engineering techniques developed in space program to medical problems was reported by participants at 19th Annual Conference in Medicine and Biology in San Francisco. Among developments reported: application of computer techniques to detection of pathological conditions and to mass diagnosis of heart disease; automation of classical laboratory techniques in hospital, resulting in increased accuracy and speed; use of new engineering devices to obtain information for better diagnoses; application of new engineering to treatment, including refinements on artificial heart and control of photosensitive epilepsy with a real-time computer. (Tech. Wk, 11/21/66, 30)
ijsaf’s OV3-II research satellite was launched from Vandenberg afb by Scout rocket into orbit with 991-mi. (1,595-km.) apogee; 198-mi. (319-km.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 82° inclination. Launch was planned so satellite would be in orbit during Nov. 12 South American solar eclipse to provide data on charged particle variations in extreme upper atmosphere before, during, and after eclipse. Satellite, designed to remain active in space at least one year, would also extend knowledge of electron and ion density structure found in outer radiation belt by NASA’s discoverer xvii. (Vandenberg afb pio; dpi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 10/30/66)
Sun-powered laser developed by Dr. C. Gilbert Young of American Optical Co. under usaf sponsorship had been successfully operated in earth’s atmosphere, producing one watt of power in continuous, highly intense beam of invisible infrared light. A slender, one-inch-long rod of yttrium-aluminum-garnet crystal (Yag), laser was connected to telescope which trapped, focused, and delivered sun’s rays—which replaced conventional lamp and electrical apparatus needed by other lasers for "initial boost”—to crystal rod. Laser’s beam could carry messages between spacecraft and could be used as intense satellite beacon. (AIP News 6)
USAF launched Areas solid-fuel rocket from Vandenberg afb to collect information on atmospheric temperature, pressure, and movement above 98,400-ft. altitude. Data collected would be used to plan glide paths of vehicles reentering earth atmosphere. (AP, Phil. Inq., 11/10/ 66)
nasa surveyor i’s successful soft-landing on the moon received worldwide acclaim. Daily Telegraph, London: "There is magic of a kind in the latest achievement of American exploration in placing their electronic Surveyor almost directly on its target on the moon. . . . The technological power behind the enterprise of putting a man on the moon is mounting with visible acceleration. But the human element remains most vital.” Le Monde, Paris: "In succeeding with their first attempt at a soft landing on the moon only three months after the Soviets, the United States has shown that they are on the point of catching up with the Soviets in the race to the moon. There is only one experiment left in which the United States is behind the Soviet Union: the orbiting around the moon of a lunar probe similar to Luna-10. This lag is not very great, since the first trial of the Lunar Orbiters is set for next month.” R Tempo, Rome: "We think that the best judgment, even if purely a prioristic, of the Surveyor is that given by the Soviet Government, which, the day after the departure of the lunar probe, practically adhered to President Johnson’s initiative of March 7, tending to a recognition of the internationalization of the moon and other extraterritorial bodies.” Tass: "The success of the Surveyor is an important part of the American space program and Soviet scientists think very highly of it.” (NYT, 6/5/66, E13) Congratulatory cable from Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny to President Johnson: "On the occasion of the successful soft-landing of the Surveyor I spacecraft on the moon, accept . . . our congratulations for the American specialists who ensured the success of this flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/5/66, 80)
NASA would negotiate two incentive-fee contracts totaling $315 million with Boeing Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., for procurement of additional Saturn V 1st (S-IC) stages and F-l rocket engines: Boeing Co. would supply five S-IC stages, costing $165 million; North American Aviation, Inc., would handle production, support, and sustaining engineering of 33 F-l engines for $150 million, (nasa Release 66-69; WSJ, 3/25/66, 10)
Detailed report on "Scientific and Engineering Manpower in Communist China, 1949-1963,” by Dr. Chu-yuan Cheng, of the Univ. of Michigan, was made public by nsf. Communist China had been strengthening its scientific and engineering fields by putting thousands of students through colleges and universities. Yet, these masses of young scientists were getting less comprehensive training than older generations of scientists and also lacked sufficient experience to engage in top level research. In 1963, many of China’s leading scientists were 60 or 70 yrs. old and engaged in basic and creative research. The success or failure in bridging the gap between the mass of young scientists and the older scientists would determine whether Communist China would become a scientifically advanced power in the next decade or two, Dr. Cheng said. (Text) January 26: U.K. had made a successful underground test of a major component of its own nuclear warhead for American-supplied Polaris missiles, it was disclosed. Prime Minister Harold Wilson told the House of Commons the test would lead to a considerable savings in costs. An earlier test had been unsuccessful. (NYT, 1/26/66, 39) In a panel on the origin and possible death of the universe, P. J. E. Peebles and David Wilkinson of Princeton Univ. and Robert W. Wilson of Bell Telephone Labs, told about evidence indicating that space was permeated by black body radiation. If this were so, it would support the "big bang” theory of the origin of the universe which held that at first, all was a mass of dense energy; then came expansion powered by much of the energy. The original energy would have the properties of the energy emitted by a black body—light, heat, and radio waves proportionate to its temperature. Because no other explanation existed for the energy the Princeton and Bell scientists had detected uniformly distributed over space, and because black body characteristics were so clearcut, they believed confirmation could be achieved within a year. Yuval Ne’eman of Tel Aviv Univ. proposed a new theory to explain the quasar (quasi-stellar radio source): the force represented by the tendency of the universe to expand had been suppressed in some parts of the universe; thus, these areas were highly dense. But because this tendency is not suppressed under all conditions, it sometimes bursts forth and matter tears free of the intense gravitational attractions. When this happens, enormous amounts of matter and energy are emitted and observers on earth detect the event as a quasar. Scientists in a panel discussion on scientific data said the task of coping with the scientific information explosion should not become exclusively a Government responsibility. Discussion was based on December 1965 report of Federal Council for Science and Technology recommending that the Government—with participation of private groups—establish a national document handling system to help keep scientists abreast of new knowledge. In a discussion of planetary exploration, Cal Tech Prof. Robert B. Leighton, scientist in charge of the televising by mariner iv of Mars (July 14, 1965), said there was still hope the TV pictures would yield information about Mars’ canals: "When we know more nearly where the camera was pointed—because it is not known very clearly now ... we . may be able to say that this picture was taken at a place very near where a canal goes across.” Leighton said he had agreed to collaborate with Prof. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of ucla on a television experiment for the Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Venus in 1967. (Texts; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/27/66, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/28/66, A4; Weil, Wash. Post, 1/27/66, A2, 1/29/66, A6, 1/30/66, A7)
According to count by North American Air Defense Command’s (norad) Space Defense Center, NASA’s launch of essa i (Tiros OT-3) meteorological satellite brought total of objects currently in orbit to 1,000. Of 209 earth-orbiting payloads, U.S. had 162; U.S.S.R., 41; France, two; U.K., two; and Canada, two. norad counted nine U.S. deep-space probes and debris of eight others; U.S.S.R. had ten, with debris of two more. Remaining objects were "space debris” or "junk.” Space Defense Center had catalogued 1,982 objects, but nearly half had decayed or had been intentionally deorbited. (norad Release 66-2-2)
Joint Chiefs of Staff believed U.S.S.R. was accomplishing much more in advanced weaponry than Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was giving them credit for, reported Aviation Week. Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, was said to be especially concerned about Soviet developments in antimissile missiles and their radars, maneuverable warheads for icbms, military space systems, and advanced aircraft. During hearings on the FY 1966 budget, General McConnell had said the decision on whether to proceed with full-scale development of the advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) should be made in FY 1967. Aviation Week pointed out McNamara did not make that decision in the the FY 1967 budget and dropped Amsa one category—from engineering development to advanced development. Also, in a posture statement before the Senate Armed Services Committee’s Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, McNamara appeared to contradict Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown’s view that the FB-111 was only a stop-gap bomber until Amsa was approved. Comparison of Boeing B-52C through F models, McNamara reportedly said, showed "the FB-111 is not an interim aircraft but is, indeed, a truly effective strategic bomber.” (Wilson, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 16)
usaf launched unidentified satellite by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (M&R, 2/7/66, 11; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb using Titan III-B-Agena D launch vehicle, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 9/29/66, 24; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Prime goal of space exploration was the development of scientific capabilities, but it was important to recognize the many other benefits accrued from the space program, NASA Administrator James E. Webb told ymca meeting in Oklahoma City: "We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, the sinews and nerves our Nation needs for healthy growth. Scientific discovery is no longer the sole province of the lone inventor. It requires an all-systems endeavor that calls on all the resources of a nation. . . . "NASA reaches across all industry. About 90 per cent of NASA’s budget goes out under contract to American industry—to pay for work by almost 400,000 men and women in the factories and laboratories of 20,000	prime and subcontractors. . . .” (Text)
usaf XB-70 No. 2 flew 20 min. at mach 3—longest to date—and reached 70,000-ft. maximum altitude in 1-hr. 49-min. flight from Edwards afb. Pilots were North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test pilot Alvin S. White and Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf). (Flight log; afftc pio)
Dr. Carl Schreiber, Procurement Specialist with NASA Hq. Office of Industry Affairs since Aug. 2, 1964, died in Washington, D.C. Dr. Schreiber, naca employee since 1939, had been Assistant Procurement and Supply Officer from 1958-64. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
Col. Donald Boyer Phillips (usa, Ret.), military aviation pioneer, died of pneumonia at age 74 in Alexandria, Va. Colonel Phillips, native of Washington, D.C., had designed, built, and flown his first glider in 1905. When he retired in 1947, he had flown in nearly 90 types of planes. (Wash. Post, 4/4/66, B2) During March: Study of Vertically Incident Cosmic-Ray Trajectories Using Sixth Degree Simulations of the Geomagnetic Field—consisting largely of computer-generated tables of cosmic-ray trajectories at more than 130 locations around the world—was issued by afcrl. Since cosmic ray trajectories are directly influenced by the configuration of the magnetic field, which varies diurnally, seasonally, and with solar-cycle variations, it was possible to derive information on the changing magnetic field by observing cosmic-ray events. Also, because calculations of cosmic-ray rigidities are equally valid for solar protons, calculation techniques developed under this study could be used to evaluate the trajectories of these solar particles as well, (oar Res. Rev., 3/66)
Aeronautical exhibition tracing aviation’s history from supercharger to turbojet opened in new Hall of Aeronautical Propulsion at Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (Wash. Post, 7/9/66, B2)
In scheduling manned space flights, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., crew safety was the principal consideration, followed by accomplishment of program goals. He pointed out the "open-ended” aspect of Apollo mission scheduling and expressed confidence that lunar landing would be achieved before the end of the decade based on present program posture. During question and answer session, Dr. Mueller said that while NASA and its contractors had studied possible methods of rescuing astronauts in space and would continue to do so, the cost, complexities, and uncertainties made it appear to date that the money and effort would be better spent in making flights safer in the first place. He added: "We don’t exactly have instant rescue for people flying around in airliners and this is a large segment of the population.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 8/17/66, 16)
Dr. George P. Woollard, president of the American Geophysical Union and director of the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics, said in agu Transactions that there was a "crisis in science” requiring bold Government action. Stating that less and less of nsf’s budget was going into basic research, Dr. Woollard called on Congress to assess the overall scientific needs of the country, including "ambitious” programs in various fields proposed by NSF and NAS panels. "Research proposals that were good enough five years ago to obtain NSF support now would not stand a chance,” he said. "They would be turned down not because the projects lacked significance but because funds are short and only the most established and influential researchers win out.” (agu Transactions, 1/66)
Aerospace industry believed 4,000-mph hypersonic transport (Hst) could be ready for commercial service in 1990’s—but only if Government would support its development, Richard Cooke reported in the Wall Street Journal. "Aerospace . . . officials agree that the rate at which new developments in air transportation come along will hinge in large measure on Government policy. They note that the military has sponsored the development of every large American jet engine. . . . A military version of the craft will almost certainly have to precede the commercial one—but right now there’s no driving military sponsor at high level behind these advanced materials and engines.” Development of Hst would require new heat-resistant materials, a more efficient fuel, and higher-capacity engine. (Cooke, WSJ, 12/29/66)
faa announced that Washington (D.C.) National Airport would be open to short-haul jet traffic April 24. (faa Release 66-5) James W. Miller, Office of Naval Research, reported that results of the Sealab II experiment had indicated that at ocean depths 600 ft. and below man could perform useful tasks such as salvaging ships and aircraft if he were equipped with electrically heated diving suits, diver-to-diver communications, and underwater swimming aids. Outside of Sealab II, the aquanauts had been cold, frustrated, unable to talk to one another, limited in their visibility, and constantly in danger. Inside the capsule, they had experienced difficulty in sleeping and had had speech problems because of the helium atmosphere. There were no serious medical problems, and "an unprecedented amount of useful work was accomplished.” (Text)
Commentary on numerous reports of Ufo sightings: Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Ufo’s were "purely American phenomena.” What people really see "is most likely weather balloons, meteorites, fireballs, re-entry of nose cones or other space debris. No trained observer or astronomer has ever reported such a sighting.” Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: "Sir Bernard Lovell, the eminent British astronomer who runs the Jodrell Bank space observatory, believes that seeing ufos ... is strictly an American phenomenon. "Maybe he is right, but IF Americans are seeing ufos, and IF there are visitations from outer space, it may be that the terrestrial visitors believe that only America is worth investigating.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/26/66) Rev. Francis J. Heydon, professor of astronomy at Georgetown Univ., said that people "are seeing things,” but that reports of flying saucers would "doubtless increase. The phenomenon of flying saucers is 100 percent imagination.” Roscoe Drummond, Washington Post: "History is littered with examples of the most eminent scientists who were dead certain that things couldn’t be done . . . and wrote with great displays of scientific evidence to prove that they couldn’t be wrong. We need more objective investigation than we have been getting. The scientific unbelievers may be right—but they could be totally wrong. They have been before.” Howard Simons, Washington Post: ". . . scientists point out that even traveling at the speed of light, which is 186,000 miles per second, whoever it is that is buzzing America in a flying saucer or saucers would have to have left the nearest galaxy 50,000 years ago.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/66, A2; Wash. Eve. Star, 4/18/66; Drummond, Wash. Post, 4/6/66, A25; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/24/66, A25)
Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. vice president and designer of numerous aircraft, was named recipient of the Air Force Academy’s 1966 Thomas D. White National Defense Award for "outstanding contribution to the national defense and security of the United States.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/66, A18)
Maj. Donald E. Keyhoe (usmc, Ret.), director of the National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena, demanded at a press conference in Washington, D.C., that Congressional inquiry be made into Ufo’s and usaf’s handling of investigations of reported sightings, nicap had long charged usaf with suppression of evidence and censorship. (Carmach, Wash. Daily News, 3/29/66; Young, N.Y.J/Amer., 3/29/66,1)
William Hines charged in Washington Evening Star that publicity given to proposed U.S. supersonic transport (Sst) was . . part of a propaganda barrage aimed at the American taxpayer, who in the years ahead will be called upon to underwrite deficits clearly predictable in building and operating a costly fleet of airplanes capable of spanning the Atlantic in two hours. "The sst program has been publicized since the program’s inception in 1963 with the same combination of gobbledygook and public-relations hokum used so successfully in merchandising the moon program. Technological challenge, the asserted psychological-spiritual imperative, and the added spur of an international 'race’—all are cited as reasons compelling development of a 2,000-mile-an-hour super-airliner. "Actually the sst, when built and placed in operation, will be no more a free-enterprise product than the Saturn-5 moon rocket is. It will be built to government specifications, by contractors selected by the government, with development costs largely if not entirely underwritten by the government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66)
Gen. William Hugh Blanchard, usaf Vice Chief of Staff, died at 50 after suffering heart attack at Pentagon meeting. General Blanchard was credited with landing first B-29 in China in March 1944. {NYT, 6/1/66, 43)	... During May: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown said in an article written for NATO's Fifteen Nations that one of his principal tasks had been to find the most effective way of integrating technical and nontechnical advice. Of contributions scientists had made to the process of defense policy-making, he said: "First, the scientist, operating at the frontiers of knowledge, may have anticipated many political and military problems posed by scientific advance. Second, military necessity made the scientist a leader in applying sophisticated rational and mathematical analysis to the solution of some problems—especially resource allocation —which have been generated by scientific advance. "At the same time it must be acknowledged that advice from scientists had been far from infallible, especially where the advice touches upon aspects of a larger problem on which the specialist is less expert, and in some cases, may not even be fully informed.” (NATO's Fifteen Nations, 4-5/66, 18)
NASA awarded five contracts to Saturn contractors to continue studies to improve Saturn concepts of an intermediate vehicle with a payload capability between that of Saturn IB and the Saturn V. On Saturn V, Boeing Co. received $370,500; North American Aviation, Inc., $329,624; and Douglas Aircraft Co., $96,730. Eight variations of the Saturn V vehicle would be examined. Boeing would be study systems integration contractor for all prospective configurations involving the S-IC stage, naa for all others. On Saturn IB, Chrysler Corp. received $450,000; Douglas, $116,345. Six Saturn IB configurations would be studied. All five contracts would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 66-3)
faa cautioned airline executives during briefing in Washington, D.C., not to let desire for a "fly-off competition” keep them from making as clear-cut a first choice as possible for the supersonic transport. If they did not, they might get aircraft they did not want or Congressional critics might use indecisiveness to stall or kill program. Possibility that prototypes of both the Boeing and Lockheed airframe designs would be built was virtually ruled out. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 25) During October: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown summarized USAf’s position on its future in space in an interview with Armed Forces Management: "It is not a matter of desiring to conduct military campaigns in space but rather to preclude any aggressor from using space as an area of operations for launching attacks against the U.S. . . . "We should not be doing things just to be doing them. Rather, they must have direct relation to establishing military needs. "Space is not a mission but a place to perform a mission. When a mission can be performed from space, the Air Force will perform it from there. . . .” (Armed Forces Management, 10/66, 69)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
nasa modified existing cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts with North American Aviation, Inc., and ibm Corp. for Apollo program services with new agreements totaling $252.6 million: under $145.6 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract extended through December 1968, naa would provide 52 additional J-2 engines for launch vehicles as well as support services; ibm would receive $107 million under multiple-incentive contract, extended through February 1970, for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of msc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc). (nasa Release 66-205; msfc Release 66-176)
Pan American World Airways’ fan-jet Falcon claimed new speed record for business aircraft when it flew from St. John’s, Newfoundland, to Lisbon, Portugal, covering 2,388 mi. in 4 hrs. 38 min. 28 sec. North American Aviation’s Sabreliner had set previous record of 4 hrs. 45 min. 59.4 sec. on Oct. 26, 1963. Both flights had been piloted by George Eremea of Petit Jean Air Service. (NYT, 9/29/66, 86)
A surface-based deep-sea search and retrieval system was described by its inventor, Willard N. Bascom, president of Ocean Science and Engineering, Inc., in an interview with William Hines of Washington Evening Star. Bascom, holder of a patent on "search”, said his system could be ready in a year and that "total cost of a 'search’ vessel ready for operation anywhere in the world would not exceed %y million.” He cited "presently unrecoverable losses of spacecraft and experimental weapons as an urgent justification for developing a deep-sea retrieval system,” and said that he had offered "search” to the Navy. "Similar proposals have been submitted to the Air Force and NASA,” Bascom said. His system, an outgrowth of the Mohole deep-sea drilling project, would use scanning devices and grappling tools suspended from a converted cargo ship. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, A7)
Editorial comment on retirement of afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever: "Few men had a larger hand ... in developing the scientific 'mix’ of manned aircraft and missiles that is today’s U.S. Air Force. "From the day he was put in charge of our ballistic missile program in 1954 until today he has been the key man in Air Force research and development. "Only last August he was given what is probably the single most important scientific assignment in Air Force history-—developing the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). . . .” (Wash. Daily News, 4/26/66)
faa lost its first customer for supersonic transport (Sst), paid Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) $200,000 refund requested by company on Feb. 25. Panagra was one of eight U.S. and 14 foreign customers which had deposited money to reserve delivery positions for Sst. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
Biologist Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, Dean of Princeton Univ. Graduate School, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics that biological exploration of the planets would be "a milestone in modern science,” but such an undertaking, he cautioned, would first require scientific readiness and organization. Without adequate preparation, outright commitment now would risk the political consequences that would attend failure of a major, costly project. "Could commitment now to the opportunities in mid-1970s fail to freeze an inadequately formulated strategy? Could it avoid outright assignment of responsibility and the authority for decision on design and tactical detail to one of several single laboratories, no one of which can marshal the necessary scientific talent to ensure a competent project? . . . The task immediately confronting those of us anxious to see Voyager go in the 1970s is thus more organizational than scientific. . .	(A&A, 11/66, 76-89) During November: Department of Transportation would be the means and choice to begin a new era in transportation planning, Alan S. Boyd, Under Secretary of Commerce for Transportation, wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . transportation policy-making today necessitates a resolving of three different elements: The methodology for planning and programming; the organization to parallel such methods; and the leadership to carry them out. These three ingredients have never been combined in an effective manner. ... If the nation takes this opportunity, benefits to the public and to the users of transportation will be tremendous. . . .” (A&A, 11/66, 112-116)
An explanation of white dwarf stars—based on study of spectra of four stars in constellation Orion gathered during October 1965 NASA Aerobee sounding rocket flight—appeared in report released by Dr. Donald C. Morton, head of Princeton Univ. rocket program. Results indicated that the four stars are hurling matter toward the earth at about 4 million mph. This loss of mass, extended over a long period of time, would eventually remove up to 95 per cent of the stars’ mass, according to Dr. Morton. They would then be white dwarfs. (NYT, 1/11/66, 6)
American Astronautical Society (aas) held symposium on the moon in Washington, D.C., as part of American Association for the Advancement of Science’s (aaas) annual meeting. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said NASA’s lunar orbiter I photos had revealed "mass wasting” on the moon—a process similar to "downhill creep” which produced slopes of fragmented dirt and rock debris on earth. Accelerated by small local earthquakes caused by impacting meteorites, wasting process was rapidly covering all of moon’s small craters, Shoemaker said. He believed majority of lunar craters were caused by high-velocity explosive impacts of meteorites. Dr. Donald H. Menzel, Harvard Univ., told the press that man would make profound changes on the moon in 15-20 yrs.—particularly if lunar rock were found to contain water of crystallization. "There is a real possibility for man ... to establish self-support expeditions on the moon. Using solar or atomic energy for melting rocks, man could get water and then use the debris for building blocks. Lunar gardens . could be established and animals could be raised there.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/29/66, Al, A6; Clark, NYT, 12/30/66, 8)
nasa’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe launched from etr Dec. 16, 1965, completed six-month nominal mission at a range of 54.6 million mi. with all spacecraft systems performing well. Perihelion had been passed May 20, 1966, and aphelion passage would occur Oct. 24. Preliminary results of experiments had been reported Apr. 19 at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Two solid-fueled Minuteman icbms were launched simultaneously from Vandenberg AFB, to evaluate multiple-firing techniques which could be used "under combat conditions at operational bases.” This was first salvo launch down wtr. (sac Release 6-17)
ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., disclosed plans for a $7- to $9-million laboratory to be built by ComSatCorp near Washington, D.C. Facility would employ about 200 people and would be completed by mid-1968. (Clark, NYT, 6/22/66, 12)
Sen. Karl Mundt (R-S.D.) informed Senate that Subcommittee on Government Research expected to make specific recommendations to improve Federally-financed research and development program, for which almost $16 billion was being expended during FY 1966. Sen. Mundt, ranking minority member of the subcommittee, said primary task of group was to determine and enunciate a more definitive, longer-ranging science policy. He said U.S. had reached the crossroads, where "it has become painfully obvious that we cannot continue to support all who demand support, but must be selective in the allocation of research funds.” This indicated that one of the most pressing questions was how to direct NASA efforts, with Apollo program reaching its goal and no follow-on approved: "nasa now is on the threshold of placing a man on the Moon within this decade. After this what? This question concerns the leaders of this fine NASA organization as well as its highly trained, scientific and technical staff. Where do we turn? Shall the space program continue on its present course, or shall it be broadened to better serve the everyday needs of the American people? This is a priority crossroads. . . .” (CR, 5/16/66, 10212)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman and their wives met with Chinese Nationalist President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei, and gave him a letter from President Johnson and a color photograph taken in space. Chiang gave each astronaut wings of the Chinese National Air Force. Astronauts then flew to Bangkok, Thailand, to begin a three-day visit during which they would give a series of lectures and be received by the King and Queen of Thailand. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, A2; NYT, 3/1/66, 19)	...
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received National Aviation Club’s (nac) 1966 Award of Achievement for his "significant contributions to the creation of the Air Force strategic missile force.” The award would be presented Aug. 16 in Washington, D.C. (Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 13)
oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by nasa from etr with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.) apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35° inclination. Satellite's solar panels and instrumented booms would be deployed April 10. First of four spacecraft scheduled for nasa’s Oao program, oao i— largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft ever developed by U.S.—weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere, including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft attitude control system, oao i would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao program was managed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)
usaf successfully carried out second launch from Vandenberg AFB in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program to investigate and measure infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products. Nike-Javelin combination carrying payload of plume measurement was launched seconds after launch of its target, a Titan II icbm, and data were telemetered back to Vandenberg station. Preliminary reports indicated that missile was on target for preselected Pacific target area. (upi, NYT, 3/26/66, 27; dpi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)	/
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: "Two years ago I asked Administrator Webb for nasa’s future space plans and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been issued. Instead, nasa Administrator Webb has told us 'the future of the nasa program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . . "Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear. Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically, the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had. From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage. "Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
Pan American World Airways, Inc. (Pan Am), would purchase 25 new Boeing 747 jet transports—including twenty-three 490-seat passenger models and two all-cargo models which would carry 214,000 lbs. freight—for over $525 million, announced Pan Am’s chairman and chief executive, Juan T. Trippe. Deliveries of order, reported to be largest and most expensive in airline history, would be made between September 1969 and May 1970. The 680,000-lb. aircraft would be powered by new Pratt & Whitney JT9D-1 fan-jet engine capable of delivering 41,000-lbs. thrust and would have 45,O0O-ft. cruise altitude— nearly one mile higher than current transports—and mach .90 cruise speed—compared with mach .82 for current models—and would provide "safety margins superior to any previous commercial airliner” with multi-gear landing system which would require only 9,150 ft. of takeoff runway. Trippe forecast lower passenger fares and reduced cargo tariffs because of 747’s large capacity and efficiency of operation. (Pan Am Release; Bedingfield, NYT, 4/14/66, 1; Edwards, Wash. Post, 4/14/66, Kl)
afsc had completed 110 successful tests of Bak-11 (Barrier Arresting Component)—device to stop aircraft on runway during emergency—at Air Force Flight Test Center (afftc), Edwards afb. Device, developed by Research, Inc., consisted of an arresting cable which engaged main gear struts when actuated by aircraft’s wheels rolling over switches mounted on the runway, (afsc Release 46. 66)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II and Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/66)
It was one minute after Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra, Jr., decided not to eject in the Dec. 12, 1965, Gemini VI launch failure at etr, that his pulse rate increased, reported Gemini medical director Dr. Charles A. Berry in the American Medical Assn. News. Delayed reaction was viewed as supporting theory that fear follows action in an emergency— particularly in the case of a highly trained subject, (msc Morning Neivs Flyer, 1/7/66)
Editorial comment on President Johnson’s proposal: ". . . In addition to rules governing space exploration a body of law is needed to govern the exploitation of useful resources that may conceivably be found on other solar bodies. Omission of this topic from the first international treaty on space law could produce future difficulties. But the President may well have felt that any present attempt to reach agreement on this delicate matter might prolong negotiations beyond the time of the first manned lunar landing. . . . There is no time to lose in getting international agreement to and ratification of this essential document.” (NYT, 5/9/66, 36) ". . . Someday such a treaty may save us from a new sort of far-out interplanetary imperialism. As revived by Mr. Johnson, however, the proposal has to do with a problem that will develop sooner and closer to home. After all between now and 1969 or 1970, Americans are going to be lofted to the moon’s surface, and so are Russians. This is a prospect full of very great historic importance. It lends special force to the President’s call for a renewed effort ... to negotiate an understanding under which the always unpredictable Russians will sign a treaty worthy of the name. . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/10/66, A6) "The first manned landing on the moon seems likely before 1970. The implications are immense, regardless of whether the first one is American or Russian. President Johnson’s proposal for an international compact to govern this and outer space explorations makes much sense. ". . .Perhaps a willingness by Moscow to entertain a treaty on space may also open the door to discussions about pooling some of the costs, as the late President Kennedy proposed.” (Boston Globe, 5/11/66) ". . . Probably the most succinct argument against a comprehensive treaty of this nature is, 'Who needs it?’ Monopolization of the lunar surface by military units and establishment of terror weapons on the moon or in orbit appear to be neither immediate dangers nor remote possibilities. The bugaboo of an orbiting multimegaton H-bomb seems, on close examination, to be more trouble than it would be worth. . . . "There is no slightest indication that the Russians propose to lay claim to the moon if their cosmonauts get there first, any more than we do if we win the race. The precedent followed by both countries in Antarctica—nearest thing to the moon on earth—is neither to assert nor to recognize territorial claims. This was U.S. and Soviet policy before the Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/12/66, A20)
President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec. 4-18 GEMINI vii/vi mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values of U.S. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had cooperated with U.S. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21, and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand. The President had sent Gemini iv Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221; NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Burner II booster. (Tech. Wk., 9/26/66, 15; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
NASA-sponsored space science course—including lectures, demonstrations, and experiments—began at (Washington) D.C. Teachers College to help local elementary school teachers understand space-age fundamentals and interpret them to their pupils. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/66, D9)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.’s first high-reliability Agena was launched from Vandenberg afb as upper stage on Atlas booster, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. High-reliability Agena had been under development for usaf Space Systems Div. for over three years in conjunction with Midas infrared early warning system under Program 461. (Av. Wk., 6/20/66, 31)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of the Space Sciences Subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, said at a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn, in Washington, D.C., that the war in Vietnam and the needs of "the Great Society in general” would keep the space budget from expanding soon. He said the budget of "more than $6 billion” that NASA planned to ask Congress for in January 1967 "is financially not in the cards for the near future.” (Text)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, at Armed Forces Management Assn., in Washington, D.C., predicted a management revolution commensurate with the explosive advance of technology and the pressing nature of military requirements. "I think that the biggest challenge to management in the years ahead will be to find ways to encourage and use the full creative potential of individuals. . . . We must create the atmosphere where the unique human capacity for innovation and judgment can be fully developed and employed. . . .” (Text)
nsf Reviews of Data on Science Resources indicated, in a preliminary report on research and development in American industry for 1964, that the aircraft and missile industry was responsible for 44% of total net increase in R&D performance funds from $6.6 billion in 1956 to $13.4 billion in 1964. Report attributed 17% of increase to the electrical equipment and communication industry, noting that performance of R&D in those two fields was "strongly influenced by the requirements of the Federal Government in the areas of defense and space exploration.” Only those two industries received more Federal than company financing for R&D; in 1964, 90% of aircraft and missile industry’s R&D funds came from Federal Government, and 62% of those of the electrical equipment and communication industry. Aircraft and missile industry employed 30% of total number of R&D scientists and engineers; January 1965 figure of 101,200 for these personnel showed decline of 7,700 from January 1964. Electrical equipment and communication industry accounted for 22% of total—74,800 scientists and engineers as of January 1965, 600 less than previous January, (nsf, Reviews of Data on Science Resources, 1/66)
The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-fueled rocket from Auburn, Mass., 40 yrs. ago. Annually on the anniversary of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address, emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: "I feel the necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he could foresee "dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration, notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of "a whole family of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3) development of "recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneuverable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5) improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be made in a week or less; (6) "launching of unmanned probes to every part of the solar system—and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as well.” (Text; CR, 5/4/66) National Space Club Press Award "in recognition of his exceptional photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went to nasa photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews "for his contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as a key engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space flight, culminating in Project Mercury... and in the successful Gemini program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for "making a major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented jointly to msc, usaf Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for "Danish Rocketry in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to university of recipient’s choice) "in recognition of the need for higher scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C. (Text; Program)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling $1.5 billion to Avco Corp., Martin Co., North American Aviation, Inc., Northrop Corp., Fairchild Hiller Corp.. and LTV, Inc., for work on Sst prototype. (Boeing Release S-8928)	'
Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) asked faa to refund $200,000 which company had deposited to reserve delivery on Sst being developed under faa contract. This was first Sst cancellation request. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
Decisions on the direction of post-Apollo activities in space would require a "two-pronged effort by the part of our economy interested in the evolution of space products,” suggested Boeing Co. vice president George H. Stoner before aiaa Forum on "After Apollo, What Next?” in Washington, D.C.: ". . . industry must assist NASA and the federal government in formulating succeeding national space goals for the research that will produce fruitful progress toward understanding our universe and toward building a store of knowledge about specialized space techniques. . . . Industry and government agencies other than NASA must explore and continue to find ways to compete successfully in the world market place and in the international technological race on the large scale development projects that characterize our modern society. . . .” Stoner offered several specific suggestions for post-Apollo activities: (1) communications satellites that would take advantage of the natural access to anywhere on earth provided by spacecraft; (2) applications of space-based activities to ballistic missile defense; (3) expansion and refinement of equipment for survey of earth affairs from space; (4) dramatic reduction of launch costs; and (5) continuing exploration of space and its technologies by NASA astronauts and scientists to learn more about our universe. (Text)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey said in address at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colo.: "It was seventy years ago this May that Samuel Pierpont Langley, Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, launched his sixteen-foot, steam-powered model airplane off the Potomac River and flew a half a mile in the incredible time of 90 seconds. . . . "Seventy years—in the larger scheme of history—is not a very long time. "But though those seventy years are but the average length of a full American life, they reach back into an incredibly distant world—a world that has receded from us by a quantum of change that no other period in the vast sweep of human history can surpass. "One measure of that change is flight itself. "I flew here this morning from Washington—nonstop—in 3 hours and 20 minutes. "Had I made the flight from Washington to Colorado Springs in Langley’s plane, it would have required 127 days—and we would have had to make 2,987 fuel stops along the way. . . (Text)
nas Committee on Public Engineering Policy (copep) held first meeting in New York City; chairman was Dr. Chauncey Starr, president of Atomics International Division of North American Aviation, Inc., and as of January 1, 1967, UCLA Dean of Engineering. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 10/66, 1, 3)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown, testifying before Senate Armed Services Committee and Subcommittee on dod of Senate Appropriations Committee, said usaf was "working on” increasing procurements directly with prime contractors, but with Government-furnished equipment. He added: "There comes a point, however, where the trouble that the Government buys itself by furnishing equipment is more than the money it saves . . .” (Testimony; Senate, Military Procurement Auth. for FY 1967, 907)
USAF Agena D rocket launched from Vandenberg afb with Atlas booster Feb. 15 exploded into at least 40 pieces which fell from orbit during seven-day period, UPI reported. There was no indication that the payload itself was damaged: "It is no longer in orbit, but it may have been a reconnaissance satellite which was brought down and recovered,” UPI explained. Explosive gas in the otherwise empty Agena apparently was detonated accidentally after booster had fired, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/11/66)
usaf successfully launched OV1-IX and OV1-X research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb with Atlas D booster. Each 220-lb. spacecraft carried 12 radiation-measuring experiments. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, Al; Tech. Wk., 12/19/66, 13)
NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin addressed the American Academy of Political and Social Science in Philadelphia on international significance of space program: ". . . the United States has welcomed direct foreign participation in space research and exploration. The U.S. has contributed its boosters to launch six satellites which were conceived, engineered, instrumented and funded by cooperating foreign countries. Eight more such satellites are to be launched by us under existing agreements and, at this date, other agreements are in early prospect. We have opened our own satellites to foreign experimenters. Some twenty experiments proposed by scientists abroad have been selected on their merits for flight on our satellites. These foreign experiments are contributed to the program; we contribute space in the satellite and its support systems and retrieve the data for the experimenter. Even wider cooperation—with twenty different countries —is achieved through programs which utilize small, nonorbiting rockets to obtain data for which satellites do not commend themselves. In all of these projects, we have shared the tasks and costs in literal cooperation without exporting a dollar.” (Text)
New studies of Martian atmosphere had rekindled hope of finding life on Mars, Dr. Lewis D. Kaplan of Jpl reported at Western meeting of American Chemical Society in San Francisco. French scientists Drs. Pierre and Janine Connes of the Observatory of Haut-Provence, using improved spectroscopic equipment designed by Dr. Connes, had found concentration of hydrogen compounds around Mars 1,000 times greater than in earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Kaplan, who analyzed observations obtained, said the hydrogen compounds—considered necessary to life— probably included methane derivatives and perhaps methane itself. Methane appears on earth as gaseous hydrocarbon product of decomposed organic matter and is known to he produced by anaerobic bacteria not requiring the oxygen essential to most life on earth. Dr. Kaplan’s work was sponsored by NASA and by France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) and the Meudon Observatory. (AP, NYT, 10/18/66, 9)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb expressed appreciation to usaf, on its 19th anniversary, in a letter to Air Force Assn. President Jess Larson: "The technology developed by the Air Force for its needs in the period before 1958 has served as the foundation for the manned and unmanned missions which NASA is carrying out. . . . "An. . .important aspect of the growing aerospace strength of the United States is the close cooperation between the Air Force and NASA in planning for future projects. . . .” (Text; AF/SD, 11/66, 85)
Advanced Minuteman icbm was launched from a modernized Minuteman I silo at Vandenberg afb as part of a series of tests to verify modernization procedures for upgrading of Minuteman I silos and control centers. (upi, NYT, 1/23/66, 57)
Measurement of angular size of x-ray source Sco X-l [see March 8, May 23, June 17-18] was reported by Herbert Gursky, Riccardo Giacconi, Paul Gorenstein, and John R. Waters of American Science and Engineering, Inc. (ase) and mit’s Minoru Oda, Hale Bradt, Gordon Garmire, and B.	V. Sreekantan in Astrophysical Journal. Accompanying article by ase’s Oscar P. Manley suggested source was a protostar; Giacconi group said source, if observable, would appear in visible light as starlike object. (Astrophys. /., 6/66, 1249, 1253)
Mystery of how the universe began could be solved within 15 to 20 yrs. if U.S. would use the $100 million spent on one manned Gemini mission for five new 200-in. telescopes, MIT professor Dr. Philip Morrison suggested at New York meeting on cosmology. Morrison said three or four telescopes equal to the one at Mt. Palomar could be built for the f>60-to $80-million cost of one Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) and would provide more information on the origin and nature of the universe than the satellite. Meeting was sponsored by American Institute of Physics and National Assn, of Science Writers, Inc., with NSF support. (NYT, 2/5/66)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
U.S. had current "edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but this status had been "recently acquired and is not sufficient to form even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: "(1) Number of spacecraft. The United States has placed almost 400 spacecraft into earth orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than 200 on such missions. . . . However . . . Soviets have placed each year a greater total weight of payloads. ... (2) Lunar and Interplanetary. The United States has been far less active but considerably more successful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and had a productive fly-by of Venus while the USSR’s active interplanetary program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. ... (3) Manned Flight . . . U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man flight hours in orbit compared with about 500 . . . with the longest individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also, the U.S. has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experience. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and communications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientific Data . . . the larger number and greater variety of U.S. scientific payloads, as well as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under development larger and more advanced propulsion systems.. . (Text)
Question of "garbage problem” in space was raised during recent House Appropriations Committee hearings on Spacetrack, which maintained surveillance on over 1,800 orbiting objects, Drew Pearson reported in Washington Post. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Alexander H. Flax replied there was no danger of collision "because of the tremendous amount of volume that these 1,800 objects are disposed in. It is like the problem of stepping on a flea in Grand Central Station. It could happen, but it is highly unlikely.” (Pearson, Wash. Post, 6/27/66)
"The American Space Outlook” for 1967 was summarized by Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., in the Baltimore Sun. ". . . 1967 should he a year of genuine accomplishments in space for men and machines. ". . . astronauts will begin to fly around the earth in the kind of spacecraft that will carry them to the moon in 1968 or 1969. . . . "New unmanned spacecraft will climb into orbit for additional views of the earth’s weather. Other craft will fly away to study the science of the sun; make further on-the-spot examinations of the moon’s surface, probe the nature of the stars and take another close look at Venus. . . the Defense Department will lay the groundwork for the 1969 launching of a manned orbiting laboratory to study possible military roles of men in space . . . the people who make airplanes will be planning the big jumbo jets and, in Europe, fashioning airliners that will go faster than the speed of sound. . . .” (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 12/28/66)
usaf announced it would award contracts to "individuals within the scientific community” to conduct "prompt, in depth investigation of selected Ufo reports.” Funds for study, which had been recommended by Air Force Scientific Advisory Board in March, would be requested from FY 1967 and FY 1968 budgets, (dod Release 388-66)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown testified before the House Armed Services Committee that Ufo reports investigated by usaf under Project Blue Book indicated no threat to our national security: "Based upon 10,147 reported sightings from 1947 through 1965 . . . the Air Force has succeeded in identifying 9,501 of these objects. Virtually all of these sightings were derived from subjective human observations and interpolations. The most common of these were astronomical sightings. . . . Other major sources of reported sightings include . . . satellites, mirages, and spurious radar indications. The remaining 646 . . . are those in which the information available does not provide an adequate basis for analysis, or for which the information suggests a hypothesis but the object or phenomenon explaining it cannot be proved to have been there or taken place at that time.” Dr. Brown assured committee that USAF would contract a group of scientific experts to conduct an "in depth study” of selected Ufo sightings. (Text; AP, Wash. Post, 4/22/66, A4)
Praising June 16 flight of Titan III-C booster which injected eight satellites into orbit, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told Pentagon news conference that program cost included $33 million for satellites, $45 million for ground stations, and $10 to $20 million for other system elements. Launch costs were excluded since they were covered by Titan III-C development funding. Satellites were resistant to jamming or interference, but "anyone who puts up an antenna” of the right kind could listen in. What they would hear "may or may not be comprehensible to them” since traffic would be coded. Asked if U.S.S.R, could use satellite system, Dr. Brown replied affirmatively. However, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Thomas F. Rogers stated: "We have arranged so that it would be very difficult for them to have assured use of it.” (Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, outlining the NASA manned spaceflight program at American Assn, of School Administrators meeting in Atlantic City, discussed the benefits to man on earth of the Apollo Applications program: ". . . man would have the capability of establishing world-wide, real-time television by placing large antennas and powerful transmitters into synchronous orbit; of establishing control towers in space both for aircraft and ocean-going ships; of using space observations to identify and exploit earth’s natural resources; and of controlling the weather.” (Text)
usaf’s OV1-VIIIT satellite was launched with Atlas D booster from Vandenberg afb into near-circular retrograde orbit: apogee, 627 mi. (1,009 km.); perigee, 619 mi. (996 km.); period, 105 min.; inclination, 144°. Balloon-shaped satellite—made of soft aluminum wire mesh covered with a plastic "skin” which disintegrated after inflation—would act as a passive comsat to reflect signals transmitted to it between earth stations, determine whether wire would be rigid enough to maintain spherical shape, and test theory that "open-mesh” structure would reduce drag and solar pressure in space environment, (afsc Release 140.66)
afsc announced plans to use seven defense communications satellites, launched from etr June 16, in series of experiments to gather data for design of improved communications systems between ground stations 5,000	to 6,000 mi. apart. Using specially equipped C-121 communications research aircraft, Air Force Avionics Lab. engineers would test: (1) relay of voice and teletype communications through satellite from either aircraft or ground station; and (2) transmission of airborne meteorological reconnaissance data to the ground via satellite. Signals often would travel 50,000 mi. between terminal points, (afsc Release
George A. Lemke, Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, died at age 54. A veteran of more than 26 years in aircraft and space industry, Mr. Lemke had formerly been NASA Apollo Project Resident Manager at North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
B/G J. C. Maxwell (usaf), faa deputy administrator for supersonic development, told a Washington meeting of Aerospace Industries Association’s Public Relations Advisory Committee that total cost of delivering the first American Sst for airline service may exceed four billion dollars. He explained: "The sst program has been, and still remains, a high risk program. That fact, combined with the sheer magnitude of the development cost, is why the Government is participating in the program to develop an aircraft aimed solely at a civil market.” Adding that the cost estimate was "considerably more than the total net worth of the major aircraft manufacturers combined,” Maxwell said: "Our philosophy for financing the sst program beyond the prototype construction and flight test phase is to encourage industry and the financial community to assume as much responsibility and risk as practicable. We eagerly look foward to the day when we can turn the whole program over to private enterprise. Conceivably, this could occur when the prototype has flown and proven out the design. If all goes well—and the work performed by the airframe and engine manufacturers during the past nine months gives us cause for optimism—the sst prototype will take to the air in late 1969 or early in 1970 to begin an intensive period of testing. At about this time, production development will get underway with the first production model rolling off the line early in 1973 followed by type certification and entry into commercial service by 1974.” Although the British-French Concorde was expected to be in airline service by 1971, Maxwell said this three-year timelag would be offset by the U.S. Sst’s advantages: (1) cruising speed of mach 2.7, compared with Concorde’s 2.2; (2) 250-passenger capacity, compared with Concorde’s anticipated 140 passengers; and (3) growth potential of titanium construction contrasted with volume-limited aluminum of Concorde. (Text)
Pictures from U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft that apparently entered lunar orbit were received and tape recorded by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. Although unable to immediately decipher pictures, Station officials said . . they appear to be similar to those of Luna 9 and the American Lunar Orbiter transmissions.” U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Aug. 24 launch, (upi, NYT, 8/29/66, 11; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/30/66; upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/30/66)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s contention that Nike-X antimissile missile system was incapable of defending U.S. against Soviet attack and should be kept in r&d stage, received support from Society of American Scientists’ executive board. In a statement opposing Senate vote providing $168 million toward deployment of Nike-X system, the sas board said: "These expenditures, truly enormous over extended periods, would be the hallmark of a frightened, not a great society. . . .” {Wash. Post, 5/8/66, P14)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey told group of young scientists visiting Washington, D.C., under National Youth Science Camp program to devote some of their talents to solving problems on earth as well as in space. "If we can put a Surveyor on the moon to take pictures, why can’t we get some one in from La Guardia Airport to downtown New York City before he collects his old age pension ... we must try to harness our divergent and separated resources and our energies to solve the problems of our earthly environment.” The Vice President forecast scientific break-throughs for the year 2000, including the elimination of bacterial and viral diseases, the correction of hereditary defects, landing of men on Mars, farming of the ocean, manufacture of synthetic proteins, control of weather on regional basis, and creation of life in the laboratory. (Text)
President Johnson was asked to invite a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut in a space mission in an open letter in Parade magazine written by editor Jess Gorkin. Gorkin admitted that, officially, there had been little cooperation in space science between the two countries, but said that "Russian and American scientists, guided by a tradition that scientific research belongs to all men, had been eager to cooperate. On a person-to-person basis, they had already exchanged more space data than their governments have officially sanctioned.” Gorkin envisioned joint space mission as proof that U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together for "the good of all men on earth” despite disagreement on "how they want to live.” (Parade, 1/9/66)
West Germany’s Chancellor Ludwig Erhard and President Johnson are briefed by NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center.
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown had indicaten that future U.S. military exploration of space would concentrate od existing and proved technologies, Dr. I. M. Levitt, director of Fels Planetarium, reported in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Dr. Brown had isolated three areas of vital interest to the military: (1) electronic systems which would ensure long life and reliability in orbit; (2) reusable materials for spacecraft, launch vehicles, and propulsion systems; and (3) space electrical power systems which world provide better power-to-weight ratios at reduced cost per kw for long duration missions. (Levitt, Phil. Inq., 12/4/66, 5) NASA Administrator James E. Webb responded to accusations that he was more concerned with life on Mars than with life in Chicago or Los Angeles: "Neither I nor any other leader in the space program has ever suggested that the space program should have any priority over the needs of the American City. . . .” He agreed that cities needed more Federal funds, but suggested that they first offer greater assurance that their programs would work well. Benefits in medical, industrial, and other fields added dimensions to space program far beyond the value of the lunar-landing program alone, he said. (Transcript; Janson, NYT, 12/6/66, C34)
Absence of statement by President Johnson and West German Chancellor Erhard after their September meeting in Washington, D.C., on suggested U.S.-Western Europe program of unmanned exploration of Jupiter indicated that the proposal had been "killed for the foreseeable future,” Technology Week speculated. (Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 3)
First manned Apollo mission might be launched in late 1966, predicted Astronaut Virgil Grissom during news conference held by Apollo crew and backup crew at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., facility. Mission was officially scheduled for 1967. (Transcript)
Dr. Hans-Joachim von Merkatz, member of West German Bundestag, charged in report prepared for delivery before meeting of Assembly of the Western European Union that U.S. was trying to "break up” Western Europe’s space program with "tantalizing” offers for joint U.S.-European planetary exploration: "In other words, the exploration of Jupiter could divert us from the essential economic benefits to be derived from space through the exploration of communications satellites. The American approach to date has definitely been aimed at insuring United States monopoly and leadership in this field as in the nuclear field.” Western European Union was composed of U.K., France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. (NYT, 6/9/66, 3)
New mineral named "djerfisherite”—a copper-iron sulfide—had been found in meteorites. Since it does not exist naturally on earth and could be formed only at high temperatures, it was speculated that djerfisherite might have originated in the sun’s outermost layer. Report of finding was released through American Assn, for the Advancement of Science by Dr. Louis H. Fuchs. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/66, D2)
A nasa Contract Administration Services Representative’s office—headed by Donald R. Mulholland, Deputy Director of nasa’s Western Operations Office—had been established at headquarters of afsc’s Air Force Contract Management Div. (afcmd), Los Angeles, Calif. New office, which completed network of representatives’ offices in major dod centers, would "provide liaison between afcmd and nasa elements on contract administration services support. . . .” (nasa Hq. Bull., 5/23/66, 6)
Federal mediators in San Francisco announced interim agreement in wage dispute between International Union of Electrical Workers and United Technology Center. Striking electricians would return to work by April 28; negotiations for a new contract would continue until May 20. AP dispatches from ksc reported union, which had limited picketing to one gate April 20, had resumed picketing all five gates, charging "bad faith on the part of utc.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/26/66, A6; AP, NYT, 4/26/66, 14)
Apparent inactivity in Soviet manned space program might reflect "growing dismay over the tremendously high cost of astronautics where men are involved,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. "The Russians may feel they have better things to do with their money, just as the United States would have if the Kennedy 'moon message’ of 1961 had not been hung like an albatross around the national neck as a commitment involving American prestige before the world.” Cost of Project Gemini was about $700,000 per man hour. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, A12)
Problems of construction industry were discussed by William Rieke, nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, at Construction Industry Joint Conference in Washington, D.C. Rieke praised accomplishments such as ksc’s Vertical Assembly Building but urged management to increase its effectiveness, labor to expand apprentice programs and control rate escalation, and Government to examine labor policies and maintain knowledgeable labor relations staffs. (Text)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afr with AtlasAgena D booster. {Tech. Wk,, 11/7/66, 10; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van Shepard and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.55 and 60,300-ft. altitude in national sonic boom program flight, (nasa Proj. Off.)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was presented Gen. Benedict Crowell Gold Medal by American Ordnance Assn.’s Cleveland Post. (Lewis News, 11/10/66, 1)
Astronauts returning to earth after long space flights in sterile environment might have to take bacteria pills, suggested Dr. T. D. Luckey, Univ. of Missouri Medical School, at American Society for Microbiology convention in Los Angeles. Dr. Luckey suggested that astronauts’ sterile air, food, and water eventually could dangerously reduce the amount of bacteria in their systems, resulting in bacterial illness when they returned to earth. Pills could restore normal degree of immunity to terrestrial bacteria. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/4/66, A12)
H.S. Becker, former North American Aviation, Inc., executive, had been appointed Deputy Director of msfc’s Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-199)
Air Force Assn, honored four officers for exceptional achievement at its second annual fall meeting in Washington, D.C.: Col. Robert A. Berman, Wright-Patterson afb, Logistics Executive Management Award; Col. Spencer S. Hunn, Hanscom Field, Mass., afsc Distinguished Award for Management; Col. Gregory C. Frese, Jr., Washington, D.C., afsc Meritorious Award for Support Management; and L/Col. Martin H. Brewer, Vandenberg afb, afsc Meritorious Award for Program Management. (J/Armed Forces, 9/10/66, 25)
Endorsement of suggestion in Jan. 9 open letter to President Johnson that he invite "a Russian cosmonaut to join an American astronaut for a space ride in a two-man capsule” was reported by letter’s author, Parade editor Jess Gorkin. Newspapers throughout the world had publicized the idea and written favorable editorials. Le Figaro (Paris) had given it front page coverage. Melbourne (Australia) Herald had said the idea had "great merit.” Asahi Shimbun (Tokyo): "As long as America and Russia accelerate space development separately, there will be much money wasted. Both countries will probably suspect that the other party is engaged in space development for military purposes. ... If the United States and the Soviet Union cooperate and 'all the families of the earth’ pitch in to further space development, war on earth will gradually become absurd.” New York World Telegram: "What do we have to lose? If we succeed and the two men orbit the earth together the psychological effect will be tremendous. If Russia turns down the idea, we will be on sounder moral grounds.” (Gorkin, Parade, 3/20/66) During week of March 20: Several hundred sightings of unidentified flying objects (Ufo’s) near Ann Arbor, Mich., were reported. Rep. Weston Vivian (D-Mich.) said he would ask dod to make an investigation. (upi, NYT, 3/22/66, 19; dm, NYT, 3/23/66, 22; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, Al; upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/66, A20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/66, Al)
nasa awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $37-million, costplusaward-fee contract supplement for launch preparation and checkout of ten Saturn V 2nd stages (S-II). (nasa Release 66-281)
Atlas F advanced ballistic reentry system icbm fired from Vandenberg AFB apparently exploded and fell into the Pacific, usaf was investigating causes of the failure, (upi, NYT, 8/9/66)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in a letter to msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun that after "careful review” he had approved an agreement between msfc and Lodge 1858, American Federation of Government Employees (afl-cio). Mr. Webb noted that agreement, negotiated after msfc employee vote May 19, 1965, for afge representation, was "a forward step in the nasa Employee-Management Cooperation Program.” (Marshall Star, 2/2/66, 1-2)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey presented 1966 Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy in Washington, D.C., to gemini vi Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Thomas P. Stafford and gemini vii Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Frank Borman for achieving first rendezvous in space by two separately launched maneuverable spacecraft Dec. 15, 1965. After the ceremony, the Vice President told newsmen he was one of those "manning the ramparts” against those who failed to see any direct public benefit from space exploration. He thought the space program had resulted in a superior educational system, increased industrial competence, new products, "and if it hasn’t done anything else it has taught us to manage” vast undertakings. (Clark, NYT, 12/16/66, 21)
Unidentified usaf satellite launched by Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb did not achieve orbit. (U.N. Public Registry, 5/31/66)
Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of first manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations of military orientation of U.S. space efforts and predictions of Soviet space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said: "American scientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged "all his energies and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make himself at home on the moon "to establish stations which will serve as points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical observatories and scientific laboratories.” Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow television, predicted that "builders and assemblers will one day exit into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.” In a Pravda article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take several cosmonauts through the Van Allen radiation belts. He noted that biomedical data from the cosmos cx flight would "doubtlessly . . . be used in preparing new manned space flights.” In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970 and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; upi, NYT, 4/14/66, 7; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 4/13/66)
Space negotiations played important roie in visit of West German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard to U.S. Following discussions with President Johnson, joint statement was released from White House: "The President and the Chancellor discussed possibilities for increased cooperation in technology and science and in particular in the field of space research. The Chancellor expressed his satisfaction that effective steps toward increased cooperation in space research have been initiated since his last meeting with the President in December 1965. The President and the Chancellor welcomed the decision to expand the present cooperative satellite program reached as a result of the recent discussions in Bonn between NASA Administrator Webb and Minister of Science Stoltenberg. "The President and the Chancellor agreed that scientific cooperation should be pressed forward for the mutual benefit of both countries and the advancement of human knowledge, preserving opportunities for additional nations to participate and contribute.” President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, later flew from Washington, D.C., to Cape Kennedy for tour of ksc. During speech in Vehicle Assembly Building, President Johnson said he was discussing "with the Chancellor, as well as other leaders, my hope that our scientists can join in joint endeavors to reap the full benefits of space research.” He said he had authorized Administrator Webb "to discuss whether solar physicists from Europe may wish to be associated with the American solar physicists” in program for Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm) to be flown "on an Apollo flight in order to study the sun at the height of the solar cycle.” Appealing to the U.S.S.R. for early conclusion of a treaty on outer space exploration, Johnson said: "I earnestly hope that the Soviet Union—whose space achievements have been very great—will feel as we fee] in America: that the rapid evolution of space technology makes ... a treaty between us governing the use of space a most urgent matter ... as we explore the vastness of space, and as we dream of new horizons, we work, too, for the manmade controls that will keep these efforts at the service of man and at the service of peace.” He noted that the U.S. sought and would continue to seek cooperation in space with U.S.S.R.: "We have an agreement to exchange certain kinds of space data. . . . We will soon publish jointly American and Soviet material on space biology and medicine.” The President also mentioned that the U.S, was "on schedule in our plan and our determination to put men on the moon before 1970.” (Pres. Doc., 10/3/66, 1365-6, 1370; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/66, Cl)
U.S. should divert funds from nasa’s Apollo program and from Federal highway projects to improve urban housing and transportation systems, Sen. Eugene J. McCarthy (D-Minn.) suggested to International Conference of Social Work in Washington, D.C. (Honsa, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, A14)
NASA awarded contracts totaling $825,000 for study of methods to explore the planets and to design advanced launch vehicles: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $200,000; Boeing Co., $150,000; Lockheed-California Co., $250,000; and North American Aviation, Inc., $225,000. Contract management would be performed by nasa Hq. Mission Analysis Div. (nasa Release 66-302)
Graduate Research Center of the Southwest president Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner addressed msc employees. Outlining postlunar landing exploration, Dr. Berkner said: "The very broad strategic objectives for the exploration of the solar system are clearly outlined in the National Academy of Sciences Summer Study that was done last summer. . . . It is urgent and imperative that this study be adopted, or something like it, as our major basic strategy beyond the moon. The first job is to adopt a national strategy. This is not just a decision of NASA; it is a decision of the administration, of the Congress, of the American people. "And second it is urgent and imperative that this study be translated by joint actions of NASA, the National Academy of Sciences and American scientists into specific tactical plans for a specific program with dollars attached to it. For example, in my opinion, it makes little sense to undertake the first Martian landing without some precedent exploratory steps. We must first orbit and map the planet and ascertain where a landing would be profitable. "To do the planetary exploration job effectively, we now need a tactical program of specific flights on specific dates with the instru-. mentation necessary to plan to accomplish those tasks. I remind you that what we are doing today was planned in 1961. And yet, when we get to our planetary program in the 1970’s, we don’t have corresponding specific plans.” He reemphasized the urgency by saying: "If we are to achieve in the planetary exploration of the future in an intelligent way, in light of the objectives of the Space Act, the time has come to get our scientists started now. Your vehicle program is already ahead of us.” Dr. Berkner said that the long-range program should meet certain specifications: "(1) step-by-step advancement of experiments in the proper order; (2) use of the right vehicles to carry out the experiments; (3) effective use of Saturn capabilities, from unmanned missions to the ultimate manned landing on Mars and perhaps Venus, and (4) proper phasing-in of smaller vehicles with the larger ones, and reasonable time/cost programming.” (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 3)
faa awarded $65,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., to study competing Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Sst designs for possible size reduction that would reduce sonic boom. (WSJ, 12/5/66,12)
usaf announced Dr. J, Allen Hynek, chairman of Northwestern Univ.’s Dearborn Observatory and scientific consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, would investigate reported Ufo sightings in the Ann Arbor, Mich., area, (upi, NYT, 2/23/66, 22) March 22-25; Air Force Assn, held its 20th annual convention in Dallas, Tex. usaf Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell told the meeting that U.S. and U.S.S.R. had enough long-range nuclear weapons to make a nuclear war between them extremely costly for either side, but that a stalemate did not exist between them: "It follows that each country has its own nuclear threshold, that is, the point or level of restraint above which it may no longer be deterred from war. This threshold is by no means static but dynamic, as it is determined by a number of factors which are both variable and unpredictable.” McConnell said the strategic superiority of usaf during the past 20 yrs. had kept the nuclear threshold of all potential aggressors at a safe level. (Text) USAF’s first priority—continued maintenance of strategic superiority over any potential enemy—required a mixed force of missiles and manned bombers, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told the convention. "We will continue to need manned bombers in our strategic forces as far ahead as any of us can see, and I think that should include at least the entire decade of the 1970s. ". . . There is no doubt about the technical feasibility of advanced manned bombers of all sorts of designs. The questions which have to be answered . . . are how we propose to use such a weapon system and how it fits in to the missions of assured destruction and damage limitation. . . . This issue is under intensive study by the Air Staff. . . .” (Text) A Citation of Honor—Air Force Assn.’s highest award—was presented to B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier for "outstanding management achievements while directing the Air Force’s development program for the Titan III-C space booster,” and to ssd’s 655th Aerospace Test Wing, at Patrick AFB, for "successful missile and space launches, including six Gemini launches which placed ten astronauts in orbit and achieved the first manned rendezvous in space.” (afsc Release 48.66)
nasa’s ogo iii (Ogo-B) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched from etb with Atlas-Agena B booster into orbit with 75,874-mi. (122,157-km.) apogee; 183-mi. (295-km.) perigee; 48.6-hr. period; and 31° inclination. Third of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Ogo program and first to successfully operate three-axis stabilized in highly elliptical orbit, ogo iii weighed 1,135 lbs.; it carried 21 experiments—largest number ever carried by U.S. scientific spacecraft—to study solar wind, solar flares, magnetic field disturbances, radiation belt particles, aurora events, ionization, and variations in atmospheric density. Ogo program was managed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-132; AP, NYT, 6/8/66, 15; AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A7)
Successful 384-sec. captive firing of first flight model of Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) was conducted at mtf by North American Aviation, Inc., prime contractor. State was powered by five Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-hydrogen-fueled engines capable of developing a total of 1 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-290; upi, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/66)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, told World Affairs Council in Los Angeles U.S. civil space program "affords perhaps the most effective globed projection of the American personality and the American achievement today . . . "The elements of this favorable projection are the openness with which the program is conducted, the direct benefits to others through space communications and weather systems, the willingness to share both research and results in projects of mutual interest, the energetic forward thrust toward technological and managerial pre-eminence, and . . . the evidence of high national purpose.” (Text)
Negotiations by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to acquire the 14,981-acre Sudden Ranch properties adjacent to Vandenberg AFB marked beginning of massive expansion operation for Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, Missiles and Rockets reported. B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier, Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div., predicted that within five years, Vandenberg would have "continuous manned operations” involving 40 or more launches annually. (M&R, 1/10/66, 35)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey proclaimed Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill "Multiple Sclerosis Woman of the Year” in ceremony at his Washington, D.C., office and presented her with engraved bronze hope chest— symbol of Multiple Sclerosis Society. Dr. Gill, an MS patient for over 20 yrs., was with NASA Manned Flights Experiments Office, ossa. She formerly had been Chief of In-Flight Sciences, ossa, and on March 1 had received one of six Federal Women’s Awards of 1966. (Wash. Post, 6/16/66, Dl)
gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan, resting aboard U.S.S. Wasp, received tributes from around the world. President Johnson, telephoning from his Texas ranch, said: "We are very proud of both of you. I have been watching off and on over the weekend and saw your return this morning. "You have made all of us more aware of what performance under pressure is all about and that includes courage. . . .” Tass science commentator said the Soviet people "give their due” to the courage of the astronauts and congratulate them on their safe return to earth. He praised the flight as an "achievement of American astronautics.” Jodrell Bank Experimental Station director Sir Bernard Lovell said the success of surveyor i and gemini ix-a had made the week one of the greatest for American science. "It seems that the Russians will have to stage a spectacular development in order to recapture the lead which they apparently possessed a week ago.” (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A8; Balt. Sun, 6/7/66)
Summing up the effect of May 17 loss of Gemini IX mission’s Agena Target Vehicle, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is obvious that at the very least the American space effort has lost three weeks of precious time and possibly $25 million in money— the cost of the lost Hardware plus overhead. . . . "One thing should be clear from the experience of Gemini 9. "There was nothing of omission or commission that can be charged against NASA in the failure of the Agena’s Atlas launching rocket. If the hackneyed phrase 'random failure’ ever was properly used, it was in describing yesterday’s trouble. "The Atlas, as a standard space launching vehicle, has had 49 successes in 52 attempts over the last three years—a better success record than the over-all American space program has enjoyed in any year since its inception in 1957.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A8)
Astronaut Bruce McCandless II, discussing role of manned space flight in science in address before Washington, D.C., Junior Academy of Sciences’ annual meeting, concluded: "Man is flexible; he is capable of responding to unforeseen situations intelligently and effectively. He has a limited and on-the-spot redesign capability built in and contributes to mission success through improved reliability. He is capable of evaluating and screening information and making decisions accordingly and independently. As long as these elements are required, man’s participation will be beneficial.” (Text)
Performance of Apollo Command Module (Cm), launched Feb. 26 from etr on AS-201 flight, was successful enough to obviate any delay in schedule for a 1969 manned lunar expedition, Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, told Gladwin Hill of the New York Times. The Cm, on display at North American Aviation, Inc., in Downey, Calif., remained structurally intact, and the few minor technical problems that had developed during flight were not serious enough to cause any engineering problems in the assembly-line production vehicles for subsequent phases of the testing program, Dr. Shea said. "This was the first major confirmation of design processes and it went quite well.” (Hill, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
Prominent details of the moon’s far side photographed by zond ill in July 1965 had been named by Soviet astronomers for great scientists, Tass reported. Among them were the Korolev thalassoid and the craters of Confucius, Spinoza, Mendel, Zhukovskiy, and Galois. Information relayed by zond ill would be included in second part of Atlas of the Other Side of the Moon, currently under preparation. First part was published in October 1960. Prof. Yuri Lipski, in charge of preparing the atlas, said one of the photos taken by lunar orbiter i that had been "kindly supplied by American researchers,” had revealed approximate ^ overlap of details in photo taken by zond hi while remainder of photo coincided in part with photos taken by Luna hi. (Tass, 9/27/66)
Blanche W. Noyes, faa air marking specialist and veteran pilot, was awarded the Brazilian Medal of Merit of Santos Dumont at the Brazilian chancery in Washington, D.C., for outstanding and meritorious services to Brazilian aviation. Mrs. Noyes was the first American avi-atrix to receive the award, (faa Release 66-8)
usaf successfully launched Nike-Javelin combination carrying a payload of plume measurement instrumentation seconds after launch of its target—an Atlas-D icbm—from Vandenberg afb. Launch was first in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program in which data on infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products were telemetered back to Vandenberg telemetry station, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/20/66, 22; upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 82; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
Russian-born Igor I. Sikorsky, "father of the helicopter,” was honored as Air Force Man of the Year by the New York chapter of the Air Force Assn. He was cited especially for the outstanding work helicopters had done in the Vietnam war. (N.Y. News, 2/21/66)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $1,550,000 initial increment to a $5,671,000 usaf contract for development work on vertical takeoff and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Contract would be managed by afsc’s Systems Engineering Group, (dod Release 760-66)
alaa met in Washington, D.C. Satellite Educational and Informational Television (seit)—concept of combining television and communications satellites to raise standards of living in less-advanced nations—was discussed by Vincent P. Rock, director of Communications Central. He emphasized lack of literacy requirement for television instruction and noted that it could (1) "transmit skills and knowledge required for modernization of productive activity; (2) transmit fantasy which helps a person understand the role and techniques of association required for participation in a modern society; and (3) transmit information about events and goods required for action in the modern world.” Following his speech, Rock told the press that a demonstration SEIT system would cost about $30,000,000, excluding ground receiving equipment, and could be ready in three years. Transmissions from satellites could either be received on six-foot "dish” antennas and relayed to individual receiving sets or relayed directly to home sets. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 5/3/66) James D. O’Connell, White House Director of Telecommunications Management, warned of frequency shortage for satellite communications by 1970 unless new techniques were devised. O’Connell urged aerospace engineers who started "this communications explosion” to "consider all ideas and concepts” that would squeeze more talk into existing broadcast frequencies. (Clark, NYT, 5/4/66, 23) U.S. should assume active world leadership in direct satellite-to-home radio and television broadcasts which offer tremendous potential for mass education and mass propaganda, suggested Columbia Univ. law professor Richard N. Gardner in a panel discussion. Warning that several nations had already asked international bodies to outlaw general broadcasting from space for fear of "unilateral penetration” or unwanted propaganda, Gardner urged: (1) the Administration to proceed immediately in developing direct broadcast satellites; (2) the organization of a pilot demonstration project, perhaps in India, with U.N. endorsement; (3) the involvement of aid and other international lending agencies in educational use of space communications; and (4) the reassurance of friendly nations that comsats would not he used for propaganda. Murray L. Schwartz, Univ. of Calif. School of Law, told panel that satellites were one more example of a technology that might be moving too fast for existing social institutions. A "knowledge explosion” helped by space communications would accelerate homogenization of society and "one of the great problems is to make sure the homogenization is not too great,” he said. (Clark, NYT, 5/5/66, 17; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/5/66, Al)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Design requirements for second-generation, recoverable-reusable booster and spacecraft systems, outlined by nasc staff member Dr. Eugene B. Konecci at American Astronautical Society meeting in Wayne, N.J., included: new propulsion capability; materials, structures, and subsystems suitable for reuse; and system designed for "full use of the human factor capabilities in the control loop, . . . minimum (limited) ground support participation, and for easy maintenance and repair.” (Text)
Charles W. Harper, Director, Aeronautics Div., nasa Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart), testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on the nasa aeronautics program. Citing the need for close coordination between scientific groups within Government, he said: "Recognizing the Air Force interest in hypersonic flight, a proposal was made to the Air Force Systems Command Headquarters that the two agencies prepare a single coordinate program representing a national effort in hypersonic technology with each agency supporting that portion most appropriate to its capabilities. The proposal was accepted. . . . Technical approval of general plans is through the nasa oart Office and the AFSC RTD Office and generation and coordination of program details are developed through appointed technical groups from the NASA and Air Force research centers. To date this coordination activity has been very effective. ...” As major elements of NASA’s 1967 aeronautics program, Harper listed: (1) a continuing effort in advanced research; (2) major effort in support of Sst with emphasis on flight operations and advanced propulsion; (3) a substantial increase in research in propulsion systems appropriate to the whole speed range, from V/Stol to hypersonic speeds with special attention directed to the noise problem and supported by two new facilities; (4) a substantially increased effort in V/Stol research supported by construction of the first research facility to be built expressly for conducting research on problems unique to V/Stol aircraft. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 170-1, 179)
Four-stage usaf Trailblazer was launched from nasa Wallops Station in second of a series of six Air Force Avionics Laboratory launches to study communications blackout during space vehicle reentry. (Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 10)
U.S. embassy confirmed that West Germany was negotiating with several unidentified American aircraft companies for technical assistance in removgin flaws from the F-104G Starfighter jet aircraft. Since beginning of 1965, 29 Starfighters had been destroyed in accidents and 16 Luftwaffe pilots killed. (NYT, 2/20/66, 9)
William A. Hyman, internationally known air and space lawyer and author, died in New York City. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66)
T. R. May, vice president of Lockheed-Georgia Co., disclosed plans to build commercial version of the C-5A military fan jet which could carry up to 900 passengers and thus reduce fares drastically. May, speaking at an Air Force Assn, seminar in Salt Lake City, said Lockheed "fully expects” to have the aircraft, designated the L-500, "flying commercial routes” in the early 1970’s. Lockheed-Georgia Co. had received a $1.4-billion dod contract Sept. 30,1965, to develop and build the C-5A—a military carrier that would be world’s largest aircraft. Delivery was scheduled for mid-1968. (djns, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/18/66, Dl; NYT, 2/18/66, 53M)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with ThorAgena D booster, (upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 4; U.S Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 158)
Commentary in New York Times on difficulty of allocating limited funds for scientific research: "The eminent Soviet physicist P. L. Kapitsa has published an article [see Jan. 20] acknowledging that American science is still contributing far more to mankind’s knowledge than its Soviet counterpart. He attributes the United States lead largely to the wiser American technique for Government subsidy of research.... Ironically, several months ago President Johnson . .. directed that Federal funds be more equally distributed among the nation’s universities and geographic areas and that a larger proportion of this money be allocated to universities for distribution as their administrators see fit, rather than directly to research scientists. "If the Kapitsa analysis is correct, the President’s order was a mistake and may lead to reduced productivity in American science.” (NYT, 1/26/66, 32)
Potential impact of aeronautical technology on social patterns of the nation was discussed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, chairman of mit’s aeronautics and astronautics department, at meeting of Aviation/ Space Writers’ Assn, in New York City. In only the 10th year of the space age, he said, the world was ". . . at the beginning of a new surge in science and technology stimulated by their interactions with each other and with social needs, nourished by the resources and needs of space exploration.” (Text; AF/SD, 8/66)
U.S.S.R. transmitted to U.S. for first time information obtained from its only known meteorological satellite, cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Previously, U.S.S.R. had relayed only conventional observations from land stations, ships, and balloons. Direct telecommunications channel between Moscow and Washington, D.C., had been established after March 1963 signing of bilateral agreement for exchange of meteorological satellite data under June 1962 space cooperation accord. (Bird, NYT, 8/20/66, 1; AP, Wash. Post, 8/21/66, A6)
American Federation of Government Employees (afge) at ksc had charged nasa with preferential hiring of retired military officers for choice civilian jobs—a practice which was "demoralizing” career officials and damaging the space program, afge’s charge was supported by House Civil Service Manpower Subcommittee, which had been investigating the situation for several months. (Young, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/4/66, A2)
NASA Astronaut Michael Collins presented U.S. flag carried on July 18-21 gemini x mission to St. Albans School in Washington, D.C., as "a token of my appreciation for getting me started on this road.” Collins and three other alumni were honored by St. Albans at a banquet and reception. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, Bl)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first U.S. astronaut to walk in space, received the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy from Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown at National Geographic Society ceremony in Washington, D.C. Established in 1S61 by Dr. Thomas W. McKnew, chairman of the National Geographic’s Board of Trustees, trophy was awarded annually to the usaf officer or unit that made the foremost contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. nasa Administrator James E. Webb said at the ceremony: "I think . . . that no factor has been more important in the advances made in aviation and in space than the continued and dedicated driving leadership of the officers of the Air Force and the personal willingness to take the risks involved of these outstanding test pilots and combat pilots and those who have done the intervening jobs from transportation to helicopter work. We have a great Air Force.” (Text; NYT, 7/12/66)
msfc had purchased 22 additional Saturn IB H-l rocket engines from North American Aviation, Inc., under $7,634,742 modification to previous contract. In addition to the 205,000-lb.-thrust engines, which would complete engine requirements for Saturn IB/Apollo program, naa would provide three years of support services, (msfc Release 66-75)
First launch of usaf’s Titan III-B-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg afb placed an unidentified satellite into polar orbit, (sac twx; Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 29)
Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn.: "As we stand at the end of one record year of achievements and at the beginning of a year that we confidently predict will establish new records on all fronts, will historians view this point of time as having any particular significance from an aerospace point of view? After all we’re not going to the moon next year and we didn’t inject man into space for the first time last year. . . . "I believe historians may come to regard about this point of time as being the point when the aerospace business completed its transition from a matter of only peripheral concern to the total public interest, into the mainstream of American life. . . .” (Text)
Washington Post commented on report of satellite collision made by Dr. Hilliard Paige at iaf Congress in Madrid: "Belated disclosure that two Air Force space vehicles collided in space in April, 1965, ought to remind the country that part of its space program is being carried on behind a cloak of secrecy as absolute as that which conceals space operations in the Soviet Union. The open policy of NASA, which has done so much to keep the whole nation interested in and excited about space progress, is in sharp contrast to the policy of the Air Force. . . .” [Ed. note: Satellites were usn, not usaf.] (Wash. Post, 10/13/66, A22)
House passed H.R. 6125 amending Air Museum Act to authorize construction of a National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., to replace the National Air Museum, Museum, to be completed in five years at an estimated $40 million, would house permanent exhibits of space exploration and be part of the Smithsonian Institution. The NASA Administrator would serve on its advisory board. (NASA LAR V/20)
Mrs. James A. McDivitt gave birth in Houston to a daughter—first child conceived by an American astronaut’s wife after her husband had returned from space. Astronaut McDivitt was command pilot on the June fane 16: usaf Titan III-C launch vehicle in preparation for multiple-satellite payload mission from Eastern Test Range. 4-7, 1965, Gemini rv mission during which Astronaut Edward H. White II made his 21-min. Eva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/66, A2)
President Johnson transmitted his annual Report to the Congress on United States Aeronautics and Space Activities, calling 1965 "the most successful year in our history.” He said in the transmittal letter: "As our space program continues, the impact of its developments on everyday life becomes daily more evident. It continues to stimulate our education, improve our material well being, and broaden the horizons of knowledge. It is also a powerful force for peace.” He cited U.S. accomplishments in the Gemini, Ranger, Mariner, and Early Bird programs. "Research and development in our space program continued to speed progress in medicine, in weather prediction, in electronics—and, indeed, in virtually every aspect of American science and technology.” Among chief aeronautical developments report cited "design refinement and wind-tunnel testing” of Sst and decision to build C-5A jet transport. Among successful U.S. launches during 1965, DOD had 67 satellites, 34 of which were unidentified. Military space programs were discussed, including Project West Ford; Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol); Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project; and the geodetic Secor satellites. Research was under way on the best means of determining physical characteristics of "uncooperating objects in earth orbit” through observation by ground-based radar. The section on aec said that a third pair of Vela radiation-detection satellites launched in July 1965 was watching for nuclear explosions in space and measuring x-ray emissions from the sun. In a separate chapter of the report, the nasc said: "This Nation’s space achievements during the year were so distinctive in quality and quantity as to cause people, at home and abroad, to conclude the United States had attained the space leadership of the world.” The Council said that in many respects this conclusion was correct "but it would be incorrect and unwise to minimize the vitality and size of the space program of the U.S.S.R.” (Text; CR, 1/31/66, A419; Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 149)
All F-104G Starfighter aircraft in West Germany’s Air Force were grounded indefinitely as result of Nov. 28 air crash which killed pilot. Since 1962, 65 of Luftwaffe’s 700 Starfighters had crashed, killing 37 pilots. Aircraft was manufactured by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (Shabecoff, NYT, 12/7/66, 15)	_ Agena D booster into elliptical transfer orbit with 22,831-mi. (36,758km.) apogee; 114-mi. (183-km.) perigee; 650-min. period; and 31° inclination. At 16:30 get, apogee motor was fired to place satellite into near-synchronous 22,300-mi.-altitude orbit. It would be allowed to drift 12 days to stationary position over the Pacific at 151° west longitude. One of the most versatile satellites ever developed, 775-lb. ATS I carried 15 communications, technology, and scientific experiments, including camera systems for cloud-cover photos; two-way vhf transponder for voice communications between ground stations and aircraft in flight; electronically despun antenna to continuously direct a radio beam toward earth; and low-thrust resistojet which produced thrust of 450 millionths of a pound. Capable of multiple-access communications, satellite would be able to transmit TV and voice communications among stations in North America, Asia, and Australia. It would also be used to send weather data from essa facility at Suitland, Md., to Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) stations in U.S., Japan, and Australia. Mission objectives were to inject spacecraft into synchronous orbit and place it on station; operate spacecraft for at least 30 days; and conduct experiments. Ats program—a five-satellite project managed by gsfc under ossa direction—sought to investigate technology common to various spacecraft applications through flight experiments carried on spin-stabilized and gravity-gradient-stabilized spacecraft, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-308; Marshall Star, 12/1/66, 1, 4; Wash. Post, 12/8/66, A2; upi, ATT, 12/9/66, 57; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A15)
Comment in the Washington Sunday Star called U.S. Sst program a "dubious” venture moved by extraordinary pressures: "This is a project the taxpayer should view with more than a little interest, if not apprehension, for its cost is coming out of his pocketbook and the price tag is escalating. Industry may repay the cost some day, but no one is sure just when. The sst, in fact, has become a symbol of national prestige. If we do not produce such a plane, American leadership in the aircraft industry will sustain a loss of face from which it could not recover. Perhaps it is impossible to back away from the situation. But the American public is at least entitled to know what kind of mare’s nest this rivalry has got us into, and the hazards that must be faced.” (Wash. Sun, Star, 8/14/66, Cl)
In unpublished letter to Science, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, head of Northwestern Univ.’s Dept, of Astronomy and usaf consultant on Ufo’s since 1948, criticized the "American scientific establishment” for failure to investigate persistent Ufo phenomena [see Oct. 21]. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A12)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever was presented the American Legion’s General William E. Mitchell Memorial Award—highest honor bestowed by the Legion’s Aviator’s Post—at a luncheon ceremony in New York’s Wings Club. Schriever was cited for his "outstanding contributions to the aerospace science and military posture of the United States.” (afsc Release 76.66)
Research and development in essential space programs would not be seriously affected By demands of the Vietnam conflict, usaf Under Secretary Norman S. Paul told a National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C. Asked during question and answer period for rough estimate of military manned spaceflight expenditures in the 1970s, Paul said that currently dod was spending $1.3 billion of its $7-billion R&D budget on space and that it was "a safe guess this amount will go up.” Asked if there might be NASA programs competitive with USAf’s Mol, Paul said there was "not the slightest possibility.” (Text; M/S Daily, 10/19/66, 20)
Nation’s most modern ship for oceanographic research, usc&gs Oceanographer, was commissioned at Washington [D.C.] Navy Yard in commemoration of Environmental Science Services Administration’s (eSSa) first anniversary. President Johnson, speaking at the ceremony, called for international cooperation in oceanographic research and invited 11 nations, including U.S.S.R., to participate in first round-the-world expedition of the new research ship. (Text; essa Release 66-41) July 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 52-lb. variable frequency impedance probe to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude in cooperative West German-U.S. experiment to measure electron density in the ionosphere, nasa furnished two radio propagation experiments and sounding rocket; West Germany furnished probe. There was no exchange of funds between cooperating agencies—nasa and West German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-188; Wallops Release 66-40)
usns Kingsport, first ocean link in U.S. research in satellite communications, was retired from nasa’s networks and returned to dod. In July 1963 Kingsport had participated in world’s first demonstration of communications by satellite in synchronous orbit when a message was sent in 45,000-mi. loop from Kingsport anchored in Lagos harbor, Nigeria, to syncom ii comsat and back. Several days later, she was part of first direct exchange of radio message via satellite, linking Lakehurst, N.J., terminal station with land circuits at Lagos. On Aug. 4, Kingsport and Lakehurst transmitted and received via syncom ii first satellite exchange of news copy and photo facsimile. Several days later, caught in a squall 40 mi. offshore, she became first terminal station to establish satellite communications from the open sea. Two months later, she participated in first trans-ocean press conference by satellite: stationed at Rota, Spain, she connected syncom ii communications between United Nations in New York City and NASA Hq. in Washington, D.C., with the International Telecommunications Union Conference in Geneva. Kingsport first demonstrated the practicality of communications by satellite during manned space missions March 16, 1966, by relaying voice reports from Gemini viii Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and David R. Scott via syncom ii to Hawaii ground station, (nasa Release 66-79)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown issued memorandum approving recommendations of panel appointed to investigate usaf relations with "not-for-profit” corporations and ordering that fees paid to the corporations be substantially reduced. In report, issued Feb. 1, panel had said that nonprofit corporations . . continue to be an indispensible factor in developing and acquiring complex aerospace systems and in assuring their function through command and control,” but that "guidelines . . . point to a fee substantially lower than at present.” (Text; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/17/66, A10; Wash. Post, 4/17/66, A14)
International Association of Machinists and Boeing Co. settled dispute on seniority issues under Federal mediation, averting strike of 50,000	Boeing employees, including those working on Saturn V boosters at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (upi, NYT, 4/20/66, 48; upi, Wash. Post, 4/20/66, A6)
Under Secretary of the Air Force Norman Paul told Rep. George H. Mahon (D-Tex.), chairman of House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, in closed session that usaf officials were unaware that the XB-70 which crashed June 8 was to be used for commercial publicity purposes: "The Air Force definitely does not put its stamp on this sort of business. . . . Had we been aware, I think it is safe to say it would not have happened.” Representative Mahon said Committee would "insist that procedures be established which will make impossible a recurrence of such misuse of men and military equipment.” (Morris, NYT, 6/11/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A8)
usaf awarded contracts totaling over $6 million to Lockheed-Georgia Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., to advance Vtol aircraft development. naa received $5,671,000 to develop and demonstrate a Vtol integrated flight system; Lockheed received $975,000 to modify XV-4A "Hummingbird” to new system with direct lift and diverted thrust engines, (afsc Release 288.66)
usaf successfully launched the OV1-IV and OV1-V scientific satellites into circular orbits from Vandenberg afb with Atlas-Agena D booster. OV1-IV satellite bore photosynthetic organisms to determine effects of zero-g and four types of thermal control coating samples to test durability and resistance to heat and radiation. Each of two thermally insulated sample holders on satellite carried two control surfaces and four circular samples, slightly less than an inch in diameter. Protected during launch, coatings would be exposed to space environment and thermistor measurements of erosion, corrosion, and changes in color telemetered during anticipated year in orbit. OV1-V measured optical radiation of earth, background, and space, (afsc, RTD Release 37.66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
Dr. Eric A. Walker, president of Pennsylvania State Univ. and chairman of the National Science Board, was elected president of the National Academy of Engineering, (nae News) Dr. Vannevar Bush, Honorary Chairman of the Corporation, MIT, received the National Academy of Engineering’s first Founders’ Medal at 2nd annual nae meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Bush, former president of Carnegie Institution of Washington, director of Office of Scientific Research and Development during World War II, and naca Chairman 1939-41, was cited as "the engineer who mobilized this country’s scientific and technical resources for war and created the blueprint for the post-war cooperation of science and government.” (nae Release, 4/19/66)
North American Air Defense Command (norad)—nerve center of North American air and space defense—took formal possession of new headquarters built 1,200-1,400 ft. into the solid granite of Cheyenne Mountain, Colo., to insure survival of a retaliatory capability in the event of nuclear attack. Eleven interlinked, steel-framed, steel-sheathed, three-story buildings constituting the command post were mounted on coil springs that would protect equipment from ground shock of nearby thermonuclear blast. (Eng. Opp., 2/66, 20-28)
msfc awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $141-million, costplusincentive-fee contract to provide 30 F-l rocket engines, beginning in November 1967, and varied support services. (NASA Release 66-297)
Circular insignia of Project Apollo astronauts was displayed for first time at ksc. Capital letter "A” was in center with its crossbar formed by part of a curving track joining earth (at right) and moon (at left) of the "A.” Centered on the crossbar were three twinkling stars— symbolic of the three-astronaut crew of each Apollo mission. Earth symbol was dominated by North American continent; moon was represented in third quarter phase with dark part dominated by a man’s profile. Moon, earth, and letter "A” were displayed against dark blue background studded with stars—representing outer space. Entire design was ringed by a circle with "Apollo” at top and "nasa” at bottom. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/16/66, Al)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center held an "open house,” including movies, live demonstrations, and exhibits, (gsfc Release G-7-66)
Twenty-one Long Tank Thors were purchased from Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. by usaf for use in its programs at Vandenberg afb. Expected to succeed the present Thrust Augmented Thor (Tat), the Long Tank Thor would provide increased payload capability by enlarging the volume of Thor’s liquid propellant tanks; result would be a 20% increase in payload capability over Tat. Although its total thrust of 330,000 lbs. would be essentially the same as that for Tat, the Long Tank Thor would have a burn time of 216 sec. as compared to 146 sec. for Tat. (afsc Release 205.65)
NASA’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe, launched Dec. 16, 1965, passed near earth after 76 days of near-perfect operation in solar orbit. Probe was 84,190,800 mi. from the sun, passing 7,775,600 mi. closer than earth does, and in earth’s orbital plane on a course which would ultimately take it within 75.6 million mi. of the sun. Devised to study interplanetary space, pioneer vi had telemetered 250 million readings from its six scientific instruments covering 3,300 separate measurements and taken 2.5 million readings of 100 engineering measurements. It had also registered solar wind speed of 1,636,000 mph on Feb. 23, close to highest speed previously recorded of 1,675,000 mph by explorer xviii in earth orbit. Preliminary scientific findings would be presented to American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C., April 19-22. Pioneer project was managed by arc. (nasa Release 66-43,)
NASA-sponsored space exhibit opened in Arts and Industries Building of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; exhibit would begin U.S. tour Sept. 5. (EH)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received Henry H. Arnold Gold Medal for "distinguished service to augment progress and readiness in air and space” and. for "distinguished service in defense of our country” at American Ordnance Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C. In his acceptance speech, General Schriever quoted General Arnold’s 1938 prediction: " 'Planes of the future may have telescopic wings, which, once in flight, can be foreshortened, telescoped, or pulled in . . . thus greatly accelerating the forward progress of the vessel of reduced size and decreased air resistance.’ This description . . . anticipated the principle which is employed today on the F-lll sweepwing fighter. . . .” (Text)
U.S. Ambassador-at-Large and newly appointed Ambassador to U.S.S.R. Llewellyn E. Thompson and Soviet Minister for Civil Aviation Yevgeni F.	Loginov signed agreement authorizing direct commercial airline flights between New York and Moscow at State Dept, ceremony. Service would begin in spring 1967 with weekly flights by ran American World Airways and U.S.S.R.’s Aeroflot. (Eder, NYT, 11/5/66, 1; Roberts, Wash. Post, 11/5/66, Al)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling more than $25 million to Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General Precision Equipment Corp., Litton Industries, Inc., North American Aviation, Inc., General Telephone & Electronics Corp., and Universal Match Corp. for help in developing a short-range attack missile (Sram). Boeing had received $142.3-million usaf contract Oct. 31. (WSJ, 11/8/66, 13)
A 40-ft. strip of 16-mm. film "of excellent quality” shot by Astronauts Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Charles Conrad, Jr., during Sept. 12-15 gemini xi mission was released at msc. One sequence showed Gordon straddling Agena to tie tether from gatv to gemini xi. Movie revealed Conrad had described scene accurately when he had radioed to earth: "He’s riding it like a cowboy.” In Washington, D.C., White House announced Gordon would be promoted from usn lieutenant commander to full commander. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/17/66, FI; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/17/66, A5; upi, NYT, 9/18/66, 1, 82)
North American Aviation, Inc., received a one-year, $48,229 contract from msfc to "investigate the best methods and hardware for performing manned Mars and Venus flybys with maximum use of Apollo/Saturn systems ... as a stepping stone to manned landing missions.” (msfc Release 66-187)
Study of Ufo’s had been "relegated to the bottom of the barrel” by usaf, Dr. James C. McDonald, Univ. of Arizona professor, charged at Washington, D.C., American Meteorological Society meeting. Attacking usaf’s Project Bluebook as "extremely superficial and of a low level of technical competence,” he urged that Ufo responsibility be taken away from usaf and put "into scientific hands.” The hypothesis that Ufo’s might be "extraterrestrial probes” could not be ruled out, he said. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/66, C14)
Ground-test version of S-II, North American Aviation, Inc.-huilt 2nd stage of NASA’s Saturn V booster, was static-fired at Santa Susana Field Laboratory for 354 sec. in successful test of its engine-gimballing and liquid-oxygen-cutoff systems. S-II, which developed 1-million-lbs. thrust from five Rocketdyne J-2 engines, had been previously ground-tested for 18 sec. on Dec. 29, 1965. Firing was monitored by msfc engineers. (msfc Release 66-17)
Najeeb E. Halaby, vice president of Pan American World Airways and former faa Administrator, suggested that Government build two Sst prototypes—one Boeing and one Lockheed—using same prototype power plant for both before selecting the final design. "There is no substitute for flight testing,” he said. "The whole world would benefit in the economics and safety of a flight-tested plane.” Airframe designs by Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and engine designs by General Electric Co. and Pratt & Whitney Div. had been submitted to faa Sept. 6 for evaluation. President Johnson would announce final selection in late 1966. (NYT, 11/11/66, 73)
Commenting on the tiny U.S. flag packed into surveyor i which softlanded on the moon June 2, Sydney Harris said in the San Francisco Examiner & Chronicle: "If we begin to export nationalism to the moon, we are defeating the very purpose of science and exploration.” (Harris, S.F. Examiner & Chron., 7/17/66)
Tape recorder for Advanced Vidicon Camera System on NASA’s nimbus ii meteorological satellite had failed, but camera could still transmit cloud-cover photos when within range of North American receiving stations. Launched from wtr, nimbus ii had successfully passed its final test objective of two months of continuous operation July 15. Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera system and High Resolution Infrared Radiation (Hrir) system were still operating. (nasa Release 66-243)
nasa Assistant Administrator Breene M. Kerr presented a charter to the recently formed Northern Alabama Chapter of the American Society for Public Administration. Kerr announced nasa Administrator James E. Webb had been elected to succeed Harlan Cleveland as president-elect of ASPA. Cleveland had resigned when appointed ambassador to NATO. (Marshall Star, 1/26/66, 1)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
afsc awarded 12-mo. study contracts totaling $900,000 to LockheedCalifornia Co., North American Aviation, Inc., and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to develop a high-altitude, hypersonic Scramjet-powered cruise vehicle with potential military applications, (afsc Release 188.66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with 300-lb. Princeton Univ. payload was launched from wsmr to 108-mi. (175-km.) altitude to measure ultraviolet radiation from the star Alpha Virginis, popularly known as Spica. Although rocket performed satisfactorily and payload was recovered, no stellar spectra were obtained because of arcs in the guidance voltage system which may have prevented acquisition of the star, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $12,916,000 contract for Agena rocket launch services from April 1966 to September 1967. Work would be at Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 462-66)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded three new study contracts totaling $400,000 to investigate launch vehicle needs and best methods for sending manned spacecraft on planetary flyby trips: North American Aviation, Inc., received $100,000 to study feasibility of modifying Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) for use as an orbital injection stage; Douglas Aircraft Co., $100,000 for feasibility of using Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) as part of a planetary vehicle; and TRW Systems, Inc., $200,000 for alternate mission modes for manned Mars and Venus orbital and landing missions, (msfc Release 66-223)
Juan T. Trippe, chairman and chief executive officer of Pan American World Airways, in remarks made when he received National Defense Transportation Assn. Award in Dallas, urged development of both Boeing and Lockheed supersonic transport prototypes: "Only further competition between these two manufacturers, during the three years required to build and flight-test the prototypes, can insure that the American supersonic transport ultimately selected will have the maximum attainable performance.” (Text; Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 21)
Teat pilots saved one of two U.S. $500 million XB-70 research aircraft during test flight from Edwards AFB by short circuiting two terminals with a paper clamp. When a jammed door prevented hydraulic extension of nose landing gear, Col. Joseph Cotton {usaf), co-pdot with North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test pilot, Alvin S. White, removed paper clamp from his brief case and touched it to two pin terminals in a small relay unit, following instructions radioed by NAA ground engineers. Gear extended, and although main gear burst into flame as 185-ft., delta-winged aircraft landed, naa reported damage was light. (Wash. Post, 5/3/66, Al; NYT, 5/4/66, 23)
Comprehensive report on June 8 collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft near Barstow, Calif., compiled by two investigative boards—one to determine causes, the other to examine command responsibility—was transmitted to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara by Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown. Inadvertent movement by F-104 into position "from which recovery was virtually impossible” was cited as "most probable cause” of collision; failure of Maj. Carl Cross (usaf) to eject from XB-70 before crashing was attributed to an escape system malfunction. Among report’s recommendations were: improvement of afftc’s operational procedures; modification of XB-70’s escape system; and establishment of standards for formation flights. In accompanying memorandum, Secretary Brown said that Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) , XB-70 test director; Col. James G. Scott (usaf), Edwards afb information officer; and John S. McCollom, Director of Research Vehicles for Aeronautical Systems Div., had been reprimanded and Col. Albert M. Cate (usaf) relieved of duties as Deputy for Systems Tests at afftc. (CR, 8/15/66, 18505-10; upi, NYT, 8/16/66, 15; Maffre, Wash. Post, 8/16/66, 6)
XB-70 No. 1 supersonic aircraft, piloted by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van H. Shepard and L/Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf), reached mach 2.51 and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards afb for the national sonic boom program. (XB-70 Flight Log)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun discussed U.S. space objectives and accomplishments in U.S. News & World Report interview. Immediate objective, he explained, was "to land an American on the moon in this decade and bring him back alive”; far-reaching goal was "to develop a broad, national spaceflying capability.” He described Gemini program as "a smashing 100 per cent success. . . . The purpose of Gemini was to learn the kind of things you can’t learn on the ground . . . and we did make some surprise discoveries, for which we are more than grateful. . . .” Dr. von Braun said there was a "distinct possibility” U.S. might land a man on the moon in 1968. (U.S. News, 12/12/66, 62-7)
Unidentified usaf satellite was launched from Vandenberg Afb by a Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Certificate promoting the late Dr. William Randolph Lovelace II, to rank of major general in U.S. Air Force Reserve was presented to his eldest daughter, Mrs. John Sellman, at usaf Satellite Test Annex, Sunnyvale, Calif., by M/G Ben I. Funk, afsc’s Space Systems Div. Cmdr. Dr. Lovelace, former NASA Director of Space Medicine, died with his wife and their pilot in an aircraft accident near Aspen, Colo., December 1965. (afsc Release 43.66)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., pilot Van Shepard reached mach 2.52 and 60,000-ft. altitude during national sonic boom program flight, (nasa Proj. Off.)
nas Space Science Board chairman Harry H. Hess, Princeton Univ. geology professor, received Geological Society of America’s Penrose Medal "for distinguished achievement in the geologic sciences” at society’s 79th annual meeting in San Francisco, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 11/66, 6)
Ability to induce genetically a hibernation state in man that would lessen the body’s needs by cooling could be beneficial for long space voyages, suggested Dr. R. R. Chaffee, Univ. of Missouri Space Science Research Center, in a speech before Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology meeting in Atlantic City. Dr. Chaffee told of genetic experiments in which the ability to hibernate gradually was increased over several generations in some families of Syrian hamsters and reduced in others, indicating that only a few hereditary genes might be involved in the hibernation process. (Carey, Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A3)
Air traffic control radar equipment which could automatically display the third dimension of aircraft position—altitude—would go into service in New York City metropolitan area by late 1967, according to faa. Present radar equipment employed by faa air traffic controllers provided only two-dimensional—distance and direction—picture of air traffic, (faa Release 66-6)
Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than colonization of the moon, said B. G. Anderson, senior research psychologist for General Dynamics Corp.’s Electric Boat Div. at joint aiaa-usn Marine Systems Conference in Los Angeles. The food and minerals available to man in and under the oceans were more important natural resources— and more easily retrieved—than any likely to be found on the moon or elsewhere in the solar system. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, H4) August 19: usaf launched usa’s secor vii geodetic satellite, ers-xv satellite, and an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using Atlas-Agena D booster. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
U.S.S.R. charged at 17-nation disarmament conference in Geneva that the crash of an American nuclear bomber in Spain in January was "flagrant violation of international law and of the 1963 Moscow Treaty” which banned all but underground tests. U.S.S.R. claimed flight violated the treaty because "it is common knowledge that the most important purpose of this treaty was to prevent radioactive contamination of the atmosphere, outer space, and water.... The southern coast of Spain and adjacent sea areas have been radioactively contaminated by American nuclear weapons.” U.S. chief delegate William C. Foster rejected the allegations as "false” and countercharged that U.S.S.R. was guilty of a "propaganda” maneuver. (Wash. Post, 2/18/66, A16)
usaf OV3-I satellite carrying AFCRL-instrumented 152-lb. payload was launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb with Scout booster (slv-IA). Reported orbital parameters were: apogee, 3,557 mi. (5,724 km.); perigee, 219 mi. (352 km.); period, 152 min.; inclination, 82°. Objectives were measurement of charged particle distribution in earth’s magnetic field and acquisition of radiation intensity data for comparison with afcrl satellite measurements in 1960-1963. Previously scheduled for April 19, launch had been postponed after detection of malfunction in launch vehicle’s ground support system, (oar Release; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
