usaf launched unidentified satellite employing Thor-Burner II combination from Vandenberg afb. (upi, W News, 2/8/67)
Messages from President Johnson and Japan’s Prime Minister Eisaku Sato were exchanged between Washington, D.C., and Tokyo in ceremony inaugurating commercial service via ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II—B comsat. In President Johnson’s message, delivered by Chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.), he said: “The beginning of Pacific satellite service tonight is more than a great technical feat: It is a promise of deeper understanding between the peoples of East and West. . . Ceremony also included live color television exchanges and telephone, teletype, facsimile, and photograph transmissions between the two capital cities. Intelsat II—B was launched by NASA from etr Jan. 11. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb toward polar orbit using Titan III-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 12/6/67, A24)
ERC appointed 0. Hugo Schuck Director of Office of Control Theory and Application. Schuck had been Visiting Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Stanford Univ. while on leave as Director of Research at Honeywell, Inc. In his new position Schuck would supervise research on application of control theory to complex aeronautics and space vehicle systems. He had been President of the American Automatic Control Council, heading U.S. representation in the International Federation of Automatic Control, (erc Release 67-37)
The Federal Government had involved itself in the SST program because failure to do so would have resulted in a loss of jobs and progress in U.S. aviation industry, m/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf), Director of faa sst Development, told the National Space Club. “The aircraft industry had been challenged by a powerful consortium [Concorde] of two large aircraft companies fully subsidized by two major governments. Our aircraft companies did not have the resources to meet this challenge. The government acted.” Federal participation had resulted in some major side effects, Maxwell said. “We were able to make available to all . potential sst contractors a vast amount of technological information that the government had acquired in its own huge aircraft endeavors. The flight test experiences of the B—70, the SR—71, and the F—111 were and are being provided to our sst contractors. . . . We were able . . . to contribute some 49,000 hours of sst wind tunnel tests conducted by NASA. The military . . . has logged some 300,000 hours of supersonic experience. . . . The sst program is founded on the experience and know-how from other programs sponsored and paid for by the government—and that includes the space effort. “Another benefit . . . [was] the fact that the resources of the whole aviation industry were brought into the project. Our search for the best design was, in every sense of the word, a competition. The best talent and genius of American aeronautical engineering was put to work.” (Text)
Representatives of 62 nations signed space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. Notable absentees were Communist China, Albania, and Cuba. Representatives of France said they would sign after studying treaty further. At White House ceremony, attended by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, and U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur Goldberg, President Johnson described treaty as the “first firm step toward keeping outer space free forever from the implements of war” and said it would assure that American and Soviet astronauts “will meet someday on the moon as brothers and not as warriors.” Treaty, which limited military activities in space, had been agreed upon by U.S. and U.S.S.R. Dec. 8, 1966, and unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 1/28/67, 1; Frankel, NYT, 1/28/67, 1)
Entire universe might be immersed in a sea of tiny particles known as neutrinos whose presence had thus far eluded observation, Dr. William A. Fowler of Cal Tech told American Physical Society meeting in New York. His theory sought to explain absence of helium in the spectra of certain older stars within the framework of the “big bang” theory of the universe. If -the exploding fireball from which the universe was formed had been packed with neutrinos, these particles would have interacted with neutrons to produce a cloud of protons and electrons, Dr. Fowler said. Latter would then have combined to form hydrogen atoms which would have stringently limited amount of helium formed. “Neutrino astronomy is just getting started,” he said, “but it might ultimately verify or deny presence of the hypothetical neutrino sea.” (Sullivan, NYT, 2/2/67,25)
NASA announced that 2nd stage of the first Saturn V booster would be dismantled at ksc to check for any “hairline” cracks. Decision was made after similar cracks had been found in an identical stage of the vehicle at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Seal Beach, Calif., plant. Additional checks were not expected to delay first Saturn V flight—an unmanned mission scheduled for mid-August—by “more than a week or so.” (NASA Release 67—132)
U.S.S.R. preferred “to wait for technical reasons” until its 11-62 aircraft was ready and thus was postponing first direct Moscow-New York flights until “later this year,” U.S. State Dept, announced. Commercial service by Aeroflot and Pan American World Airways had been scheduled to begin in late spring under Nov. 4, 1966, agreement. (AP, NYT, 6/14/67, 47)
President of Aerospace Industries Assn. Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., testifying before Senate Special Subcommittee on Scientific Manpower Utilization, urged that the systems approach—“an extremely high degree of capability to evaluate, plan and do certain complex and difficult things”—be applied beyond the national defense and space effort to “problems connected with improving the quality of American life. . . . Many of these problems, such as air pollution and water pollution control, relief of traffic congestion, provision of adequate food supply, school systems, housing, and crime control are already fully identified and very much on the front burner of public concern.” Harr pointed out the need for experimentation in the application of the systems approach to gain breadth of experience and emphasized that efforts should be aimed at regional, state, and municipal levels. “It remains for us as a nation to find the various political formulae for its application wherever needed. Whatever the cost it will be far cheaper to solve these problems than not to. . . .” (Testimony)
nae announced establishment of an Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board to advise nasa and other Federal agencies. Board would operate under contract with nasa that estimated expenditures of $186,500 during first year of operation. Chairman was Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie Institute of Technology. Col. Robert J. Burger, Executive Secretary of Scientific Advisory Board, usaf Hq., would become Executive Director Aug. 1, following his retirement from usaf. Board’s first meeting would be held in Washington, D.C., in mid-July, (nae Release)
Charges that nasa’s Apollo program had serious deficiencies were reviewed by William Hines in series of articles in Washington Evening Star. A 55-page report submitted to nasa three days before Jan. 27 flash fire by Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., inspector at ksc Apollo warehouse, charged that improper parts had been installed in Apollo I spacecraft. Careless and unorthodox warehousing practices had caused many parts and materials intended for spacecraft use to lose their identity, Baron told Hines in an interview. “As a result there was probably a bundle of stuff [in Apollo] that they don’t have any idea what ... it is at all.” Baron also charged that on at least one occasion, naa had installed a substandard part with deliberate subterfuge, without the knowledge of nasa. Truth about the part could easily be concealed because nasa had no quality-control men of its own in receiving warehouse, Baron said. He was particularly critical of deviation from test procedures: “When you deviate on your small components, and you deviate on all of them, and you put these in one system and you run a systems test and you deviate again, you’ve ended up with a system that really isn’t worthwhile.” James Parker, former nasa quality control inspector at ksc, told Hines that nasa quality control supervision on Apollo contractors’ work was “spotty” and said he had periodically cited instances of waste and improper expenditures in reports to his ksc superiors. (Hines, W Star, 3/15/67, Al, A6; 3/19/67, A7; 3/23/67,1, A6; 3/26/67, A3)
Twenty-sixth meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee (icsc)—17-member governing body of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat)—accepted invitation of Japan to meet in Tokyo, May 18-23. ComSatCorp, representing U.S. in intelsat and acting as its manager, announced that international participation had expanded from 13 countries in 1964 (when interim agreements were opened for signature) to 56 countries that now account for more than 95% of world’s commercial communications. Tokyo meeting would be first to be held in Asia, and was second time icsc had convened away from headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., Paris having been site of meeting in July 1965.
Washington Evening Star columnist Richard Wilson compared “cloud of suspicion over large undertakings” in both dod and NASA programs: “An identical parallel is now disclosed between the award of the multi-billion dollar TFX fighter-bomber contract and the award of the very large contract for the Apollo capsule. In both instances the recommendation of the experts was rejected and a handful of public officials chose the contractor they favored.... In both instances many other facts and expert opinions were suppressed. “Contrary to the findings of expert boards and committees and of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the TFX contract was awarded to a company with good political connections which was temporarily in financial trouble. Contrary to the findings of a group of 200 space experts, the Apollo contract was awarded to North American Aviation, strongly represented in Washington’s political life, instead of to the Martin Company. “Congress and the public need to know how these huge undertakings have been handled because there will be many more of them in the future.” (Wilson, W Star, 5/15/67)
usaf launched an experimental reentry vehicle by Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg afb as part of Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems (abres) program. {Aero Tech, 1/1/68, 13)
Newsweek reported that Soviet diplomats in Washington, D.C., admitted to East European colleagues that Soyuz I mission had been launched one week early in an attempt to offset the impact of Svetlana Alliluyeva’s press conference. Mrs. Alliluyeva, daughter of the late Joseph Stalin, defected to the U.S. in April. U.S.S.R. reportedly denied, however, that rescheduling had any effect on the April 24 crash-landing which resulted in Cosmonaut Komarov’s death. (Newsweek, 5/8/67)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried American Science and Engineering experiment to 112-mi (179km) altitude to measure neutron flux in vicinity of earth using directional neutron detector. Once proven, detector was planned for use in OGO-E program. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, in testimony before Senate Commerce Committee and Committee on Public Works’ Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution, recommended against direct Federal support of an electric car “at this time.” He urged instead a program to reward the “best designs of low-pollutant vehicles by basing Government purchase on performance competition. ... If electric vehicles can compete successfully ... a market could be made available on which production facilities and schedules could be based. . . .” (Testimony, 9, 11) Arthur C. Clarke, author and past president of British Interplanetary Society, chided critics of space program expenditures because “ ‘there is so much to do on earth.’ . . . There was plenty to do in Europe when Columbus left—there’s still plenty to do there. But the opening up of the new world did more to revive the stagnant European culture and economy than an internal action could possibly have done. “. . . I welcome the so-called space race, despite the multiplication of cost and human effort that it involves. If we weren’t racing, we wouldn’t be moving quickly enough. . . .” (Text) Mariner spacecraft would be increasingly useful in returning scientific data from the planets, JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering predicted. He noted launch opportunities during 1970’s in which Mariner-type spacecraft could be flown to more than one planet in series of gravity-assist missions and said 1970-6 period offered several favorable opportunities for closeup study of the comets by Mariner-type spacecraft carrying up to 150 lbs of scientific instruments. (Text) GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark, discussing possible first mission configuration for a Galactic Jupiter probe, said an initial flight could probably be launched during a 20-day launch window centered on first week of March 1972. Planetary encounter would occur between 17 and 20 mos after launch. (Text) Sterilization of lander and surface laboratory constituted “the most difficult technological task” of NASA’s Voyager program to explore Mars and Venus with automated spacecraft during 1970’s, Edgar M. Cort-right, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the meeting. The most difficult scientific task vas developing an effective integrated set of biological experiments. (Text) Exploration of the planets would contribute to, not detract from, man’s ability to meet problems on earth, Dr. Charles Sheldon II, Library of Congress, suggested. “Also one has the right to hope that even if elements of past history repeat in new forms, mankind with a shrinking world and shrinking solar system, and with a greater awareness of his place within the scheme of things will divert his restless energies and struggles to overcoming the space frontiers rather than wasting his talents and his treasures in fratricidal war. . . .” (Text) U.S. had achieved world leadership in the technology of space exploration, but that leadership was relative and by no means conclusive, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) asserted. “The challenge is no less great now than it was in 1957 when Sputnik I jolted us out of the narcosis of complacency. To our peril, we cannot allow the transient pressures and strains of American life to vitiate our determination to maintain that leadership. At the same time we cannot ignore or overlook any opportunity to reach a rapport and an understanding with Russia that will be of material assistance in making the exploration of space for peaceful purposes truly a monumental achievement of all mankind.” (Text) March 15: NASA and West Germany’s Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) signed Memorandum of Understanding for study of electric fields in the upper atmosphere. NASA would furnish five Nike-Apache sounding rockets for launch from esro facilities at Kiruna, Sweden, beginning in April. Rockets would release barium clouds, particularly in the auroras, to be observed from the ground, bmwf would provide chemical payloads and ground observation equipment and would conduct launchings in cooperation with esro and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) . Both NASA and bmwf would bear cost of their respective responsibilities. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-57)
U.S. must “answer the post-Apollo question . . . very soon,” Douglas Aircraft Co. Vice President and General Manager J. P. Rogan told aiaa/aas Space Forum in Washington, D.C. He suggested that U.S. develop five “building blocks” which would maintain options for any future course of action chosen: (1) long-duration orbital experience; (2) reusable spacecraft; (3) reusable launch vehicles; (4) nuclear-powered stages; and (5) improved secondary power systems. (Text)
William Littlewood, a former vice president of American Airlines and developer of the DC-3 aircraft, died at age 69. Recipient of numerous awards—including Wright Brothers Medal, Flight Safety Foundation Medal, and Guggenheim Medal—Littlewood had been a member of naca, Flight Safety Foundation, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory board of directors, U.K. Royal Aeronautical Society, and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute. (NYT, 12/5/67, 45; W Star, 12/5/67, B4)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb Using a Thor-Agena D booster. (Aero Tech, 12/18/67,10)
The 64th anniversary of first powered flights by Orville and Wilbur Wright from Kitty Hawk, N.C. Proclamation issued by President Johnson to commemorate their achievements cited “their inventive genius [which] revolutionized transportation, and gave rise to great new industries that have strengthened America’s defense and economy.” Igor I. Sikorsky, consulting engineer at United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA awarded 28 12-mo, $2,400 predoctoral training grants to Univ. of Pittsburgh for public administration and to Georgia Institute of Technology, Univ. of Kansas, Cornell Univ., Purdue Univ., and Stanford Univ. for engineering design, (nasa Special Releases)
Two scientists, speaking before American Physical Society meeting in New York City, discussed earth’s magnetosphere and plasma properties of solar wind. Iowa Univ.’s Director of Physics and Astronomy Depts. Dr. James A. Van Allen believed that particles—protons and electrons— penetrated magnetosphere to populate the outer radiation belt, indicating existence of a peculiar dynamo effect. Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientist Dr. A. J. Hundhausen reported Vela bomb-detection satellites observed peculiar solar wind properties—a motion reflecting fluid and electrical characteristics. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/67,21)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
France’s first variable-sweep-wing jet aircraft, the Mirage G, flew 1,500 mph in public debut at Istres, France, military airport. Dassault-built aircraft was world’s fourth variable-sweep-wing model and first built in Western Europe; others were American F—111, and Soviet Sukhoi and Mikoyan. {W Post, 12/21/67, A31)
NASA announced selection of 11 civilian scientist-astronauts: Dr. Joseph P. Allen, 30, a physicist research associate at the Univ. of Washington; Dr. Philip K. Chapman, 32, a naturalized citizen horn in Australia and staff physicist at mit’s Experimental Astronomy Laboratory; Dr. Anthony W. England, 25, a graduate fellow in geophysics at MIT and the youngest man ever to be named an astronaut; Dr. Karl G. Henize, 40, an astronomy professor at Northwestern Univ. and experimenter in the Gemini program; Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, 28, who would report for duty in one year after completing his medical internship at Baylor College of Medicine; Dr. William B. Lenoir, 28, an assistant professor of electrical engineering at mit; Dr. John A. Llewellyn, 34, a naturalized citizen born in Wales and associate professor in chemistry at Florida State Univ.; Dr. Franklin S. Musgrave, 31, a post-doctoral fellow at Univ. of Kentucky with a doctorate in medicine from Columbia Univ., a Ph. D. in physiology from Univ. of Kentucky, and four other college degrees; Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, 27, who held a Ph. D. in astronomy and was in the NASA trainee program at Univ. of California Dept, of Astronomy’s Space Sciences Laboratory; Dr. Robert A. Parker, 30, assistant professor of astronomy at Univ. of Wisconsin; and Dr. William E. Thornton, 38, who recently completed two-year tour of duty with Brooks AFB Aerospace Medical Div. The new astronauts, except Dr. Holmquest, would report for duty at MCS Sept. 18. After two weeks orientation, they would begin “ground school” training, which would include orbital mechanics, astronomy, computers, spacecraft orientation, general mathematics and physics refresher courses, and field trips for contractor facility orientation. In March they would start Air Force flight training to become qualified jet pilots. The new group, which increased number of NASA astronauts to 56, was sixth class to be selected and second to be chosen specifically for scientific education. They were selected from a group of 69 nominees submitted to NASA in March by nas after evaluating 923 applications. (NASA Release 67—211; msc Roundup, 8/18/67,1-3)
The aerospace industry had a special responsibility to try to respond to the critical challenges posed by the Vietnam war and the urban riots, Robert Hotz suggested in Aviation Week. “Perhaps the aerospace industry has been so much absorbed in its traditional task of providing defense against external enemies that it has never given much thought to the contributions it can make to strengthen this nation internally. We submit that the events of this summer should stimulate the industry to take a long hard look in re-evaluating its role on the American scene and to make a bolder and more imaginative bid to offer its services to meet the new challenges of our times....” (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/31/67,11)
Informed sources said U.S.S.R. had resumed sending meteorological data to U.S. from an orbiting satellite following a four-month pause, AP reported. Sent over a special teletype “cold line” established in 1964 between Moscow and Washington, D.C., for exchange of weather information, data were apparently transmitted from Cosmos CXLIV, launched Feb. 28. National Environmental Satellite Center later confirmed that it was receiving data from Cosmos CXLIV. (AP, NYT, 3/5/67, 31; AP, B Sun, 3/9/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB employing a Thor-Burner II booster, (upi, P EB, 10/11/67, 2; Pres Rep 1967)
Vladimir Komarov was twelfth Soviet cosmonaut to die in a spaceflight accident, Julius Epstein, a Stanford Univ. professor, told upi. He claimed he had conclusive evidence including the names of Soviet cosmonauts who had supposedly died on space missions. Epstein said U.S. policy of not disclosing Soviet space disasters that U.S.S.R. does not publicize was based on the State Department’s desire “not to embarrass the Russians.” (upi, P Inq,	1) During April: The U.S. press commented on the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. New York Times: “Men have risked their lives in pioneering since history began—explorers, mountain climbers, the first aviators who conquered the globe’s blanket of air, and now the cosmonauts who enter the ‘infinite spaces.’ That much has to be accepted—but how much? It seems clear that the three Americans who died in the oxygen fire at Cape Kennedy were victims of insufficient care, slipshod work and haste. There is no way of knowing whether similar factors led to the death of Komarov yesterday; but it is a fact that the Russians are aiming at time schedules, hoping to beat the United States to the moon, trying to meet special dates connected with the fiftieth anniversary of their Revolution. The United States still insists on trying to reach the moon by 1970. “Both nations are duplicating costly and dangerous work. Thus good and brave men die unnecessarily, vast sums are wasted, and without doubt the progress that humanity could make through cooperation in the thrilling quest for knowledge of the universe is being hampered by pride, prestige and the nebulous possibility of strategic gain.” (NYT, 4/25/67,40) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin• “. . . hard on the heels of a test disaster that took the lives of three U.S. Apollo astronauts, tragedy has also struck the Russian space program with the crash of a new giant spacecraft and the death of its pilot, Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov. . . . “Had the Russians succeeded in mounting a new space spectacular at this time, it is possible that some of the sobering impact of the Apollo on this country would have been dissipated. Although there have been repeated disclaimers of a space ‘race,’ the sight of the Soviet Union again forging ahead would surely have fanned anew American competitive instincts. Surely the death of brave men on both sides will reemphasize for both the element of human fallibility and the need for offsetting it with infinite pains and caution in space exploration.” (P EB, 4/25/67) Technology Week: “The Soviet tragedy, by emphasizing the hazards of space flight, has perhaps eased some of the pressure of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and North American Aviation. There is more awareness now that the exploration of space will not be a series of glittering successes, one after another. There are dangers; there will be further tragedies, other brave men to mourn. While bringing home the care which must always be taken, the Soviet accident also makes it clear that in programs of this magnitude humans are not always infallible. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/1/67, 50) Aviation Week and Space Technology: “It is fortunate that the Apollo and Soyuz tragedies came this far downstream in the history of manned space flight. If they had occurred in the initial phases of Vostok or Mercury, the hue and cry of technical timidity in both countries might have killed the manned space flight programs before they had a chance to demonstrate their technical feasibility. Viewed against the perspective of Vostok, Mercury, Voskhod and Gemini and more than 2,000 hr of successful space flight logged by crews of both nations, the recent tragedies spotlight development problems but do not raise any fundamental doubts about man’s ability to reach the moon. . . .” (Hotz, Av Wk, 5/1/67,11)
ats Hydrolic Communications Experiment system, designed to report river height and rainfall measurements automatically via satellite was the object of a cooperative program by the Weather Bureau’s Office of Hydrology and NASA, ESSA announced. The synchronous satellite, Ats I, would be the communications link between automatic measurement devices at three locations in the U.S. and the Office of Hydrology in Washington, D.C. Purpose was the development of a fast, reliable, operational system by which potential flood conditions would be relayed instantly so public warnings could be issued. Sites chosen were Benton, Ark., which started transmitting data to the satellite on Aug. 1; Salem, Ore., which began operating Aug. 4; and Sacramento, Calif, (essa Release 67-68)
Rep. Theodore R. Kupferman (R-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, expressed concern about the “noise pollution problem” [see Feb. 1]. He quoted from a speech which he had presented on Sept. 12 to a luncheon meeting of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, held in Washington, D.C.: “It is possible to have noise control and industrial development without penalty to each other. . . . The idea that noise is a necessary price of industrial and economic progress is as antiquated as is the belief that contaminated waters and a polluted atmosphere must also accompany civilization’s material advances. . . . Noise pollution, however, unlike water and air pollution, is only now beginning to receive a proper share of public attention.” (CR, 9/27/67, H12606-13)
North American Aviation, Inc., merged with Rockwell-Standard Corp. to create North American Rockwell Corp. (North American Rockwell Corp. Release 092267)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
Fifteen outstanding young scientists received Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) Postdoctoral Research Awards “for advanced study and fundamental research in the sciences.” Selections, made by a board of NAS-appointed senior scientists, were based on “demonstrated competence and creativity in original research and on the scientific merit of the proposed postdoctoral investigation.” (nas-NRC Release)
American Security Council (asc) released results of study prepared for House Armed Services Committee which concluded that U.S.S.R. would achieve a marked nuclear superiority over U.S. by 1971 unless steps were taken immediately to improve American strategic capabilities. Study, conducted by asc’s National Strategy Committee under chairmanship of former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), found that U.S. had “exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence” while U.S.S.R. “is driving hard toward a goal of overwhelming superiority. . . .” Report predicted that by 1971 U.S.S.R. would have a 30,000- to 50,000-mt nuclear delivery capability, contrasting with 6,000- to 15,000-mt for U.S., and recommended a rapid arms buildup or development of an antiballistic missile system. It warned that “by placing our sole reliance for deterrence on iCBMs, POLARIS and POSEIDON missiles, and the remaining manned bomber force . . . [U.S.] places itself in the dangerous position of having only one option left if it is faced with a Soviet ultimatum to surrender. It must either fire its offensive nuclear weapons or give up its sovereignty. An abm [Antiballistic Missile System] would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he is confronted with such a fateful decision, and it might stay the hand of an enemy at a critical moment. . . .” (Text; asc News) did not produce a nuclear reaction, (nasa Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/22/67, 11)
F-lll aircraft, under development by USAF and USN, was defended by Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown in letter to Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.), ranking member of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee: “There has never been and will never be a major development program that does not provide grist for the critic’s mill, and I say this without questioning either the sincerity of the critics or the utility of the function they perform.” He professed confidence in “comprehensive testimony” before congressional committees and asserted “the F-lll is the aircraft we want and need.” (CR, 10/9/67, S14445)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Naval Research Laboratory Superintendent of Atmosphere and Astrophysics Div., received 1967 Rockefeller Public Service Award ($10,000) from Princeton Univ. President Robert F, Goheen. Award was given in the field of science, technology, and engineering. Scientist had specialized in astrophysics from first experiments in rocket astronomy (revealing strength and pattern of uv and x-rays 50 mi above atmosphere) down to present service, which also included post of Chief Scientist of Hulburt Center for Space Research. (Lobsenz Public Relations Co. Release, 11/13/67; Science, 12/29/67, 1655)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay (usaf, Ret.) resigned after two years as President of Air Force Historical Foundation. In accordance with Gen. LeMay’s recommendation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) was unanimously elected to replace him. b/g Monro MacCloskey (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Executive Director. (AFHF Newsletter, 12/67, 1)
gsfc announced award of $3.4-million contract to American Science and Engineering, Inc., for development of x-ray experiment package for first spacecraft in Small Astronomy Satellite (sas), GSFC-managed program. Spacecraft sas—A would map sources emitting x-rays outside solar system in collecting information on position, strength, and time variation of emissions, sas program would also have satellites search for sources radiating in the gamma ray, uv, visible, and ir regions; its data should enable selection of the most interesting stellar sources for detailed study by more sophisticated spacecraft. Contract provided for three 140-lb experiment structures: structural and thermal test unit, prototype unit to serve also as flight backup, and flight unit. Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory would build spacecraft structure and systems, integrate and test total spacecraft before flight. Launch of 330-lb sas-a was planned for 1970; four-stage Scout would place sas-a in circular, equatorial orbit at 330-mi altitude, (gsfc Release G—54-67)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, North American Aviation President J. Leland Atwood denied that pressures to meet 1970 lunar-landing goal had prompted naa engineers to take shortcuts in Apollo program. Terming the Apollo 204 Review Board’s study “a good and penetrating report,” Atwood conceded that deficiencies existed in the Apollo capsule, but disputed Board’s charge that “deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship, and quality control. . . .” naa’s Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy said that although an electrical arc “probably” caused the fire, there were “various other possibilities”—such as Astronaut Gus Grissom accidentally kicking loose a wire that could have later initiated the blaze. Under stern questioning by subcommittee members, however, Dr. McCarthy admitted that this theory was pure speculation. In response to charge by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that prevailing attitude prior to fire was not “just a feeling of over-confidence” but “real negligence” by naa and NASA, Atwood reasserted that the most serious error made by naa and NASA was classification of the AS-204 test as “non-hazardous.” Questioned about the reasoning behind designing to minimize fire hazard, Dr. McCarthy pointed out that naa had concentrated on eliminating possible ignition sources while it turned out that the amount and placement of flammable materials was crucial. He characterized this as a “grave error in judgment.” Atwood assured the Subcommittee that naa and NASA had “placed great stress” on the importance of quality and workmanship: “The procedures followed and the depth of inspection which have been employed far surpass those . . . used on any other program. The fact of the accident itself makes it obvious that we must do more than we have done, that we must—guided by the finding of the board—redouble our efforts to approach perfection. Already we have gone over every other design feature of the spacecraft to identify any other area of possible failures . . . [and] we have found none.” (ATT, 4/12/67, 34; W Star, 4/12/67, A6)
usaf and usn issued statements supporting development of F-lll fighter aircraft as an all-purpose military aircraft. Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown: “The F—111A is designed to provide an all-weather strike potential superior to that of any tactical aircraft in the world today. It will fly faster, farther and carry a greater payload, nuclear or conventional, with an unexcelled capability to penetrate sophisticated enemy defenses. . . . We are confident from the level of performance already displayed in the very extensive flight tests performed on development aircraft that the operational F— 111 A will provide these vitally needed capabilities, and will meet the military requirements established for the aircraft at the inception of the program.” Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze: “. . . development of a system as complex as the F—lllB/Phoenix has produced sizeable engineering problems. I continue to be impressed with the manner in which they have been met and overcome. I have confidence that changes proposed by the Navy, approved by the Secretary of Defense and now being implemented, will make the F-111B suitable for operation from our first-line attack carriers and will give it the capabilities to perform its mission.” (CR, 4/17/67, S5300)
Static launch from motionless rocket sled of F—111 aircraft’s crew escape module at Air Force Missile Development Center (afmdc) was successful. Under severe conditions pilot might encounter in emergency before takeoff, module would allow crew to escape. (Av Wk, 10/16/67, 19)
LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson had been selected as one of 10 public servants to receive National Civil Service League’s 1967 Career Service Award for his pioneering efforts as an engineer, scientist, and administrator in advancing the science of aeronautics and space flight in the U.S. Award would be presented to Dr. Thompson April 21 at Annual Career Service Awards banquet in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 67-69)
Many building blocks of life, “and possibly life itself,” may exist on Jupiter, arc scientists Dr. Cyril S. Ponnamperuma and Fritz Woeller suggested at American Chemical Society meeting in Miami. Using electrical discharges as an energy source the scientists had simulated activity of Jupiter’s upper atmosphere and produced numerous building blocks common to life on earth. They concluded that energy transfer and resulting chemical processes in Jupiter’s turbulent atmosphere— similar to processes believed to have produced life on earth—“may produce organic chemicals such as the forerunner compounds of amino acids and of the living cell nucleus.” (NASA Release 67-79; arc Release 67-4)
Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Roman Smoluchowski told annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York that huge amounts of energy emitted by Jupiter—three times the amount it received from the sun—could be accounted for by a gradual shrinking of the planet. Dr. Smoluchowski said that Jupiter was losing gravitational energy because it was shrinking about l/50th of an inch a year, and that it was this lost energy that it was emitting. Shrinkage was occurring, he reported, because liquid and solid molecular forms of hydrogen, which comprise planet’s outermost layer, were gradually being compressed into metallic hydrogen, which comprises the next innermost layer. Rate of compression, according to Dr. Smoluchowski’s calculations, would yield just the right amount of shrinkage to account for the observed amount of energy Jupiter emits. {NYT, 1/31/67, C52)
U.S.S.R. and North Vietnam signed agreement to establish a satellite tracking station in North Vietnam and cooperate in synchronic photography of earth satellites. (Reuters, NYT, 10/19/67,9) Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, spoke on role of Congress in r&d in 1970s. Citing increasing “Government concern for the involvement of science and technology in the welfare and security of the American people,” he said it was increasingly obvious that science and technology, a prime source of many environmental problems, must be means by which they are solved. He also called for realism in minimizing influence of competition between political philosophies on implementation of scientific knowledge for human problems. “We must direct more and more attention ... to the effects of urbanization, such as the pollution of air, water and the land, the practical control of population, to offsetting the constantly decreasing supply of natural resources such as fresh water, arable land, and fuels.” (Text) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), speaking on techniques for forecasting technological advances, emphasized need for enlightened and comprehensive planning and bold, imaginative management. He described technological forecasting as one of most valuable new tools for planners and managers. Indicating that forecasting must go beyond advanced planning, he called for its use in determining long-range implications of technological progress. If a manager, keeping a program open to possible advances in technology, chose improved performance, then he could be assured that when his truly advanced item entered the market or the military inventory, it would be effective for the maximum number of years. (Av Wk, 12/4/67,21) All scientific instruments and spacecraft subsystems performed properly during encounter sequence, as they had throughout flight. Sequence of 15 significant events during encounter, occultation, closest approach, exit occultation, and return to cruise mode, had begun at 10:49 pm edt Oct. 18 and had ended at 3:55 am edt Oct. 23. Full recorded account of experiments performed by Mariner V—first and second playbacks— exhibited clear and steady signals, jpl scientists obtained meaningful scientific data from all of spacecraft’s experiments. Results of experiments included: solar plasma probe and magnetometer showed existence of solar wind/Venus interaction; trapped radiation found no energetic particles or radiation belts, and found magnetic moment less than 1% of earth’s; S-band occultation estimated carbon dioxide and found ionospheric observations on daytime side indicated electron density; dual-frequency radio propagation provided data on Venus mass as 81.50% of earth’s mass, and astronomical unit determination agreed with radar computations; and ultraviolet photometer found hydrogen corona comparable with that of earth, detected no oxygen, and found night airglow to be very faint ultraviolet emission detected at dark limb of planet—probably result of chemical reactions, particle bombardment of electrical discharge. Spacecraft’s mission also was to accumulate data on interplanetary environment during period of increased solar activity. After return to cruise mode, Mariner V would resume report on interplanetary space weather. By end of November 1967, when earth was no longer in direction of high-gain antenna pattern, communications would be terminated; however, three-month-duration communications would be possible during next five years. (NASA Proj Off; Wilford, NYT, 10/20/67, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 10/22/67, 12)
North American Aviation, Inc., and Rockwell-Standard Corp. announced agreement on proposal to merge into new corporation called North American Rockwell Corp. Proposal was subject to approval by directors and stockholders of each company. {WSJ, 3/23/67)
NASA Office—Downey at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant was disestablished and its functions transferred to MSC and MSFC, (NN1136)
Advanced solid rocket motor capable of being fired or pulsed on command had been developed at the Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory (afrpl) by Lockheed Propulsion Co. under two-year, $2-miflion r&d program. Motor had been selected to power usaf’s short-range attack missile (sram). (afrpl Release)
Vice President and Mrs. Humphrey, accompanied by nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, would visit msfc and U.S. Army Missile Command (amc) at Redstone Arsenal March 22-23, msfc and AMC announced. Trip was later postponed because Mr. Humphrey felt he should remain in Washington, D.C., to greet President Johnson on his return from a Pacific trip, (mfsc Release; Marshall Star, 3/22/67,1)
afsc Director of Communication Satellite Programs Col. M. B. Gibson (usaf), speaking to annual convention of Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C., explained management of Initial Defense Communication Satellite Program (idcsp) : “. . . [we] recognized need for the innovation of special management techniques [and] a rigorous, streamlined procedure for Government acceptance of satellites under a high production rate . . . [and] satellites which have a requirement for long-life operation in space. . . .” Gibson concluded: “The thoroughness of satellite acceptance procedures is evident from the performance of the 15 communication satellites in orbit today.” (Text; AP, W Post, 6/7/67,10)
John R. Biggs, former director of NASA Office—Downey at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant, became Deputy Executive Secretary in the Office of the Administrator, nasa Hq. (nasa Ann, 2/6/67)
NASA announced it was conducting series of conferences with Apollo prime contractors and “a number of other companies that may have resources which could be utilized to effect the most rapid feasible recovery from the setback to the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident.” Contractors with whom discussions were being held included: Aerojet-General Corp., Boeing Co., General Electric Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 67-105)
President Johnson addressed International Conference on World Crisis in Education, Williamsburg, Va.: “. . . I would like to suggest . . . these challenges: How can we use what we already know about educational television to accelerate the pace of basic education for all the children of the world? How can we use modern technology to economize on that most essential and that most needed educational resource: the good teacher?” He added: “If future historians . , . seek, a name for this period in America, I hope they will give consideration to calling it the age of education. If our children’s children want to measure what we tried to achieve, I hope they will remember one thing: The American Government in only 3 years multiplied its commitment to education and to health four times over. Congress passed more laws and committed more funds to education and health in the last 3 years than in all previous history.” (PD, 10/16/67, 1419-23)
naa announced that Igor I. Sikorsky, popularly known as the father of the helicopter, had been selected to receive the 1967 Wright 'Brothers Memorial Trophy. Presentation would be made at the Dec. 14,1967, annual memorial dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA announced results from experiment with four “Yolo Wonder” pepper plants subjected to 45 hr of weightless flight aboard Biosatellite II (Sept. 7-9) to determine effects of space environment (weightlessness and radiation). Photographs made every 10 min (268 times) in 30 orbits appeared to demonstrate plants depend on gravity for their orientation. Plant leaves had failed to grow in normal, horizontal position, and stems had not held to the vertical position, even with supporting brackets. Disoriented condition of plants was observed when they were delivered to Dr. Samuel Johnson, principal investigator, North American Rockwell Corp. Further evidence of plants’ gravity dependence came from wheat seedlings aboard Biosatellite II; Dr. Charles Lyon of Dartmouth College experimented with 75 seedlings which, grown from seed in weightlessness, had roots curving upward toward seedling shoots and out to the side, (nasa Release 67—279)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was flown by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van Shepard to mach 1.41 and 35,000-ft altitude to obtain data on stability and control maneuvers. (nasa Proj Off)
United Air Lines President George E. Keck, in a speech before International Aviation Club in Washington, D.C., echoed similar pleas by executives of Pan Am and TWA in calling for “expeditious £ut orderly” advancement of U.S. sst program. Although sst “is a pretty real one on the drawing boards,” Keck said there were “certainly some important decisions and actions that have to be taken here to make it a reality.” Among these, determination of a “sound, reasonable” financing plan was of paramount importance. (NYT, 1/22/67,50)
To clarify apparently conflicting statements presented during Congressional testimony, NASA Administrator James E. Webb issued statement regarding selection of North American Aviation, Inc., as prime Apollo spacecraft contractor. In separate appearances before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Webb had indicated (1) that NAA was the unanimous choice and (2) that Martin Co. had been recommended by the nasa Source Evaluation Board in 1961. Webb explained: “Dr. Robert Gilruth, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden . . . were unanimous in their judgment that of the five companies submitting proposals . . . [naa] offered the greatest experience in developing high-performance manned flight systems and the lowest cost. “In the selection . . . the work of the Source Evaluation Board was not rejected or discarded. It was used as the basis for a more extensive and detailed examination of all pertinent factors . . . necessary to determine whether the facts then available formed an adequate basis for our selection of a contractor. We decided in the affirmative and then proceeded to select the contractor the facts indicated offered the most to the government. ” (NASA Release 67-122)
Safety of combat air crews in Southeast Asia would be greatly improved by application of a new material (polyurethane foam) first used on the Indianapolis speedway, asfc’s engineers had successfully adapted the foam, which would be installed in the fuel tanks of combat aircraft in Vietnam. Under an Air Force contract, the Monsanto Research Corp., Dayton, Ohio, confirmed compatibility of the foam with military aircraft fuels. It would virtually prevent explosion in a direct hit on the fuel tank by machine gun tracer bullets or other incendiaries and would suppress slosh in the fuel tanks during flight, (afsc Release 158.67)
Sun’s illumination of a missile’s shock wave had caused strange aerial phenomenon seen throughout southwestern U.S. Jan. 17, usaf officials at Vandenberg afb reported. (AP, NYT, 1/19/67)
A U—2 photographic aircraft was flown at Edwards afb to test missile system that would intercept and then incapacitate enemy satellites, George Wilson reported in Washington Post. “The idea is to equip the United States with a missile or spacecraft that could blind reconnaissance satellites in time of war or national emergency. “There is no intention now of ending the gentlemen’s agreement under which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union spy on each other by satellite. “But there may come a day, Air Force leaders say, when the U.S. will want to hide the movements of its bombers and missiles. . . .” (Wilson, W Post, 7/27/67,17)
United Aircraft Corp. turbotrain, powered by gas turbine engine similar to those used in jet aircraft, reached 170 mph during test run in New Jersey, setting new speed record for passenger train in U.S. Train, designed for future passenger service between Boston and New York City, would be operated by New Haven Railroad under DOT contract. (W Post, 12/21/67, A7)
m/g Alvin R. Luedecke (usaf, Ret.), Deputy Director of JPL, resigned He had come to JPL on Aug. 1, 1964, after five years as general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission and 25 years as an Air Force officer. (JPL Lab-Oratory, Sept. 67)
l/g James H. Doolittle (AFRes., Ret.) received the Sixth Annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award at Air Force Academy ceremonies in Denver. An aviation pioneer and Medal of Honor holder, General Doolittle was cited for making “outstanding contributions to the national defense and security . . . [and giving] a lifetime of leadership to military and civil aviation.” (Denver Post, 5/14/67, 32)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb presented the Distinguished Service Medal—nasa’s highest award—to former nasa General Counsel Walter D.	Sohier in special Washington, D.C., ceremony. Sohier was cited especially for his efforts on the space law treaty, patent policy, and nasa-university-industry relations, (nasa Release 67-39)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
Dr. Marshall L. Rosenbluth, Univ. of California at San Diego, was selected to receive Princeton Univ. Institute for Advanced Study’s $5,000 Albert Einstein Award for 1967 for his “outstanding contributions in the area of plasma physics.” Selection of Dr. Rosenbluth, who helped develop the hydrogen bomb, was announced by Dr. Carl Kaysen, Director of the Institute. (AP, W Post, 3/14/67, A9)
Designs of both American SST and Anglo-French Concorde would have to be modified to meet standards proposed by their potential customers, International Air Transport Assn, (lata) Director General Knut Ham-marskjold asserted. He advised that aircraft be modified to meet all of the organization’s requirements, even if it meant postponing delivery date. The Wall Street Journal later commented: “Since iata’s members include most of the world’s major airlines . . . Mr. Hammarskjold’s words plainly deserve attention. . . . [He] appears to have shot a large hole in the SST supporters’ main argument for haste. It is that the British and French are already well ahead of the U.S. . . . Calm consideration would appear even more mandatory for the Government, saddled as it is with a war and a budget whose income side long ago since has lost touch with outgo. ... A late blooming success is far better than a dismal early failure.” (upi, NYT, 1/11/67, 73; WSJ, 1/17/67, 18)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. a $1.8-billion fixed-price-incentive contract for production of 493 F-lll aircraft: 331 F-lllAs for usaf; 64 F-lll strategic bombers for sac; 24 F-lllBs for usn; 24 F-lllCs for Royal Australian Air Force; and 50 F-lllKs for British Royal Air Force. Contract included only costs of basic airframes and minor electronic equipment; additional costs for engines, major electronic equipment, and modifications had not yet been fully determined and were not included. There was speculation that congressional opposition to adaptation of F—111 (formerly tfx) as an all-purpose military aircraft—heightened by large increases in estimated costs and by January and April crashes of usaf and usn test models—might delay appropriation of production funds, (dod Release 427-67; Wilson, W Post, 5/11/ 67, Hll; Sheehan, NYT, 5/11/67,1)
U.S. should move its technology beyond the “building blocks” to break out of the “mental strait] acket which is confining the Nation to a stalemate of defeatism,” recommended a policy statement adopted by Air Force Assn., at meeting in San Francisco. Asserting that U.S.S.R. was “far ahead” of U.S. in a critical area of nuclear knowledge, afa called for a “sweeping re-examination of national strategy” to assess the impact of technology “on the world balance of power.” In a specific resolution, afa urged a full-scale U.S. SST program, claiming that U.S.S.R. had been secretly flying a supersonic aircraft prototype for “more than one year.” (Davies, NYT, 3/16/67,10; WPost, 3/17/67, A4) Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader at aec’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, said U.S. reluctance to deploy an antiballistic missile system reflected a new balance-of-power concept which was characterized by weapons judged on their contributions to world stability rather than their superiority. This philosophy was dangerous because it stifled innovation and placed the Nation continually on the defensive. “Whether we use our full technological advantage should be determined solely on whether it is to our advantage politically, militarily and economically as far as our adversary is concerned. I believe it has been a mistake to allow the fleeting opinions of every nation that has a vote in the U.N. to influence materially our actions. The inhibition of the use of our full technological advantage has hurt our technological future as well as prolonging whatever confrontation is at hand. The basis of advanced technology is innovation, and nothing is more stifling to innovation than seeing one’s product not used or ruled out of consideration on flimsy premises involving public or world opinion. . . .” (Av Wk, 3/27/67, n) . ..	.
usaf successfully launched experimental aerodynamically shaped warhead from Vandenberg afb aboard an Atlas icbm to test reentry characteristics. (AP, St. Louis PD, 2/14/67,17)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C., for “leadership in the development and establishment of . . . [dot] and for his long and successful career in . . . air transportation and public utilities.” (nac; Av Wk, 6/12/67, 23)
usaf launched 8 satellites by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. This solar-cell-powered, 85-lb, satellite experiment, designed for developing satellite navigation technique as easy to use as celestial navigation and more accurate, would assist pilot or navigator of ship or aircraft who could make direct, simultaneous measurements. Signal measurement from two or more satellites with known positions to determine location of ship or aircraft would make use of signal transmission times and standard navigation techniques. Experiment had been built by Naval Research Laboratory as one to be compatible with Doppler equipment for low-altitude satellites. Naval Air Systems Command had been project sponsor, (upi, W Post, 6/1/67, C4; nrl News 5/31/67)
The overall national security significance of space, in both tactical and strategic terms, were discussed by Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, in General Electric Forum,. “The Department of Defense does not view space as a mission, but rather as a place,” he said, explaining broad Air Force responsibilities and goals in space. He cited representative features of the military unmanned space programs: (1) ballistic missile warning; (2) antisatellite defense; and (3) nuclear detonation detection. (Brown, General Electric Forum, Autumn 1967)
France and Quebec would launch a joint communications satellite for relaying French television programs to Canada, upi reported. The satellite would permit programs to be relayed without depending on existing American Early Bird satellites, informed sources said, (upi, C Trib, 9/21/67)
Satellites should be used to enable land-based air traffic control centers to track constantly commercial airliners flying over oceans, urged Pan American World Airways’ chief electronic engineer Ben F. McLeod at nato’s Advisory Group for Aerospace Research and Development (agard) meeting at New York City. McLeod said that within five to 10 years traffic increases and new aircraft would demand improved air traffic control system with positions of hundreds of aircraft being sent automatically by satellites to ground stations for plotting. (NYT, 10/12/67, 50)
Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, a leading scientific pioneer in the U.S. space program, died at age 62. He collapsed, apparently of a heart attack, while attending a Washington, D.C., meeting of the nas Council, and died the next day. Credited with being the “father” of the International .Geophysical Year (igy), Dr. Berkner was the principal administrator of the U.S. part of the igy program during its operation in 1957 and 1958. From 1958-1962, he was chairman of nrc’s Space Science Board, which advised the Government on the national program of space research. For his “outstanding and pioneering leadership,” of ssb, he received NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal Oct. 7, 1966. He served as President of the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest in Dallas from I960, until 1965, when he retired because of health. He continued until recently as Chairman of the Board of Trustees, and was a member of the NASA Historical Advisory Committee. A Rear Admiral in the U.S. Navy Reserve, Dr. Berkner would be buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetery June 7. (NYT, 6/5/67, 41; W Star, 6/5/67, B5; Science, 6/9/67, 1349)
Fabrication of five S—IIs (Saturn V’s 2nd stage) would be accomplished under a contract modification awarded by NASA to North American Aviation, Inc. Purchase of the five stages would complete the S-II requirement for the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles currently approved for development as a part of the Apollo program. The first of the stages would be delivered to nasa in Feb. 1969. The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., managed the Saturn program, (nasa Release 67-244)
usaf successfully launched an Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb with Atlas-D booster. (Aero Tech, 7/17/67,13)
Atlas-F carrying unidentified payload exploded shortly after launch by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (SBD, 10/30/67,316)
Col. V. John Lyle (usaf, Ret.), former Assistant to the Comptroller of the Air Force, was made special assistant to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Plight Dr. George E. Mueller, (nasa Ann)
Washington Daily News editorial warned that U.S. eagerness to sign space law treaty—under consideration in Senate since Feb. 7—might be costly: “Since the risks of Soviet deception are so great, it seems unwise to have accepted the Russian-proposed no-inspection honor system. . . . Since there is no provision for a check on space activity, the Soviet Union could push ahead with a variety of secret military programs in space while publicly attacking the right of the U.S. to an American military defense program in space. . . . Since the U.S. is an open society, any U.S. space defense program would be known. Since the Soviet society is closed, Moscow might well be able to keep its programs secret. “The loose way in which this space treaty was written was due in part to the Administration’s eagerness to get a treaty in hand. But that looseness could lead the U.S. into a trap.” (Cromley, W News, 4/11/67, 12) Ford Foundation consultant Fred W. Friendly said he would oppose any long-range design that relied on Treasury Dept, appropriations to produce news and public affairs programming because such funds would be subject to annual review by Congress. Instead, he suggested, news and public affairs should be underwritten from private funds—preferably out of savings from a non-profit comsat system that would employ income from commercial programs to help meet educational television’s overhead. Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., chairman of Carnegie Commission on Educational Television, urged revision of the proposed legislation so that the Corporation would have continuing responsibility for program selection to ensure freedom “from the centralization and rigidity of a network system” and to protect autonomy of local stations. net President John R. White argued that the Corporation’s role should be limited to matters of “high policy” and that operational activities, including the choice of programs to be carried on a network, should he subcontracted to other entities. The Corporation, he said, would not be able to make informed decisions until the programs had been submitted for national distribution. (Gould, NYT, 4/12/67, 79 ; 4/13/67, 75; 4/14/67, 67)
Claude Witze, in Air Force and Space Digest, claimed that usaf pilots testing F—111 A were enthusiastic about the aircraft’s potential. “These . . . pilots consider the F-111A weapon system the greatest single technological jump designed for their mission since the wedding of the jet engine and modern avionics. The F-111A, they predict, will let them hit tactical targets harder, with greater accuracy, and at longer ranges than any other airplane. . . .” Accelerated F-lllA testing and training program begun at Nellis afb, Nev., in July had accumulated encouraging statistics, he said: “By September, the new wing had set an unprecedented record. During that month, the five planes flew a total of 304.1 hours, an average utilization rate of 60.8 hours per aircraft. In October, the month in which the first production model was delivered ... it was 59.7 hours per aircraft. The stated requirement for the F— 111 A is thirty hours per aircraft. The best previous records set at Nellis on other aircraft have been in the area of thirty-eight hours a month per aircraft... with systems far less complex than those of the F-lllA.” In addition, he noted, F-lllA had set “an extraordinary record for safety. Far fewer aircraft have been lost than usaf experienced in previous similar programs.” (AF/SD, 12/67,45-55; CR, 12/5/67, S1788-90)
France and U.K. did not believe Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would be forced out of the world market by U.S. SST in 1974, Sir George Edwards, chairman of an Anglo-French management organization for the Concorde, told the Washington, D.C., Aero Club. One distinct selling advantage for the Concorde was its price—about $16,000,000, compared to an estimated $40,000,000 for sst. He predicted 150 Concordes would be sold by 1975 and about 40-50 per year after that date. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/26/67)
Mayor Henry Maier of Milwaukee, addressing a conference of upi editors and publishers in San Francisco, said: “The central city cannot be saved without a reallocation of our national resources to spend as much to build decent cities for man on earth as we spend on sending a man to the moon.” (ctns, C Trib, 9/19/67)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Washington, D.C., women’s club that Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would report to icsc Feb. 2 to meet with Apollo 204 Review Board investigating Jan. 27 accident which killed three Apollo astronauts. Dr. Seamans would report Board’s preliminary findings to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), Chairman of Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said NASA’s decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft had been made after “a long series of tests and evaluations. Any change would be made only after a most careful examination of all alternatives.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., BSun, 2/2/67; W Post, 2/2/67)
usaf launched an experimental reentry vehicle by Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg afb as part of Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry Systems (abres) program. (Tech Wk, 6/19/67,15)
United Aircraft Corp. vice president and chief scientist Perry W. Pratt received the American Society of Mechanical ^Engineers’ Gas Turbine Award for “his distinguished leadership and technical contributions in the development of aircraft turbojet and turbofan engines used widely throughout the world.” (United Release)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., told the press at MSC that he did not foresee any problems in combining his new assignment as President’s Consultant on Physical Fitness [see June 6] with his duties as an astronaut. He said he would devote about one fourth of his time to the fitness program and the rest to keeping “in a state of readiness” for future space flights. “The fact that I am not spending all of my efforts on my new assignment does not mean I consider it any less important than my role in space. In fact, I can’t think of any mission more important than that of persuading the American people to keep themselves healthy and fit. These qualities are basic to everything we do. Whether we are trying to reach the moon, or merely running to catch a bus, it helps to be in good physical condition. ... A healthy population is the backbone of a strong nation.” (Text)
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
Several Latin American nations, including Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico, were interested in making extensive use of Kourou space research base, French Guiana, according to Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) sources. New equatorial range would be fully operational in 1969, with first segment handling sounding rocket firings early in 1968. Initial plans for Kourou facility had included three launch pads, but cnes was already making plans to expand the facility. One new pad would handle Scout and Thor-Able vehicles, subject to agreement with U.S. (Space Pro, 12/18/67,150)
Boeing Co. President William M. Allen received Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce’s 1967 Kitty Hawk Memorial Award for distinguished civilian achievement in aviation. Award for distinguished achievement in military aviation was presented to Air Force Academy Commandant Col. Robin Olds. (Av Wk, 12/25/67,68; Boeing pio)
Three Lewis Research Center engineers received “I-R 100” awards at National Industrial Research Week ceremonies in New York City. The “I—R 100” awards were sponsored by Industrial Research Magazine and presented in observance of National Industrial Research Week. LeRC recipients William D. Klopp, Peter L. Raffo, and Walter R. Witzke were cited for the development of tungsten rhc, the highest strength metal known at temperatures above 3,500° F. The alloy Would have eight times the tensile strength of pure tungsten at the same temperature with no sacrifice in ductility at low temperatures. At temperatures below 250°F, pure tungsten would be very brittle and alloying it to increase strength usually made it more brittle. (LeRC Release 67-60)
Interchange of ideas, technology, hardware, and personnel had helped to make progress in space possible, said b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), msfc’s Industrial Operations director, in a talk before the Tennessee Valley Chapter of the Air Force Association, at Huntsville, Ala. “Today’s space program is a joint effort of both military and civilian agencies, and there exists a cooperative give-and-take relationship in the finest sense,” he stated, (msfc Release 67-191)
Princeton Univ. astronomers were studying photos of ultraviolet spectra of Venus and Jupiter taken by a rocket-borne telescope launched from WSMR May 5 in an effort to provide additional data on Venusian atmosphere, New York Times reported. Photos, taken at 118-mi altitude, provided “50 times more detail than ever obtained before,” Dr. Donald C. Morton, director of Princeton’s rocket astronomy program, explained. Princeton astronomers would continue analyzing spectrograms to determine composition of planets’ gaseous atmospheres, and would compare findings with data transmitted by U.S.’s Mariner V and U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV spacecraft—both expected to reach Venus by late October. (NYT, 1/2/61, 21)
U.S.S.R. team to study UFO (unidentified flying object) sightings would consist of 18 scientists and Air Force officers supported by 1,000 field observers, Time reported [see Nov. 30]. Flurry of UFO sightings had been reported in recent weeks by presumably reliable Aeroflot and military pilots, who usually described them as sickle-shaped. {Time, 12/22/67,21)
usaf successfully launched Titan II icbm from Vandenberg afb toward target in the Pacific, (upi, W Post, 4/13/67, A22)
Pilot Joseph Cotton (Col., usaf) and co-pilot Van Shepard, North American Aviation, Inc., flew XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft to mach 2.57 and 61,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards AFB for national sonic boom program. (NASA Proj Off)
Soviet jet transport, 11-62, carrying delegation of Soviet aviation experts who would negotiate final technical details of proposed Moscow-New York'air link with faa, landed at Dulles International Airport after 11-hr flight from Moscow to Washington. As a result of increasing complaints about jet noise and faa’s lack of authority to regulate it, Port Authority of New York had insisted that noise measurement tests be made on 11-62 at Dulles before initiation of direct Moscow-to-New York flights. New York Port Authority had done pioneering work on noise problem. Operational safety of 11-62 and alternate landing sites at Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, and Boston had already been approved by faa for joint use by Pan American Airways and Aeroflot, official Soviet airline. (Hoffman, W Post, 11/21/67, A4; B Sun, 11/21/67, A8)
U.S. Government would receive in royalties more than the estimated $1.3 billion it was contributing to sst development, ata President Stuart G. Tipton told the Aero Club of Washington (D.C.): “The government ' investment is to be paid back with the 300th delivery. The manufacturer will thus pay royalties of 4.3 to 6.7 million dollars for each aircraft delivered. . . . Since these royalties are to continue for a 15-year period, they will go on well beyond the 300th delivery, and this phase of royalty payment will produce a return on the government investment comparable to levels normally received by industry.” (Text)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. presented to Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum historic liquid-propellant rocket engines made during World War II. Gifts included primitive rocket test stand known as ars Test Stand No. 2, used by members of original American Rocket Society (now aiaa) , on Dec. 10, 1938, to test first U.S. successful, fully regeneratively cooled rocket engine. Other Thiokol gifts included World War II liquid-propellant jet assist takeoff (jato) units for aircraft, and engines for Lark surface-to-air missile, usaf MX-774 missile, and Viking research rocket. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
U.S. should develop a 5,000-mph commercial aircraft and a 8,000-mph bomber, Dr. Antonio Ferri, Director of New York Univ.’s Guggenheim Aerospace Laboratories, told aiaa luncheon meeting in Washington, D.C. “Civilization has grown with the speed of moving around. The history of civilization shows that gradually you want to get in contact with people further away.” Dr. Ferri noted that jet aircraft had made Europe accessible, and the next generation of aircraft would bring other parts of the world within equally easy reach. He concluded that the technology and the “tremendous opportunities” of hypersonic aircraft were near at hand, but that necessary decisions and funds were still lacking. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/67,16)
Recent cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget were due in part to lack of Congressional understanding of the U.S. space program, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told aiaa’s Joint Propulsion Conference in Washington, D.C. “Many members of the Congress understand” certain areas of the space program, but “not enough of our legislators seem to have sufficient comprehension of the vast benefits flowing from space activities. And if many members of Congress and very many of their constituents don’t know about these benefits, then they may well feel j ustified in cutting back on the amount of money to be spent. . . .” To help increase understanding, Dr. Welsh recommended that the space industry avoid “confining their advertising to superlatives” about prod. ucts and communicate the overall benefits of the space program. (Text)
U.S. officials were studying possibility of live television coverage via Intelsat II-C comsat of Latin American summit conference in Punta del Este, Uruguay, April 12—14, which President Johnson was scheduled to attend, Benjamin Welles reported in New York Times. Live coverage would require air-lifting a portable itt ground station to conference site because necessary ground stations for picking up satellite signals did not yet exist in Latin America. Use of ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C, launched by NASA March 22, would not only enhance interest in meeting, officials said, but would also dramatize U.S. technological and political support for Latin America. (Welles, AFr, 3/24/67)
President Lyndon B. Johnson presents the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy to two NASA astronauts and a veteran test pilot in the White House Rose Garden. From the left are. North .American Aviation XB^70 test pilot Alvin S. White, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and the President. {Nov, 11—15, 1966) during which Aldrin spent 5 hrs 28 min outside spacecraft. White was cited for mach 3 XB-70 flights, British aviatrix Sheila Scott, scheduled to receive award for her record-setting solo flight around the world in a single engine aircraft, was unable to attend ceremony. {PD, 10/16/67, 1436-7; AP, NYT, 10/14/67, 7) *	Nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 37-mi (59-km) altitude, fourth in nots series to measure incident polar UV irradiance in direct support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Apollo Command Module (cm) No. 009, launched on a ballistic mission Feb. 25, 1966, and successfully recovered, would be modified by North American Rockwell Corp. and reused in series of dry-land impact tests at Msc. It was first of four previously used CMS to undergo the tests, (nar Release NL-15)	.
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd addressed Sixth Annual Editorial Conference of Magazine Publishers Assn, and American Society of Magazine Editors in Washington, D.C.: “Today, April Third, is a memorable day in the history of communication. On this day, one hundred and seven years ago, the Pony Express began. . . . The Pony Express lasted only eighteen months. It was superseded by the transcontinental telegraph. And probably the managers of the Pony Express knew all along that that was going to happen. But they had customers who couldn’t wait, who were willing to pay for a faster mail service. “. . . this episode illustrates the driving impatience of the American people for progress. . . . We’re doing the same thing today in the aerospace industry. We’re building the sst. We already have a grasp of the technology that will supersede the sst, fifteen or twenty years from now. But Americans are not the kind of people.who’ll passively wait for new developments. . . . They’re engaged now in pushing jet aviation technology to its practical limits.” ( Text)
An Army Pershing ballistic missile fired from Utah by U.S. troops overshot the White Sands Missile Range and smashed into the Mexican countryside. The Mexican government gave permission for a U.S. helicopter to cross the Rio Grande to look for it. No injuries or property damage were reported. The test firings had been part of an annual training for West German Air Force personnel and U.S. troops based in Europe. The Utah-to-New Mexico range had been used because there was no range large enough in Europe. (W Post, 9/13/67)
Two ten-week programs for college faculty members—administered jointly by Auburn Univ., Univ. of Alabama, and msfc—opened at msfc. First program would be summer institute in space-related sciences, sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education (asee) , and would be conducted by Univ. of Alabama. (Five other summer institutes, sponsored by NASA and asee, would be conducted by NASA centers and nearby colleges at msc, GSFC, arc, LaRC, and LeRC.) Second ten-week program, administered by Auburn Univ., would be 1967 NASA Engineering Systems Design Summer Faculty Fellowship Program, (msfc Release 67-124)
The Vatican had authorized the Roman Catholic apostolic delegate in U.K. to sign the International Treaty on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, AP reported. Unanimously approved by the U.N. General Assembly Dec. 8, 1966, treaty was signed simultaneously by representatives of 62 nations Jan. 27 in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow, and was kept open for additional signatures in those capitals. (AP, P Inq, 3/12/67) March 12: Apollo program was six months behind schedule because of Jan. 27 accident, but time could be made up later, msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun told Stuttgart, West Germany, audience. In Stuttgart to receive gold Boelsche medal for scientific achievement, Dr. von Braun said: “We have in no way lost our chance to fulfill the mission given to us: the landing of a man on the moon in this decade. I admit that the time has become tight. If further snags develop, this decade may run out . . . [but] we are firmly resolved not to take any undue risks.” (AP, B Sun, 3/13/67; upi, C Trib, 3/13/67)
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
Pan American World Airways cargo jet aircraft approaching Wake Island participated in first public demonstration of a new data-link system for transmitting navigation data from aircraft to ground stations via an orbiting satellite, vhf signals beamed to NASA’s Ats I satellite by first data-link system ever installed on a commercial aircraft and relayed to Mojave Desert antenna, reached Kennedy International Airport 'by telephone to fix aircraft’s exact position. Experiment was part of a series using satellites to develop more reliable long-range communications and tracking contact with commercial aircraft on transoceanic flights. It was first test of aircraft antenna designed specially for transmitting satellite messages. Pan American officials predicted data-link system could be fully operational by late 1969 and could lead to instant automatic and continuous plotting of flights across vast ocean areas. (Wilford, NYT, 3/30/67, 53)
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller, speaking at a Washington, D.C., press conference, recommended that U.S. proceed with a ballistic missile defense system. Qualifying his opinion as “inexpert,” Dr. Teller noted there were other factors to be considered in any decision for the deployment of a missile defense system. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara opposed the antimissile system on the grounds that it would not withstand a sophisticated assault. (B Sun, 4/28/67, 7)
The Washington Post commented on the death of Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner: “In every generation there are a few men whose personal careers reflect with precision the great changes that have come over the country in their lifetime. Lloyd Viel Berkner built his first radio transmitter as a schoolboy in Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, and in 1928 he joined an expedition to the South Pole. Three decades later he emerged as one of the most effective advocates of American exploration in space. “In those years American science had become a vast interwoven fabric of academic and Federal laboratories, foundations and private corporations, civilian operations and military operations. Mr. Berkner moved in this world, which he had signally helped to create, not only as a scientist of distinction but as an organizer and manager of extraordinary force and capacity. . . (W Post, 6/5/67)
Japan Air Lines jet aircraft carrying American and Japanese scientists from San Francisco to Tokyo successfully maintained radio contact with Mojave, Calif., ground station via nasa’s Ats I satellite (nasa Proj Off; P EB, 6/8/67)
Commercial applications of a miniaturized TV aerial developed by usaf after four years of research were being explored by at least 100 electronic companies, Jack Gould reported in the New York Times. Firms believed device, originally developed for military communications, might accommodate public preference for small antennas without sacrificing picture quality. Inventor Edwin M. Turner, attached to the Air Force at Wright-Patterson afb, told the press that the “heart” of the miniaturized antenna was the use of transistors. (Gould, NYT, 8/12/67, 27)
One-inch-diameter hollow steel spheres for use in aerospace ballbearing assemblies were being tested at Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB. Hollow spheres were half as heavy and equally as strong as solid ones currently used, had longer life expectancy, and could easily be mass produced, (afsc Release 44.67)
GAO, responding to March 14 request by Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had reviewed NASA’s Apollo contract with North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), and published a “Summarization of National Aeronautics and Space Administration Management Review of North American Aviation, Inc., Activities” based on the Phillips Report. According to gao, the Phillips Report “stated that, at the start of the csm and S—II programs, key milestones were agreed upon, performance requirements were established and cost plans were developed . . . [but] as the program progressed, there were slippages in key milestone accomplishments, degradation in hardware performance, and increasing costs.” In evaluating the probability of naa’s ability to “meet future commitments, the report stated that, for both the S-II and the csm, significant technical problems still remained which had to be resolved. The review team did not find significant indication of actions underway, for the S—II, to ‘build confidence that future progress will be better than past performance.’ While some progress was indicated to improve the outlook for the csm, the report stated that ‘there is little confidence that NAA will meet its schedule and performance commitments within the funds available for this portion of the Apollo program. . . .’ ” (Text)
Dr. Alan T. Waterman, 75, physicist and for 12 years Director of National Science Foundation, died at the National Institutes of Health. During WW II, he had served on the National Defense Research Committee and in the Office of Scientific Research and Development. More recently, he had been a member of NASA’s Historical Advisory Committee. President Johnson said: “The American people mourn the passing of a foremost man of science and of human purpose, Dr. Alan T. Waterman. Our Government has lost a trusted counselor. As Chief Scientist of. the Office of Naval Research and as first Director of the National Science Foundation, he left an indelible stamp of achievement on one of the most vital areas in American life. He will be missed. But succeeding generations will be wiser for his skill and richer for the foresight that marked his long career.” {PD, 12/8/67, 1648; W Post, 12/2/67, B6)
Initial flight test of usaf’s Scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet)—forerunner of hypersonic aircraft—was partially successful. Launched by Scout booster from Vandenberg afb, vehicle accomplished primary goal by demonstrating it could separate properly from booster, but failed to perform some secondary missions. (AP, NYT, 1/14/67, 4; Tech Wk, 1/23/67,3)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued statement on Jan. 27 Apollo accident, commending “the diligence, integrity, and patent independence” of the Apollo 204 Review Board which would serve as a model for future inquiries. Noting the “admitted mood of overconfidence” exhibited by NASA and North American Aviation, he urged that a “renewal of chain successes . . . never again be permitted to encourage indulgence in such a potentially dangerous attitude. “. . . the Apollo accident may well move the date for an American landing on the moon beyond the reach of this decade. That would be regrettable. But there is nothing sacred about the goal. When set in 1961 it was a goal which was technically achievable. A target date was, and still is, essential to efficient planning and to maintaining a vigorous and competent organization. . . . The accident has taken a toll in morale and in momentum within the program . . . [but] that momentum will be regained and NASA will emerge stronger. I intend to support NASA in its requests for manpower and funds to get on with the important job.” (Text)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried Princeton Univ. payload to 109-mi (176-km) altitude on flight to determine uv spectrum of extremely hot atmosphere and interstellar matter in direction of 05 star Tau Puppis—hottest of bright stars in sky. Excellent film exposure was obtained from the spectrograph; attitude control system stabilized properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Negotiations were being conducted in Washington, D.C., to move Canada’s High Altitude Research Project (harp) from McGill Univ. to Univ. of Vermont, Jay Walz reported in the New York Times. Move was a result of Canada’s decision to cut off funding because it believed program should be self-supporting, harp, which maintained a launch site in Highwater, Quebec, near the Vermont border, used 16-in naval guns to launch payloads inexpensively into the ionosphere for scientific and meteorological experiments. Project, which received about $1.2 million annually from U.S. Army, employed 50 persons at McGill Univ., 70 at Highwater, and 60 at a launch site in Barbados, West Indies. (Walz, NYT, 8/20/67,20)
Astronaut-Aquanaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) was detached from NASA at usn’s request for assignment in Navy’s Deep Submergence Systems Project (dssp) . One of the Nation’s seven original astronauts, Carpenter became the second American to orbit the earth when he piloted Aurora 7 spacecraft on three-orbit mission May 24, 1962. Active in USN’s Man-in-the-Sea program since 1965, he set a world record in underwater work during Aug. 28-Oct. 10, 1965, Sealab II experiment when he lived 205 ft down in the Pacific for 30 consecutive days. Under dssp he was tentatively assigned as an aquanaut in Sealab III, a 60-day experiment 600 ft down in the Pacific scheduled to take place in 1968. As usn’s senior aquanaut, Carpenter’s duties would include responsibility for Sealab III ocean floor operations, experiments, and equipment and for coordination of aquanaut team training. NASA Administrator James E. Webb commented on Carpenter’s departure. “. . . we are grateful to him and the United States Navy for his services over the past eight years. During the past two years, he has demonstrated that many of the technologies, techniques, and psychophysiological factors related to space flight have direct applications to the Man-in-the-Sea program. Thus, Cdr. Carpenter becomes the first astronaut to return to his parent service in order to apply the skills, knowledge, and experience acquired during his assignment to NASA. ...” (nasa Release 67—208)
Cornell Univ. professor Hans A. Bethe, director of Los Alamos Atomic Weapons Laboratory’s theoretical physics section during development of atomic bomb and recipient of aec’s 1961 Enrico Fermi Award, was awarded the 1967 Nobel Prize in physics for proving that the sun and other stars produced energy through synthesis of helium from hydrogen. He was cited specifically for “his contributions to the theory of nuclear reaction, especially his discoveries concerning the energy production of stars.” Nobel Prize in chemistry was presented jointly to George Porter and Ronald G. W. Norrish of U.K. and Manfred Eigen of West Germany for their studies of extremely fast chemical reactions occurring at speeds of one-one-thousandth of a millionth of a second. Nobel Peace Prize was withheld for second consecutive year, (upi, W Star, 10/30/67, 1; Wiskari, NYT, 10/31/67,1)
usaf launched OVIII-6 research satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Scout booster into orbit with 275-mi (439-km) apogee, 254-mi (408km) perigee, 93-min period, and 90.6° inclination. The 219-lb satellite, designed for 256-day lifetime, carried two main experiments: mass spectrometers and ion density gauges to measure density, temperature, and composition of the upper atmosphere and its variation with latitude. (Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67; SBD, 12/5/67, 176)
Ats I (Advanced Technical Satellite) was used experimentally to relay weather photographs of current storms to the U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Hurricane Center in Miami and other hurricane watchers in the Caribbean. The satellite was launched by NASA into its synchronous orbit on Dec. 7, 1966, and was positioned over Christmas Island in the Pacific at an altitude of 22,000 miles. The satellite had been used as a testbed for advanced meteorological, communications, and satellite control systems, and also had made scientific measurements of its orbital environment. Photographs were recorded and radioed to earth by the Essa V weather satellite while passing over the storm area. The collected photographic data were then compiled as a mosaic and gridded by computers at essa before delivery to the Goddard Space Flight Center ground station at Mojave, Calif., for radio transmission to the Ats 1. The satellite then retransmitted the gridded data to earth by means of its weather fascimile (weafax) experiment. Any ground station equipped with the relatively inexpensive Automatic Picture Transmission receivers could read out the pictures. Mosaics would be transmitted daily on an experimental basis in this manner between 9 and 10 pm, edt. weafax was a joint NASA—essa experiment, (nasa Release 67-243)
Najeeb Halaby, Pan American World Airways, Inc., Vice President and former faa Administrator, praised the Johnson Administration’s “carefully calculated risk” in the development of the SST, in a speech before the Wings Club in New/York. He suggested that as a result both the Government and industry involved in producing the aircraft “are in a position to make a better decision and a better plane than . . . France, Britain, and the Soviet Union.” Halaby said aviation industry had a duty “to help the President and the Congress make the most prudent and the most temporary investment of public funds in a national interest venture.” {NYT, 1/19/67, 57)
Aquanauts diving to extremely low ocean depths should breathe almost pure hydrogen in their diving suits, Dr. R. W. Brauer of Wrightsville Marine Bio-Medical Laboratory suggested at Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology in Chicago. Dr. Brauer planned to subject himself to such an atmosphere—98% hydrogen and 2% oxygen—at a pressure equivalent to 700- or 800-ft depth within the next six months. Divers long ago passed the depth limits that were feasible with compressed air and were now approaching the probable safe limits with an atmosphere in which helium was the major ingredient, Dr. Brauer said. Yet oil drilling, prospecting operations, and other undersea activities were pushing divers to further depths which required new types of atmosphere and, possibly, drugs to modify the narcotic effects produced by the high pressure air. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/23/67, 60)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
Continuing shortage of physicists was threatening the Nation’s scientific progress, American Institute of Physics warned in its biennial report on physics manpower. Study, prepared under an NSF grant, said U.S. colleges and universities were not producing enough graduates to meet growing demand of education, research, and industry. In recent years— during a time of rapid growth in total college enrollment—there had been a continuing decline in the number of physics majors and a leveling off of physics baccalaureate degrees awarded. (NYT, 1/29/67, 1)
Plumbing leaks in the first model of LEM had delayed flight testing at Cape Kennedy. Portions of the plumbing system had been sent back to the plant of the main contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., Bethpage, N.Y. The plumbing leaks had virtually eliminated any chance of launching this year the first model of the craft that would land American astronauts on the moon. (AP, W Post, 9/26/67, A9)
The first manned Apollo space flight might be delayed from spring to mid-summer of 1968 by modification of the Apollo spacecraft by its prime contractor, North American Rockwell Corp., according to NASA spokesman Julian Scheer. Scheer, nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, told upi the anticipated delay, among other things, could be because of considerable changes in the capsule after last January’s fire, (upi, W Post, 9/27/67, A6)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CLXXIV into orbit with 39,750-km (24,699mi) apogee, 500-km (311-mi) perigee, 715-min period, and 64.5° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/67) During August: “Despite the rancor and doubt of the moment [about U.S. space program], the evidence is persuasive that the nation has been well served indeed,” Fortune magazine said in an article reviewing NASA problems, shortcomings, and accomplishments. The article, “Jim Webb’s Earthy Management of Space,” said: “Webb . . . has developed a managerial doctrine as extraordinary as the space mission itself. Essentially it is a bold extension of the systems-management principle first applied in the Pentagon for weapon development. This approach means that the Pentagon tries to relate design and procurement plans to the weapon system’s maximum potential, to other weapon systems, to cost effectiveness, to foreseeable strategic situations, and to other special considerations. In NASA’s case, the ‘system’ is usually an exotic research objective, like landing a package of instruments on Mars. Such an undertaking, of course, requires management consideration of costs and engineering feasibility, but NASA also tries to relate it to the social, economic, and even political impact the new knowledge may have on some of the most basic mysteries of human life. In one sense, the system becomes an exercise in applied philosophy. To master such massively complex and extensive problems, the agency has mobilized some 20,000 individual firms, more than 400,000 workers, and 200 colleges and universities in a combine of the most advanced resources of American civilization.” (Mecklin, Fortune, 8/67)
F-5 supersonic fighter aircraft manufactured by Northrop Co. could be sold to Latin American governments, Covey T. Oliver, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was reported to have told key members of Congress. Because of shortage of pilots, facilities, and financial resources, only five nations would be interested—Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Venezuela. Initial congressional reaction was reported favorable, the decision being displayed as no change in U.S. policy. State Dept, informants, however, conceded that recent reports of Peru’s negotiations with France on purchase of 12 Mirage V jet fighters had a major effect in hastening DOD’s and State Dept.’s action. (Welles, NYT, 10/18/67, 1)
afosr Director of Information Sciences Dr. Harold Wooster, writing on “Basic Research and the Department of Defense,” presented his appraisal of what basic research is and why it is a benefit when Government funds support basic research. He stated that the Government had spent $2.1 billion on basic research in FY 1967 while American industry was spending $607 million. Wooster believed that basic research and its results transcend state and national boundaries, and that there were “certain large research tools and facilities” which were too expensive for private industry, or any state or combination of states to build. As an example, he pointed to the National Magnet Laboratory at mit: “This Laboratory is a national resource already making important direct applied contributions to the defense effort. It would have been impossible to build without Federal financing.” (afosr Res Rev, 10/67, 1-9)	.	.
Aircraft flown by pilots “lacking professional ability”—usually those in general aviation—were responsible for most air accidents, according to study by Cornell Univ-.’s Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Aviation Center. Fatalities involving general aviation aircraft in 1966 in U.S. totaled 1,069, compared with a loss of 59 passengers by scheduled domestic airlines, the. study noted. “It is apparently futile to try to persuade the majority of pilots to secure and maintain instrument proficiency. ... It would seem more effective to attack the problem of requiring manufacturers to incorporate better aircraft stability and controllability characteristics. . . .” Other methods suggested to improve air safety included: (1) raising airport standards by improving lighting and increasing landing aids, anti-collision devices, and weather data, accuracy; (2) reviewing pilot certification procedures and incorporating more “human factors” into aircraft design; and (3) intensifying methods of crash fire protection and reevaluating emergency evacuation procedures. (NYT, 6/15/67, 81)
John Cobb Cooper, former president of International Institute of Space Law and founder of McGill Univ.’s Institute of International Air Law, died in Princeton, N.J. Cooper devised a legal code for outer space in 1961 when he was legal adviser to the International Air Transport Assn. Code included recommendations that: (1) the lower boundary of outer space be fixed at the point above the earth’s surface where it is possible to launch a satellite into orbit at least once around the earth; (2) outer space have the same status as the high seas, and that no one be permitted to assert sovereignty over outer space or any celestial body in it; (3) satellites and other spacecraft have the nationality of the country that launched them unless otherwise agreed; and (4) a nation have the right to take action in outer space for its self-protection and self-defense. {NYT, 7/24/67, 27)	_	_
Two MSFC scientists had received awards from Alabama Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Physicist William C. Snoddy was presented Hermann Oberth award for contributions to Explorer, Pegasus, and Apollo/Saturn programs. Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees was given General Holger N. Toftoy award for outstanding technical management during 1947-67. (Space Propulsion, 11/30/67,147)
Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fund had received nearly $1 million in donations for construction of 700-seat auditorium at nas Hq. in Washington, D.C., in honor of the late nasa Deputy Administrator. Fund’s ultimate goal was $2 million, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 3/67, 3)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted six satellites—three Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats, one Lincoln Experimental Satellite Les V, one DOD Gravity Experiment (dodge) satellite, and one Despun Antenna Test Satellite (dats)—into circular, near-synchronous orbits. Powered flight of Titan III—C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 103-mi (166-km) apogee and 89-mi (143-km) perigee. First transtage burn made necessary course corrections; second transtage bum moved stage and payload into transfer orbit with 20,920-mi (33,666-km) apogee and 111-mi (179-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and six satellites into final orbit with 20,809-mi (33,488-km) apogee and 20,453-mi (32,915-km) perigee. Between 3:21 and 3.23 pm est satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths. Three idcsp comsats, combined with 15 others launched June 16,1966, and Jan. 18, 1967, completed Pacific link of dod’s idcsp system designed to provide reliable, full-time radio communications between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts. Les V, first all solid-state uhf band comsat, would transmit radio signals and test communications to front-line troops, dodge satellite would extend 10 metal booms to test satellite’s stability, determine whether it could keep one side always facing earth, and transmit first color TV pictures of earth taken'from orbit with a 22° camera, dats, advanced version of idcsp comsats, carried new antenna designed to transmit 75% of radio signal strength—rather than current 15%—back to earth, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. (dod Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/2/67, 20; W Post, 7/2/67, A4; Av Wk, 7/10/67,39; Aero Tech, 1/11/67,20)
NASA contract activity:	Negotiations were initiated with McDonnell Douglas Corp. on a 121-million contract for Improved Delta launch support services. Contract would cover 20 launchings from WTR and ETR during 21-mo period beginning Jan. 1, 1968, and would provide for inspection, checkout, and actual launch. Negotiations were concluded with North American Rockwell Corp. on a $812-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for continuation of Apollo Command and Service Module Program from Dec. 4, 1966, through program completion. Contract covered engineering, design, manufacture,-analysis, and testing for Apollo spacecraft and related equipment, including production of four additional spacecraft through S/C 115A; contained improved plans for quality, reliability, assurance, and safety; and provided for an award fee based on achievement of specified management objectives. (nasa Releases 67-298,67-299)
New U.S.S.R. commission would scientifically study reported UFOs, reported Newport News Press. DOD’s contractor to investigate UFOs, Dr. Edward U. Condon of Univ. of Colorado, would invite head of new Soviet commission, retired Air Force Gen. Porfiri A. Stolyarov, to be his guest. Condon would offer Stolyarov access to all U.S. information, hoping for full exchange of data and close working relationship. U.S.S.R. had in past dismissed UFOs as “American hoax,” now did not reject possibility that all UFOs could still be explained away, but warned against outright dismissal. (Newport News Press, 11/30/67,4)
NASA’s total procurement in FY 1967 fell to $4,651 billion—8% below FY 1966—and procurement actions dropped to 283,000—11% less than FY 1966—because of budget reductions, Aerospace Technology reported. NASA’s “Annual Procurement Report, Fiscal Year 1967” disclosed that 83% of net dollar value went directly to business firms; 4% to education and other nonprofit institutions; 5% to Cal Tech for operating jpl; and 8% to other Government agencies. NASA continued its policy of making greater use of incentive contracts, awarding 81 new incentive contracts and converting 11 cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts to incentive awards during FY 1967. North American Rockwell Corp. led in dollar amount of NASA awards, receiving 25.46% of total. (Aero Tech, 12/4/67, 46)
Trendex poll conducted for Thiokol Chemical Corp. in six American cities indicated that interest in the national space program had dropped to lowest in more than four years. Some 41% of persons questioned thought the Government was spending too much on the space program; 83% thought more attention should be given to water pollution, 82% to air pollution, 68% to training unskilled workers, 51% to beautification program, 45% to antipoverty drive, and 26% to space exploration. Competition to achieve first manned lunar landing was favored by 51%, dropping from 77% in September 1965, and opposed by 35%. Most significant change of attitude, Trendex said, was increase in number of respondents who did not know whether they fayored the competition— 14%, compared to 1% in 1963. (NYT, 12/3/67, 28; Thiokol pio)
nasa’s Oso IV (oso-d) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 358.8 mi (577 km); perigee, 336.7 mi (542km); period, 95.8 min; and inclination, 32.9°. Fourth of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun during most of an 11-yr solar cycle, Oso IV weighed 599 lbs, carried nine experiments, was designed for a six-month lifetime, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and six experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and three solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso IV was to obtain high-resolution spectral data within the range lA-1350A from pointed solar experiments in the spacecraft during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems including raster scan of solar disk to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from nonpointed experiments and from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1962), Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965), and Oso III (launched March 8,1967) by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity, were provided by two American and two British universities, one U.S. Government agency, and one private company. Oso IV was first in series to carry foreign experiments and second (Oso II was the first) capable of scanning entire solar surface by means of a Solar Ultraviolet Scanning Spectrometer which could record a “picture” (digital number) of the sun and transmit it to receiving stations. Spacecraft also had an improved ground-control system whichjpermitted it to receive up to 140 different commands—compared to 10 for Oso /, 70 for Oso II, and 94 for Oso III. Project officials at GSFC reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal and that both tape recorders were operating; all experiments were fully operational by Oct. 25. oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—262)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
The Nation mourned the deaths of NASA Apollo Astronauts Grissom, White and Chaffee. President Johnson: “Three valiant young men have given their lives in the nation’s service. We mourn this great loss and our hearts go out to their families.” Vice President Humphrey: “The deaths of these three brilliant young men ... is a profound and personal loss to me. . . . The United States will push ever forward in space and the memory of the contributions of these men will be an inspiration to all future space-farers.” nasa Administrator James Webb: “We’ve always known that something like this would happen sooner or later, but it’s not going to be permitted to stop the program. . . . Although everyone realized that some day space pilots would die, who would have thought the first tragedy would be on the ground?” Former President Eisenhower: “The accident that took the lives of three of our highly trained, skilled and courageous American astronauts is a tragic loss to our entire nation. . . .” (upi, W Star, 1/28/67,1; AP, NYT, 1/29/67)
Editorial comment on Apollo accident hearings: New York Times: NASA “went to great lengths ... to assure the Senate Space Committee that all the expensive lessons taught by the fatal January fire will be taken into account before the next try. Yet doubts must persist because the pressurized oxygen system is retained. So is the prime contractor, North American Aviation, whose past errors and deficiencies contributed so much to the debacle. Moreover, NASA has preferred to ignore the pointed questions that have been raised about its own competence to supervise and manage this intricate endeavor.” (NYT, 5/10/67, 40) Washington Sunday Star: “Webb and his associates are not solely— perhaps not primarily—to blame for their attitude in time of crisis. In its formative years, the agency was pampered and spoiled by Congress like a favored child. The press willingly cooperated in the creation of NASA’s shining image of a superagency staffed by supermen. ... Inevitably, NASA became the spoiled brat of the federal establishment. “But NASA, of course, is no different than any other federal agency. It is composed of wise and foolish men, of dedicated and self-serving public servants, of heroes and of knaves. It is doing an extraordinary— and, in our opinion, a worthwhile—task [and] deserves continued public support.” (W Star, 5/14/67, Cl) New York Times: “Now that the public finally knows that North American was picked for the Apollo project by a few high officials— and not by a large group of technical experts as originally imagined—the question of why it was picked becomes even more intriguing than before. The cynics, of course, have always believed that the award went to North American as the result of a battle among influence peddlers, including Bobby Baker, former Secretary to the Senate Democrats. The cynics may he wrong, but the public cannot know without a full investigation. Congress has the obligation to force out all the facts.” (NYT, 5/11/67, 44)
NASA launches Apollo 4 into orbit from Complex 39A of Kennedy Space Center in successful first flight test of Apollo/Satum V space vehicle. gency Detection System (eds) in an open-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and CM recovery. Saturn V was the most powerful space vehicle developed in U.S. space program; in launch configuration with Apollo 4, height was 363 ft, and weight, fully fueled, was 6,220,025 lbs. Saturn V’s 1st stage engines produced 7,610,000 lbs of thrust at liftoff, and the launch vehicle placed 278,699 lbs in earth orbit. This launch vehicle could place 96,000 lbs on the moon. Kerosene (RP-1) was the fuel used in the five 1st stage (S—1C) engines, while 2nd stage (S-II) engines used liquid hydrogen. The five S-II stage J-2 engines, developing total thrust of 1,000,000 lbs, were rated for operations to 117-mi altitude and to 935-mi distance down-range. Third stage (S-IVB) J-2 engine, using liquid hydrogen fuel, developed about 200,000 lbs of thrust. High-quality pictures of the earth were obtained from about one hour before to one hour after apogee on Command Module apogee camera film processed at MSC. Success for Apollo 4 (AS-501), according to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, had been achieved in terms of “pre-set primary objectives.” Heat shield design, S-IVB restart, structural/thermal integrity, compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft, and ground support had been proven. Direction of Apollo Program had been the responsibility of OMSF; development of Apollo spacecraft, flight crew training, and mission control the responsibility of msc ; development of Saturn launch vehicles the responsibility of MSFC; and Apollo/Saturn launch operations the responsibility of KSC. Under overall direction of OTDA, msfn had been managed by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-275; msfc Release 67-226)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr, reached 89-mi (144-km) altitude in American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to collect data on celestial x-ray sources for location of sources and flux levels in 1—20 kev range. One strong x-ray source did not appear in data, possibly because of door malfunction. All other data were satisfactory. (nasa Rpt srl)
U.S. astronauts were honored with a special award at American Personnel and Guidance Assn, convention in Dallas. Accepted by Charles Duke on behalf of his fellow astronauts, the award cited the “exemplary model astronauts display to American youth in intellectual achievement, selfdiscipline, personal dedication and physical fitness.” (upi, W Star, 3/24/67, A6)
msfc awarded Bendix Corp. $7.4 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for development and production of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) pointing control system (pcs) . Bendix was scheduled to produce three units by August. ATM system would permit Apollo astronauts to point a telescope to selected regions of the sun during period of maximum solar flare activities beginning in late 1968. msfc had awarded American Optical Co. $740,460 contract to build a dynamic simulator for use in developing the pcs. (msfc Releases 67-54, 67-58; nasa Release 67-66)
Current faa r&d programs were discussed by faa at its first annual “Report to Industry” meeting in Washington, D.C. Meeting was designed to keep aviation public informed of R&D programs which would result in new elements in the National Airspace System, (faa Release 67-8)
Harry N. Atwood, an associate of the Wright Brothers, died at age 83. On July 1, 1911, during 17-hr 12-min flight from Boston to Washington, D.C., Atwood became first man to fly over New York City. The following month he successfully flew his biplane, the “Baby Wright,” 1,265 mi from St. Louis to New York City in 28 hrs 58 min, setting a new air distance record and winning a $10,000 prize. In 1927 Atwood announced the development of a motor that would “develop power without the use of a propeller, by exhausting exploding gases into the atmosphere or water, thus driving itself forward much as a rocket does.” In 1935 he developed strong, lightweight plywood for aircraft bodies. (AP, NYT, 7/16/67, 65)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
Number of mid-air aircraft collisions could be reduced “if pilots accept the idea that the plane can be quicker than the eye,” Lockheed Aircraft Co. aviation psychologist Dr. Earl J. Ends said in a Washington, D.C., interview. According to his calculations based on ideal conditions: “A pilot flying 600 miles an hour will travel 88 feet from the time his eye spots an oncoming plane until the message is relayed to the brain. By the time the brain interprets the message, the plane has flown 920 feet. When the pilot decides to climb, descend or turn, he has already covered 2,680 feet. And by the time he carries out his decision the plane has covered 4,792 feet. Put another way, one of the pilots would have to see the other plane 9,548 feet away before he could change course to avoid a collision, (upi, NYT, 4/13/67, 74)
ComSatCorp informed fcc that it was prepared to finance, build, and operate a pilot program for domestic satellite services. Explaining program ComSatCorp proposed March 31, ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack said pilot system would include two synchronous satellites serving 34 domestic ground stations. Estimated total cost was $104.7 million: $35.7 million for two satellites, $22 million for 34 earth stations, and $47 million for operating costs during two years. Charges for each type of service could not yet be established accurately, but ComSatCorp would provide, without fee, the capacity equivalent to two television channels for noncommercial TV service. McCormack concluded: “We believe that the pilot program offers the American people
U.S.S.R.’s May Day Parade was transmitted across U.S. for broadcast in Japan, but was not televised on American networks. The 1%-hr program, transmitted through the cooperation of ComSatCorp and U.S.S.R., originated live in Moscow and was picked up by Early Bird I over the Atlantic; relayed across U.S. by Andover, Me., and Brewster Flat, Wash., ground stations; and transmitted across Pacific via Intelsat II for viewing in Tokyo. Japan paid approximately $30,000 for broadcast and transmission services. (Birger, M News, 5/5/67; ComSatCorp)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Nuclear Safeguards Subcommittee, reported from Senate floor that “Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty safeguards [were] being supported and implemented in a satisfactory manner.” He said that recent Soviet and Chinese missile and nuclear developments had formed “serious challenge to the strategic superiority of U.S. power on which our defense planners have counted to maintain political stability and to keep the peace.” Sen. Jackson listed two prime requirements to maintain U.S. strategic superiority. First would be strategic offensive capability to penetrate Soviet abm defenses using new generations of land-based icbms and nuclear submarines with better missiles and using MIRVs. Second requirement would be the best ABM defense to protect U.S. retaliatory second-strike force, to safeguard American people, and to account for allies’ needs. He cited seriousness of Soviet’s doubling icbms, developing orbital nuclear bombs, and deploying abm system around Moscow, especially when combined with growing Communist Chinese nuclear threat. (Text)
m/g Vincent G. Huston, former Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and recipient of NASA Leadership Medal, became Commander of afsc’s National Range Div. He succeeded l/g Leighton I. Davis, who became Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces in Washington, D.C. (afsc Release 103.67)
On presentation of Distinguished Service Medal to l/g Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell cited him for outstanding management of range support of U.S. ballistic missile and space vehicle programs and as dod Manager for Manned Space Flight Support Operations—specifically, Projects Mercury and Gemini. Davis had been Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and National Range Div. from May 1960 through June 1967. (afsc Release 140.67)
Boeing Co. would spend $165 million and General Electric Co. $65 million in Phase III (prototype construction) of SST program, m/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf), faa Director of Supersonic Transport Development, told American Marketing Assn., in Los Angeles. Total cost of Phase III work was estimated at $1.1 billion; most of the difference would be supplied by Government and the small remainder by several U.S. airlines. Boeing and GE contracts would not be effective until President Johnson’s authorization to begin Phase III. (Reddig, Jr., W Star, 2/16/67, A17; WSI, 2/16/67,4)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at msc, received the Spirit of St. Louis medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme) meeting in Cocoa Beach, Fla. He was cited for his “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics.” (NYT, 7/19/ 67, 32)
Pilot performing with the French Patrol, the aerobatic team of the French Air Force, was killed when his jet aircraft crashed and burst into flames during final aerial display at the Paris International Air and Space Show. Aircraft failed to pull out of a dive, bounced along the airfield, and then exploded about 100 yds from the grandstand, injuring several spectators. (.NYT, 6/6/67, 77M)	_
Turbulence-measuring device developed at U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla., might be used by U.S. airports in 1968 to guide commercial airline pilots through severe and moderate turbulence areas, Martin Waldron reported in New York Times. Device measured severity of thunderstorms by analyzing and averaging radar pulses reflected from cells within the storm and then registered cloud structure on a radar scope. Data were relayed to pilots by flight controllers on the ground. Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau’s radar systems section Stewart Bigler said a refined version of the device had been installed at Washington, D.C., National Airport in January and would be tested in June. If it performed satisfactorily, similar devices would be installed in other U.S. airports in 1968. (Waldron, NYT, 5/4/67,51)
Soviet Union reportedly had been giving top priority to efforts to develop multiple warheads for its big missiles, William Beecher wrote in New York Times. If the report was correct and if the Soviet effort succeeded, Moscow could increase several-fold its ability to hit a number of targets in the U.S. simultaneously. In Britain, Air Commodore Neil Cameron described the new weapon in Royal Air Force Quarterly. “It is widely believed that the Russians have developed the multiple individually guided reentry vehicle, known as mirv, which could revolutionize nuclear strategy. ... It would mean that each Soviet missile dispatched could carry ten or more individually guided warheads in the megaton class, which could neutralize the Americans’ numerical lead in this field and make a counter-force strategy as far as the Soviets are concerned a realistic possibility.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/10/67; AP, B Sun, 9/15/67; Cameron, RAF Quart, Autumn 67, 175-83)
m/g Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.), oldest U.S. military pilot and first American to fly in combat, died at age 87 at Andrews afb, Md. A member of USA since 1898, General Foulois had been first person to operate an Army dirigible; first military observer on a cross-country flight (with Orville Wright); first military man to teach himself to fly; first military test pilot; first man to fly more than 100 mi nonstop; first man to use an aircraft in combat; and first Chief of Staff of the Army Air Corps to be a military aviator. He had received five campaign badges for field services, in addition to the Distinguished Service Medal, the French Legion of Honor, the Crown of Italy, and the Congressional Medal of Recognition. (upi, NYT, 4/26/67, 43; Casey, W Post, 4/26/67, B8)
Latest Harris poll indicated American people, by 54%-to-34% margin, did not believe U.S. space program was worth an annual $4-billion expenditure. By 60%-to-30%, public would oppose continuing program at present rate of expenditure if U.S.S.R. were not active in space. People were divided sharply by income and age: (1) low-income persons opposed Apollo manned lunar landing program by almost three-to-one, while upper income favored it by nearly two-to-one; (2) 62% of persons over 50 opposed program, while 58% under 35 favored it. A 1965 poll had showed public supporting space program by 45%-to-42% margin. {WPost, 7/31/67, A2)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin received first honorary membership awarded by International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers at iam Aerospace Conference in Houston. Aldrin, considered by the Union to be the first space mechanic, was cited for his work with tools outside Gemini XII spacecraft Nov. 13, 1966. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received an Award of Merit for being first American in space. (Houston Chron, 6/2/67)
Prime and. backup crews for NASA’s first manned Apollo mission [see May 9] told a news conference at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant that they were “very impressed” with the design changes being made in the Apollo spacecraft as a result of the Jan. 27 flash fire. Major changes included: (1) a new hinged hatch that could be opened outward in about two seconds by activating a springed lever; (2) replacement of many highly flammable materials such as nylon netting; (3) sheathing of open wiring with hard panels; and (4) flame-resistant spacesuits. In addition, spacecraft would be pressurized with nitrogen rather than oxygen on launching, and in orbit—where oxygen is indispensable—pressure would be reduced one third to 5 psi. Questioned about his attitudes toward the program since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra replied:	. . we went through a very agonizing self-appraisal; we suffered through three months of recrimination; we’ve culminated these three months with some very firm ideas.” These ideas, Schirra said, were being phased into an orderly program that “will continue—with orderly haste . . . [and] we are not going to run rampant on schedules.” The crews anticipated that Apollo 101 spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in December and that first manned mission would be flown in first quarter of 1968. Primary mission objective would be to “exercise the vehicle in earth orbit,” Schirra said. Asked if the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov had had any adverse effects on plans for earth landings in the Apollo program, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford replied: “The earth landing system that consists of the three main parachutes and the two drogue chutes- had been qualified completely. . . . We still have some earth landing drops to be made. But right now as far as the crew is concerned, either the parachutes in this vehicle are qualified or we don’t fly.” (Transcript; Newsweek, 5/22/67, 94; Hill, NYT, 5/11/67,27)
North American Air Defense Command (norad ) announced officially that no flying saucers, no extraterrestrial spacecraft, and no “unfriendly objects” had ever been identified by air forces over U.S. or Canada: “There have been thousands of reports about official air force stands on UFOs from the widest variety of sources over the years-—but so far as the command is aware, it never has been shown anything but natural atmospheric or astronomical phenomena or airborne objects—birds, insects, hardware—seen under unusual circumstances, or misinterpreted.” (Thomis, C Trib, 8/18/67,1)
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
Georgi Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Space Exploration Institute, claimed that docking of Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVlll, “for its technical perfection and the possibility it has opened for space exploration, is of greater importance than the American experiment in manual docking . . . [of Gemini VII and gatv]. Since the completely automatic linkup, despite the difficulty of its realization, will always he more economical as regards the payload which is so expensive on an orbit, this will make it possible to solve the tasks of helping the crews of space vehicles and open up new prospects for arranging experiments that demand a great weight on an orbit around the earth.” (SBD, 11/1/67, 3)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb employing a Thor-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 3/31/67, A3)
Thomas O’Toole, writing in the Washington Post, reviewed nasa’s “growing role in the Vietnam war.” Both NASA and dod were reluctant to disclose the size of NASA’s defense effort, he charged, “but it’s known that [oart] is spending between $4 million and $5 million a year directing the efforts of 100 scientists and engineers to tasks vital to the Vietnam war.” Results of NASA research, he said, included a new acoustic detector able to locate mortars by measuring ground vibrations, a more-steerable parachute, aircraft engines too quiet to be heard during approach, a scissors-like sling for helicopter rescues, and a helicopter which did not make a chopper noise. Although NASA willingly participated in defense research, its authorization to do so was “fuzzy,” he said, based only on a section of the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act which directed NASA to make available to defense organizations “discoveries that have military value or significance.” NASA was “nervous” about its military role, he asserted, because of its unclear authorization, fear of congressional inquiry, and fear of international reaction. Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) later attacked O’Toole’s article on the Senate floor: “One might expect that if ... a story of this sort were to be dug up, the article would express gratification that the taxpayer’s money was being used on behalf of the American people . . . [and not purport to be] shocked that NASA projects help our national objective. ... I am firmly of the conviction that anything that can be developed technically to save a single American life in Vietnam, especially by any individual or organization that is being paid by American taxpayers, belongs freely to our soldiers. . . . “The article is obviously a patently calculated leak. The informed details it provides on NASA’s research and technical work proves this. . . . This is a shocking thing, that is not a matter of press freedom, or even of press license, but plain aid and comfort to the enemy. . . . Publishers and editors should accept their responsibility to prevent such . . . news coverage and to prevent, too, the violation of security classifications on subjects that involve adversely the preservation of the lives of American fighting men.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/67, Al ; NASA lar VI/128)
The New York Times called for fuller and more open debate on cost and consequences of SST program: “The sst’s priority is debatable and so is its financing. The industry may be right in asserting that the costs of development are so huge that no company can afford to take the risk on its own. It points out that the backing of both Britain and France has been required to launch the Concorde. But if the combined efforts of two countries and their aircraft industries are needed for that much less ambitious project, the American sst might be more safely and soundly developed if it commanded the combined resources of the entire American industry and the Government. “What is at stake is not the commitment to proceed with the sst. That decision has been made and cannot—and should not—be reversed. But if the sst is to be sound economically as well as technologically, the Administration and the industry must be less secretive and indefinite about the costs and how they are to be financed. An open debate is needed on how to get the most for the taxpayers’ money.” (NYT, 1/2/67,18)
Widow of NASA X-15 test pilot Joseph A. Walker filed $l-million damage suit for the June 8,1966, death of her husband when his F-104 fighter aircraft collided with an XB-70 experimental bomber near Barstow, Calif. Aircraft had been flying in tight formation “to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Mrs. Walker’s suit, filed in Federal Court in Los Angeles, charged negligence on the part of General Electric Co. and its chief test pilot John M. Fritz, and North American Aviation, Inc., manufacturer of the XB-70. (upi, W Post, 6/9/67, A2)
Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before Metropolitan Baltimore Chamber of Commerce on impact of U.S. space effort and risk that it would be weighed and evaluated in “oversimplified terms.” A huge and complex effort should not be judged by superficial aspects alone, forgetting that concentration of “our best industrial, economic, scientific and intellectual resources, organized to an unprecedented degree . . ., has an impact on every aspect of our national life.” Harr noted the strangeness of the unknown medium of space, “for which our ultimate capabilities are yet to be determined.” “Today we find ourselves both in midstream in our national space effort and at a crossroads as to future efforts. ... It is essential that we delay no longer in sorting out that which is valid and enduring, in terms of your total interest and mine, from that which is superficial or transitory.” (Text) Cause of X-15 No. 3 crash was unknown. The pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, had difficulty with control booster system; X—15 failed to recover from a dive from extremely high altitude, the pilot losing control above 200,000	ft and regaining it briefly at about 80,000 ft. Setting unofficial world speed and altitude records, the three X-15s had flown 191 times; No. 3 having had 65 flights. The aircraft were built by North American Rockwell (formerly naa) under a cooperative program by usaf, usn, and NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
Predicting future trends in aeronautics and space, nasa’s Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop told American Society for Metals in Rochester, Pa.: “Current events make it clear that many national needs are increasing the pressure on resources and this is being felt over a wide range of activities. . . . It is times like these, however, that give the opportunity for advanced research and technology to open up the range of possible new missions that can be considered in future national decisions [and] we must visualize future mission possibilities and develop the various technologies needed at an optimum pace. Essential to the soundness of this approach is emphasis on technology that has multiple applications.” Sloop praised “the potential of applications satellites,” and said it was “perhaps best gaged by the number of users, domestic and foreign, that are willing to invest their own money. In communications, there are over a dozen proposals for systems that involve an estimated investment of over a billion dollars.” (Text)
Explorer XXXII (ae-b) aeronomy satellite, launched May 25, 1966, had ground support terminated; satellite had suffered complete depressurization [see Jan. 17]. As direct result of loss of internal pressure, battery failure had caused disablement of one electron temperature probe on March 3; ion mass spectrometer and the other electron temperature probe had remained operational and continued to produce quality data until March 22. Last radiofrequency contact had been made on March 26. Explorer XXXIl mission objectives had been achieved and mission had been declared a success in December 1966. Scientific papers on initial results would be presented at American Geophysical Union meetings April 17—20 in Washington, D.C., and additional results would be reported to cospar meetings in London during July, (nasa SP-4007,192; nasa Proj Off)
Cosmos CXLIV satellite, which began transmitting meteorological data to Washington, D.C., March 2, was equipped with an infrared camera for night photography of clouds and ice fields and two television cameras for daylight photography of weather patterns, Izvestia reported. Launched Feb. 28, satellite was powered by two wing-like solar batteries that turned automatically to trap solar rays. (Reuters, NYT, 3/17/67,
U.S. leaders expressed sorrow at the death of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. President Johnson: “The death of Vladimir Komarov is a tragedy in which all nations share. Like three American astronauts who lost their lives recently, this distinguished space pioneer died in the cause of science and in the eternal spirit of human adventure.” ~ Vice President Humphrey: “It is with great sorrow that we learn of the tragedy involving Vladimir Komarov. The loss of a dedicated life is indeed a heavy price. Yet progress and space development is necessary.” NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “All of us who have faced the difficulties of understanding and putting to use the forces of nature at the outer edge of Man’s knowledge of what is possible in this decade deeply regret the loss of life represented by the death of Cosmonaut Komarov, and extend our sincere sympathy to his family and associates. We feel certain that man will achieve great things in space. Some of these will determine what the men will be able to do on earth. “We also feel that at this dawn of the space age, man has the duty to seek cooperation between nations, such as the USSR and the United States on a realistic basis. “We at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration want to make every realistic effort. Could the lives already lost have been saved if we had known each other’s hopes, aspirations and plans? Or could they have been saved if full cooperation had been the order of the day?” U.S. astronauts: “We are very saddened by the loss of Colonel Komarov. We feel comradeship for this test pilot because we have met several of his fellow cosmonauts and we are involved in a pioneering flight effort which is not without hazards.” (Text; PD, 5/1/67, 660; AP, NYT, 4/25/67, 21)
James Smith McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., received National Academy of Engineering’s second Founders Medal at NAE’s third Annual Meeting in Washington, D.C. Medal honored “outstanding contributions by an engineer both to his profession and to society.” (nae Release)
XB—70 No. 1 research aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., pilot Van Shepard reached mach 2.53 and 60,400-ft altitude during flight at Edwards afb for national sonic boom program, (nasa Proj Off)
An all-metal payload shroud which separated in three sections would be used when an Air Force Titan III launch vehicle placed a dod communications satellite into space in the fall of 1968. Developed and produced by Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., under a $2.6-million contract, the shroud would be made up of fairings to protect the sensitive instrumentation of scientific payloads during passage through the earth’s atmosphere, (afsc Release 171.67)
President Johnson, in a White House ceremony, presented m/g James W. Humphreys, Jr., of the Air Force Medical Corps, the Distinguished Service Medal for helping to develop “a national medical program for the Vietnamese people.” General Humphreys would become Director of Space Medicine, OMSF, June 1. (PD, 5/29/67, 778; W Post, 5/25/67)
Dr. Louis B. Amoldi, former Command Surgeon of Air Force Logistics Command, had been named nasa Director of Occupational Medicine, succeeding Dr. Harold H. Stoddard, who resigned, (nasa Release 67-45)
Soviet newspapers revealed that two cities devoted entirely to scientific research were being constructed near Moscow, Theodore Shabad reported in the New York Times. The first, Pushchino, would be devoted entirely to research in biology and related fields; the second, Krasnaya Pakhra, would specialize in earth sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 1/23/67,1, 8) Cal Tech’s Dr. Maarten Schmidt told conference of a new quasar, pks 0237-23, that appeared to be farther from earth than any other reported to date, pks 0237-23, receding at 80% the speed of light, was most remarkable, however, because it displayed two “red shifts”—displacement toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away. If both shifts were indicators of velocity,, it would mean that part of the quasar was receding from earth 17,000 mps more slowly than the rest. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Dr. Sandage reported that second starlike source of intense x rays had been discovered by Oct. 11 sounding rocket and later telescopic observation. Of 30 known x-ray sources, only one had previously been linked to a starlike object. Finding of second source, located in Constellation Cygnus, persuaded a number of astronomers that such visible objects represented a new type of celestial phenomenon, perhaps related to the manner in which stars are formed. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Robert H. Dicke revealed an observation that might invalidate Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Dr. Dicke told the conference that his experiments showed the sun to he flattened at the poles and that the oblateness was sufficient to explain a significant portion of Mercury’s orbital behavior, without recourse to relativity. It was the precise conformity of Mercury’s orbit to Dr. Einstein’s predictions that was the chief pillar of his theory. “It wouldn’t surprise me if general relativity is just plain wrong,” Dr. Dicke commented. {NYT, 1/24/67,22; 1/26/67,18; 1/28/67,1,12; 1/29/67,621
NASA was studying feasibility of launching two navigation satellites to keep SST under constant surveillance and be alert to slightest malfunction, Mohammed Rauf, Jr., reported in the News American. NASA Chief of Navigation and Traffic Control Eugene Ehrlich, who conceived the plan, told Rauf in an interview that the system would provide maximum safety against accidents: “The program calls for the building of two tracking stations on each side of the Atlantic. The wings of the plane and all its other important parts will be fitted with small transponders, which will continually relay information about the plane’s condition to' the satellites . . . [which would] relay the signals to the tracking stations, where giant computers will process them within minutes for appropriate action.” Eventually, Ehrlich predicted, all aircraft and ships would be equipped with transponders “because the [proposed] navigation satellites . . . will be capable of handling the increasing amount of air and sea traffic predicted for this century. “Four satellites can have the whole world under surveillance for air and sea traffic control, and will cut down both the cost of such control as exercised by conventional methods, and also the time required for it.” (Rauf, News American, 7/13/67)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced his approval for production and deployment of a “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm ) system at a meeting of upi editors and publishers in San Francisco. He explained: “Were we to deploy a heavy abm system throughout the United States, the Soviets would clearly be strongly motivated to so increase their offensive capability as to cancel out our defensive advantage.” He opposed a more advanced, heavy, anti-Soviet system and approved the “thin” abm system because “the system would be relatively inexpensive—preliminary estimates place the cost at about $5 billion—and we would have a much higher degree of reliability against a Chinese attack than the much more massive and complicated system that some have recommended against a possible Soviet attack.” McNamara stated: “An abm deployment designed against a possible Chinese attack . . . would provide an additional indication to Asians that we intend to deter China from nuclear blackmail, and thus would contribute toward our goal of discouraging nuclear weapon proliferation among the present nonnuclear countries.” The Secretary of Defense said the defensive move was being made with China in mind, not the Soviet Union. He warned the Soviet Union, however, that if it decided to expand its limited antimissile system, the U.S. would respond by increasing its offensive forces to maintain its overwhelming retaliatory capacity. The decision was generally applauded by congressional leaders but also unleashed an offensive—expected to be focused in the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy—for building a “heavy” defense system against Soviet missiles, reported John W. Finney in New York Times. The proposed “thin” abm system would provide each region of the U.S. with at least one battery of warhead interceptors, reported AP. The exact locations of the batteries, each with several missiles, remained a secret, (dod Release 868-67; Av Wk, 9/25/67, 11; Beecher, NYT, 9/19/67, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/19/67, 1; AP, SF Exam, 9/19/67, 5)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh was interviewed by Christian Science Monitor’s Neal Sanford. Comparing American and Soviet space budgets, he expressed belief that U.S.S.R. was spending more than twice the U.S. percentage of gross national product on space. “Their [gnp] is less than half of ours. While they are spending about the same amount of money that we are on space it is about twice the percentage of gnp. They are putting a greater priority on space than we are.” Soviet space program for 1967 had been “the most active in . . . [their] history, so far as launches go,” he said. “I don’t know if they are cutting [their budget] back. They are going along at a good rate . . . [and] from the progress they are making, we assume they are going along at about the same funding.” (Sanford, CSM, 10/4/67, 5)
The X-15 research aircraft stands with the XB-70 research plane outside the hangar at NASA’s Flight Research Center. The X-IS’s new white ablative coating is designed to protect its metal skin from overheating during speeds of more than mach 6. Univ.’s proposal to improve accuracy of the surface of 300-m antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico; and (2) Cal Tech’s proposal to add seven dish antennas to one already in existence at Owens Valley Observatory. Panel rejected or deferred: (1) National Radio Astronomy Observatory’s (nhao) proposal for a Very Large Array (vla) consisting of 36 25-m dish antennas distributed along three arms of a Y; (2) Northeast Radio Observatory Corp.’s (neroc) proposal for 135-m fully steerable dish antenna under plastic Steel-ribbed radorae; (3) Associates for Radio Astronomy’s (ara) proposal for 100-m fully steerable dish antenna without radome; and (4) Committee on Institutional Cooperation’s proposal for a device to study upper atmosphere and ionosphere. Eight-member panel was chaired by Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Robert H. Dicke. {McEIheny, Science, 8/18/67, 782-4; 8/25/67, 907—10)
The time had come to “fix” the responsibility for the total results of U.S. technology, Michael Getler suggested in Aerospace Technology. There was no single group or agency to “link the broad spectrum of American technological development with social development. There is no single group with the expertise available to probe all forms of technology and its effects, to pump funds into a truly important new applied science not able to capture headlines, to speed the transfer of defense and space technology into other areas, and to put the special interest groups on the line for blockage of improvements within the state-of-the-art. There is no group directly responsible to the citizenry to develop and carry through legislation to try and save us from tomorrow’s smog and urban clutter; for we have not, by a long shot, run out of self-inflicted ills. . . .” Getler urged that the overall responsibility be given to Congress. “It is the Legislative branch of Government, properly augmented with a permanent staff of specialists, that is best equipped to serve as a responsive arbiter between the good life of our people, the promise of technology, and the pressure of die marketplace.” (Getler, Aero Tech, 8/14/67,62)
ComSatCorp awarded J. W. Bateson Co., Dallas, Tex., a $7.9-million contract for construction of a new research laboratory near route 70-S in Montgomery County, Md., 30 mi from ComSatCorp’s Washington, D.C., headquarters. Construction would begin immediately. (ComSatCorp Release 67-56; W Post, 12/28/67, F9)
Soviet mathematician Dr. Alex M. Letov, visiting Huntsville for the Guidance, Control, and Flight Dynamics Conference sponsored by Alabama chapter of the aiaa, said he supported the exchange of technical information between U.S. and U.S.S.R. After delivering an important technical paper, Letov remarked: “I am hopeful that I may have initiated some steps in this area of exchange. I am completely satisfied with my presentation and the response of the American scientist. In my report I will reflect this.” One of the world’s leading authorities on spacecraft guidance and control, Letov outlined a complex theory for stabilizing a large manned spacecraft, which he considered a major problem. “You can’t consider die other problems of engineering if your system is not stable. It must be stable.” (KC Star, 8/15/67)
U.S. scientists’ interest in military research had declined substantially, Bryce Nelson wrote in Science: “Since the beginning of the Second World War, many American scientists have regarded it as a duty to work on military research in times of national emergency and have often done so with enthusiasm. However . . . many scientists now seem to show little feeling of obligation to do military research.” Suggested reasons for lack of interest: (1) disagreement with U.S. policy in Vietnam; (2) boredom with defense problems; (3) higher salaries in private industry than in dod; and (4) increased interest in civilian problems such as urban development, poverty, and transportation. (Nelson, Science, 4/21/61, 24)
Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, was awarded National Geographic Society’s General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for outstanding contributions to U.S. aerospace progress. First civilian to receive the award since its establishment in 1961, Dr. Flax was cited for “his effective direction of Air Force aerospace research and development programs enhancing national security and advancing space technology.” (ngs Release)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
Apollo accident at ksc, January 27, 1967, was discussed in press circular released by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C.: “The sorrow of [the] American people is shared by peoples of all countries. In reality, cosmonauts are somehow representatives of the whole Earth, of the entire mankind in boundless Cosmos, no matter what . . . country has dispatched them.” (U.S.S.R. Press Cir/GSFC Trans.)
Editorial comment on authorization for sst prototype construction [see April 29]: Washington Post: “President Johnson made the right decision in requesting that Congress appropriate Federal funds for the development of the supersonic transport plane. . . . But in proposing what it calls ‘a creative partnership between our Government and American industry,’ the Administration should provide more adequate protection for the taxpayer who will bear a substantial share of the development costs. “Why should not the taxpayers, who are to provide about 25 per cent of the capital required, be permitted to share proportionately in the enormous profits that would be earned by a successful SST? Although it is necessary to launch the sst project with the shortest possible delay, Congress should be concerned with a more adequate protection of the public interest.” (W Post, 5/1/67) World Journal Tribune: “Actually, the basis of the SST project is coldly commercial. At stake is not some vague blue ribbon of achievement but American leadership in the highly profitable business of supplying planes to the world’s airlines. “sst, by its size, speed and sonic boom, will cause a number of pro'blems which have not yet been solved. But it was inevitable that this country should enter the supersonic race—not for national pride or out of scientific curiosity, but as a matter of good business. “The international plane market is too good for America to let it go by default.” (WJT, 5/4/67,22) New York Times: “Mr. Johnson acknowledged that the building of an American sst ‘carries high technical and financial risks.’ Yet in his anxiety to get on with the job he has increased the potential hazards to the taxpayer. . . . “Congress has a responsibility to establish guidelines to keep the Administration’s investment in the sst from getting out of hand. It should see to it that the Government does not write any blank checks and become overly involved in what is supposed to he a commercial venture. And industry, too, should recognize that if it asks Washington to shoulder the costs, then Washington may well end up running the entire operation.” (NYT, 5/2/67,43)	_	_
faa Administrator Gen. William F. McKee received Washington, D.C., Air Line Traffic Assn.’s 1967 “Man of the Year” award. (Av Wk, 6/19/67,13)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, urged Congress to reopen its investigation of NASA, with particular emphasis on management policies and procedures. He said the Phillips Report indicated NASA “has had grave difficulty in enforcing standards of workmanship, implementing safety and inspection procedures and in properly supervising contractor costs and time schedules. The results of more recent reviews of North American and reviews of other contractors have again not been made public. “Under such unsatisfactory conditions, accidents and failures can well be expected. Congress should be less concerned with the technical cause of a particular fire and more with the space agency’s lack of control over its own program. It is with this in mind that I have regretted the untimely close of the congressional hearings and requested further substantive investigation into the area of NASA management. . . .” (CR, 6/12/67, H7033)
American Helicopter Society, meeting in Washington, D.C., presented the Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Avco Corp. executive Dr. Anselm Franz for “leading the development of a noteworthy series of gas turbine engines for helicopters and other VTOL aircraft. . . .” (Av Wk, 5/29/67, 55)	_
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted eight Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats into random equatorial orbits. Powered flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 113-mi (182km) apogee and 106-mi (171-km) perigee where first transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage burn 66 min later moved stage and load into transfer orbit with 21,000-mi (33,810-km) apogee and 120-mi (193-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and eight satellites into near-synchronous, 21,000-mi-altitude orbit. At 6 hours 11 min GET, the 100-lb satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. Eight new satellites, combined with seven others launched by usaf June 16, 1966, would reinforce DOD’s worldwide communications system and provide reliable, full-time radio link between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts, (upi, NYT, 1/19/67, 7; AP, B Sun, 1/19/67, 1; Av Wk, 1/23/67, 32)
ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at ComSatCorp’s fourth annual meeting in Washington, D.C., said a shortage of ground stations was delaying development of a complete international comsat network. “A fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series exists and could be launched this fall. . . . Unfortunately, appropriate earth station facilities do not exist and even after approval of the necessary applications . . . [by Fee], operational availability will still be 14 to 18 months away.” Because of this lag in number of earth stations and because a satellite failure could cause severe service interruption, ComSatCorp was seriously considering “the desirability of placing the fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series as a spare in orbit this fall and . . . [seeking] a limited solution to the high-traffic demands by interim utilization of this satellite through a transportable earth station in Hawaii.” (Text; Smith, NYT, 5/10/67, 63)
frc had awarded 15-mo, $8.9-million contract to North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), for maintenance and support of XB—70 supersonic research aircraft. As under previous support contracts, NAA would provide manpower, facilities, material, and equipment to support flight operations and would conduct data reduction. Overall management of XB—70 program was assigned to frc under March 15 NASA—usaf agreement, (nasa Release 67-75)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
usaf successfully launched an Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry System (abres) module from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-D booster, (upi, W Post, 11/8/67, A21)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd outlined major goals of Dept. of Transportation (dot) at ceremony in Washington, D.C., marking its first official operating day. DOT would (1) “insist that all forms of transportation become safer and more reliable for the user” and make increased effort to meet transportation needs of the physically handicapped; (2) strive for increased intermodal efficiency through promotion of integrated systems; (3) explore new possibilities to help transportation advance technologically and keep pace with progress of American industry; (4) encourage transportation industry in a selective expansion program for the domestic market; (5) seek ways for transportation to assist economic development of underdeveloped areas; and (6) make more positive contribution to urban development and quality of urban mass transit service. “At the very least, this Department must work to make transportation more efficient, more economical, more expeditious, and more socially responsible. . . . America, today, has the best transportation system of any nation in the world. But it does have its faults. It can be, it must be substantially improved.” (Text)
Special nsf panel to screen radio astronomy proposals advised nsf Director Leland J. Haworth to accept immediately only two of the six recommendations presented to the panel during July hearings: (1) Cornell
Single global time zone would be advantageous with the speed of communications and transportation in the space age, ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffee told the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C. “We are almost approaching the point where the remaining obstacle to global business, aside from the political problems, will be the zonal time differences. “At the moment time differences are aggravations to the total realization of our new-found communications and transportation capabilities, but not complete deterrents. . . . Today, if it is important enough, we make allowances for and tolerate time differences—tomorrow we may have to do something about [them] . . . because as our business and cultural patterns change in this space era, these time differences will become intolerable. “. . . the space age has already contributed the concept of ‘one world-one time.’ By creating a common time and acceptance of a day not geared to the rising and setting of the Sun, we may be able to extend this to an acceptance of ‘one day’ consisting of 24 hours . . . during which we will make optimum use of our roads, our schools, our factories, our communications and transportation facilities . . . [with] 3-shift use . . . [so that] current facilities could handle three times as many people.” (Text)
Alumni Assn, of Western High School, Washington, D.C., would honor alumnus Edward H. White II, one of three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 accident, with a memorial, which would include furnishings, decorations, and possibly a space exhibit for school’s guidance library and counseling rooms. (W Star, 5/7/67, Bl)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stressed importance of manned spaceflight program in speech before ieee meeting in Washington, D.C.: This is a particularly appropriate date for us to review our manned space flight programs. It was just five years ago today that John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth in his Mercury spacecraft, Friendship 7. Since that time, we have made noteworthy strides in the manned exploration of space. ... In the Mercury and the Gemini Programs, we learned much about man’s capabilities in space flight. . . . “We will learn much more from the Apollo missions. By 1970, we will have provided the capability to explore space out to 250,000 miles from earth and to conduct manned operations and experiments on flights of up to two weeks duration. The Saturn I and Saturn V boosters will have injected up to 140 tons of payload per launch into near-earth orbit. The Saturn V will have sent 48 tons to the vicinity of the moon. The Apollo spacecraft will have sustained a three-man crew for two weeks in a two-compartment, maneuverable vehicle and will have landed two men on the moon and returned them with samples of lunar material, to earth. The U.S. manned space flight programs will have logged more than 500 man days in space, during which data and experience will have been acquired from approximately 100 in-flight experiments.” (Text)
President Johnson called for more Inter-American cooperation at conference of Latin American leaders in Punta del Este, Uruguay. U.S., he said, would aid Latin American development by (1) helping to develop a new common market; (2) contributing additional funds to Inter-American Bank for “special operations” such as construction of comsat earth stations; (3) exploring possibility of temporary preferential tariff; (4) offering agricultural and educational assistance; (5) increasing food program for pre-school and school-age children and operating a nutrition demonstration project; (6) establishing Alliance for Progress centers at U.S. colleges and universities; and (7) aiding development of science and technology, especially in areas of educational broadcasting, marine science, and atomic energy. (PD, 4/24/67, 636)
usaf launched experimental reentry vehicle on Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg Afb in Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry Systems (abres) program. (P Inq, 10/15/67, 7)
The Soviet Anti-Ballistic Missile (abm) System: a Survey of Soviet Strategic Doctrine, Arguments on Deployment, Intentions and Fulfillment, American Reaction and Implications,” Library of Congress document F-239, evaluated the dangers for Soviet abm deployment. Author, Specialist in Soviet and Eastern Europe Affairs Joseph G. Whelan, summarized present state of affairs, noting Russia’s historic preoccupation with the defensive and her clear intent not to accept permanently a second position to the U.S. Whelan quoted from Feb. 23, 1967, speech of Presidential adviser Walt W. Rostow at Univ. of Leeds, Great Britain: “We are all actively trying to find the terms for a non-proliferation agreement; and the emergence of [abm defense] for Moscow has posed for the United States and the Soviet Union the question of whether the nuclear arms race shall be brought under control or go into a vast and expensive round of escalation on both sides with respect to both offensive and defensive weapons.” (Text)
NASA’s Apollo 4 (AS-501), which would be launched by Saturn V in three days, had the power to place astronauts on moon, or telescopes in orbit beyond earth’s atmosphere; American capability for major strides toward the unknown had arrived when interest in these endeavors had reached a new and understandable low, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., reported in Baltimore Sun. Along with the new era of less than major interest in space had come the high-priority problems of the Southeast Asia war and the urban riots. Aviation Week for Aug. 7 had said “An era ended for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration last week when Congress voted a $234,000,000 cut in the agency’s budget authorization for fiscal 1968.” Many people during recent months had looked toward the achievement of social as well as scientific goals, reappraisement of both being called for by Congress. Because AS-501 would be one of the highest achievements in space, the question was no longer whether man could reach into space, but “. . . . with what urgency it should be done in the light of all the needs on earth.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/7/67, 6)
