nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from ,WSMR carried Cornell Univ. experiment to 106-mi (170.6-km) altitude to study far infrared in spectral range from five to several hundred microns, using mercury-, copper- and gallium-doped germanium and antimonide detectors. Nikon F camera monitored instantaneous rocket aspect. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Cornell Univ. scientists reported pulsar lying in or near Crab Nebula with fastest pulse rate of pulsars discovered thus far was slowing pulse tempo at rate of one part in 2,000 a year. Discovery was made with 1,000-ft-dia antenna at Arecibo (Puerto Rico) Observatory. Walter Sullivan in New York Times said discovery encouraged view that astronomers “are penetrating an entire new realm of physics . . . physics of superdense matter (in the form of so-called neutron stars), magnetic fields far beyond anything observable in the laboratory and superpowerful gravity.” (NYT, 11/25/68, 53)
NASA 10th Anniversary: National Space Club presented special award to President Johnson at White House citing his legislative and executive leadership of national space program. At Space Club dinner in Washington, D.C., Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) presented retiring NASA Administrator James E. Webb award for his outstanding contributions to national space effort. In telegram tribute to Webb, President Johnson said, “The Nation is in his debt. He will be deeply missed but gratefully remembered as his dreams continue to become reality in the years ahead.” Telegram from Vice President Hubert Humphrey said, “The span of achievement which measures a decade of space progress is one which should be a source of pride to all of us. Now a new decade beckons, with new challenges, and new opportunities. And, such is the nature of the space age that we dare not become complacent about our rate of progress or the scope of our past accomplishments. It is unthinkable that we would allow ourselves to be surpassed in technology by any other nation. I have never questioned that space endeavors have contributed significantly to the strengthening and enrichment of our whole society, through a teamwork approach by private industry, our universities, and the Federal Government. By means of this program we have vitalized our economy, developed improved methods of management, stimulated our educational system, produced new goods and services, added to our store of scientific knowledge, and buttressed our national security.” Telegram from Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said, “The space program must continue to be one of our national imperatives, and it must be supported at a level assuring efficient and steady progress.” Anniversary ceremonies also included open house and annual awards presentation at msfc Sept. 28—29. (nsc Newsletter; Texts; Marshall Star, 9/25/68,4) In anniversary statement issued by White House President Johnson said: “. . . not all of nasa’s accomplishments have been out of this world. Satellites have given us a new look at the world’s weather. . . . They have given us intercontinental television broadcasts, and broken down the technical barriers to worldwide communications. NASA has brought us advances in medical science, education, mapmaking, geology, transportation, and a host of other areas that promise a better life for us here on Earth. Its intensive research and development efforts have given us new materials, products and processes; raised our standards of reliability and advanced managerial techniques. These advances, together with the useful facilities it has built, will be lasting national assets long after the Moon landing is ancient history. . . . “In the years ahead—as in the past decade—our foremost motive is to make men wiser and life on earth more meaningful. And on the mile
U.K. became first nuclear power to ratify nuclear nonproliferation treaty. At Washington, D.C., ceremony, British Charge d’Affaires Edward E. Tompkins handed instruments of ratification to Director William C. Foster of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. (NYT, 11/28/68, 9)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists John W. Salisbury and Graham R. Hunt reported in Science they had found hypothesis of particle-size control of albedo incompatible with hypothesis of abundant limonite on Mars. Their observations indicated that proposal that polarimetric, spectrometric, color, and albedo measurements of light and dark areas on Mars proved limonite was major soil constituent was irreconcilable with proposal that variations in size of particle could be responsible for albedo difference between light and dark areas. They showed relative albedo was reversed from blue to red for limonite samples with different-sized particles. Observations of Mars revealed no blue-red albedo reversal between areas. Although evidence was insufficient for choice between hypotheses, they believed Mars soil was most likely, for geological reasons, to be composed of silicates stained or coated with ferric oxides. (Science, 7/26/68, 365—6)
NASA appointed m/g Daniel F. Callahan (usaf, Ret.), Manager of Florida Missile Operations for Chrysler Corp., to position of Deputy Director of Administration, Kennedy Space Center, vacated in October 1967 by Frederic Miller, who became Director of Installation Support, (ksc Release ksc—331—68)
Flight of Soviet heavy turboprop Bear aircraft had made most southern penetration over North American waters, coming close to Newfoundland coast in early February, Charles W. Corddry reported in Baltimore Sun. According to DOD officials, flight was closest to date but was not first; several Soviet aircraft had been detected 75—100 mi from Newfoundland coast since January. (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/68,1)
Washington Post commented on resignation of James E. Webb as NASA Administrator: “Virtually from scratch, with the country in a swivet over Soviet prowess, James E. Webb took over the Nation’s feeble space program and drove the United States firmly into the space age. ... he created—in the civilian space agency—the largest and most labryrinthine engineering organization in American history. ... In his eight-year stewardship, NASA proceeded under presidential and Congressional flogging toward the goal of a manned lunar landing ‘in this decade.’ It achieved repeated successes and hut a single important failure—the fire that claimed the lives of three astronauts last year. “It is characteristic of this self-effacing, organization-minded man that he should choose to retire now at his 62nd birthday, practically on the eve of the Apollo launching—a career-capping event if ever there was one. His purpose is to hand NASA over to his lieutenants before the change of administration, on the theory that the agency will thereby have a better chance of riding out next year’s power transfer. The country is fortunate that Mr. Webb is in good health and determined to apply himself vigorously to further the Nation’s understanding of the space age. For him this is far more than a matter of projectiles and orbits; it goes to the heart of the necessities and the aspirations of a great modern society. “Whereas Mr. Webb leaves NASA with its current mission adequately funded and its capabilities well formed, he does not leave it with a set mission beyond landing on the moon. This is hardly his fault. The fading American taste for competition with the Russians in space and the rising competition of other claimants for Federal funds explain NASA’s uncertain estate; its budget has been cut $1.4 billion in four years. ... it will be up to the next Administration and the next Congress to chart America’s future in space. That they have a choice is the singular achievement of Jim Webb.” (W Post, 9/18/68, A22)
President Johnson presented 1968 Enrico Fermi Award in White House ceremony to Dr. John Archibald Wheeler, Princeton Univ. physicist, for “pioneering contributions to understanding nuclear fission and to developing the technology of plutonium production reactors and his continuing broad contributions to nuclear science.” Award carried gold medal, citation, and $25,000. (PD, 12/9/68, 1956; W Post, 12/3/68, A2; W Star, 12/3/68, A6)
New York Times editorial said first flight tests of Multiple Independently Targetable Reentry Vehicle (mirv) and prototype missile carriers Poseidon and Minuteman III had taken U.S. “into a new nuclear arms race—with itself. The critical question now is whether the Soviet Union will feel sufficiently challenged to run along. Future generations undoubtedly will look back with disbelief at the way the United States again has invented, publicized and tested a deadly new weapon which, instead of improving American security, creates an added threat to it by putting the Soviet Union under pressure to produce the same weapon and aim it at the United States.” (NYT, 8/17/68, 26)
Earth Resources Satellite System, report by Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications for Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, was transmitted to committee and subcommittee, ers system “unquestionably presents NASA with . . . perhaps the best possible opportunity to achieve tangible economic returns from the substantial investment already made by the American taxpayer in the U.S. space program.” Pace of program to date had been “much too leisurely” and financial support, “inadequate.” Report recommended “NASA concentrate a much larger portion of its efforts and resources on this project” and “give the most serious consideration to the recommendation of the National Academy of Sciences’ summer study to the effect that funding for the applications satellite program should be at least doubled, perhaps tripled.” (Text)
Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) told American Astronautical Society meeting in Los Angeles: “In evaluating space spending as a budget priority, it is vital to consider the relationship of space to defense. . . . Both Russia and the United States have advance surveillance capacity. ... As long as the threat of nuclear war from any source continues, Russia and the United States will be producing ever more sophisticated orbital ‘spies in the skies’. . . . That is why the space program of the United States never is going to be abandoned. It will always be high on the list of spending priorities. The reason is not charming, but basic. We need to be in space to protect ourselves. ... In the somewhat more distant future the harvest of human rewards . . . now only beginning . . . will prove that space research and space applications justify a continuing high priority.” (Text; Aero Daily, 10/29/68)
usaf launched experimental Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, W Post, 11/25/68, 9)
NASA Honor Awards ceremony was held at Washington, D.C., with Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting Administrator, making presentations. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Research and Development) , was main speaker. ' Distinguished Service Medal, nasa’s highest honor, was presented to Secretary Flax; Edmond C. Buckley, former NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel; and Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal went to LeRC’s G. Mervin Ault, Edmond E. Bisson, and John C. Evvard; Jpl’s Richard M. Goldstein, Alan Rembaum, Lewis D. Kaplan, and Conway W. Snyder; msfc’s Otto A. Hoberg and Hans H. Hosenthien; LaRc’s Mark R. Nichols; and arc’s William A. Page and John A. Parker. Exceptional Service Medal recipients were: Mac C. Adams, Walter Boone, Richard L. Callaghan, Arnold W. Frutkin, Alfred S. Hodgson, Mildred V. Morris, and Boyd C. Myers, NASA Hq.; Robert M. Crane (posthumous), William R. Schindlar, and Michael J. Vaccaro, arc; Robert J. Darcey, Herman E. LaGow, and Robert J. McCaffery, gsfc ; Philip Donely, Paul F. Fuhrmeister, and Harry H. Hamilton, LaRC; Robert C. Duncan, erc; Fred H. Felberg and Alvin R. Luedecke, JPL; Arthur Rudolph, msfc; and Hubert Ray Stanley, Wallops Station. Group Achievement Award went to Apollo 7 Flight Operations Team, Instrumentation Ships Team, Mariner Occultation Experiment Team, ogo Project Team, Sonic Boom Investigating Team, and Surveyor Team. (Program; msfc Release 68—267; Marshall Star, 11/13/68, 1; Pasadena Independent, 11/15/68; arc Astrogram, 11/21/68, 1)
President Johnson announced resignation of Leonard H. Marks as Director of U.S. Information Agency in time to head U.S. delegation to negotiate permanent arrangements for INTELSAT at February 1969 conference in Washington, D.C. (PD, 10/7/68, 1433; Halloran, W Post, 10/2/68, A8; AP, NYT, 10/2/68,23)
Australian Air Force was sending technical team to U.S. to investigate airworthiness of F—111 aircraft. Australian government had ordered 24 F—Ills in 1963 for estimated $112 million. Cost had already increased to $266 million, and additional increases were expected. Delivery would be refused until Australia was satisfied mechanical faults had been eliminated. (NY Post, 5/20/68,21)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
USAF attempt to launch record 12 satellites from Vandenberg AFB with single Atlas-Burner II booster failed when heat shield apparently did not separate as planned. Telemetry during launch indicated Atlas and Burner II stages performed as scheduled, but confirmation of heat shield separation was not received. USAF was still investigating launch attempt. Upper stage had been designed to eject small satellites to measure size and shape of earth, provide targets for radar experiments, and test atmospheric drag in near space. {W Post, 8/18/68; Boeing Release S—9805)
New York Times editorial urged congressional passage of legislation to ban sonic booms: “While technical and budgetary difficulties have slowed development of an American supersonic aircraft, the British and French are progressing with their joint-venture model. It is important to have some protection on the law books before the booms come crashing down on the nation’s ears. . . . Developers . . . say they ‘assume’ it will fly at supersonic speed only over water but this is too important an issue to be left to anyone’s assumption.” (NYT, 5/16/68, 46; 5/25/68, 32)
Noting what he called “curious conspiracy of silence on Russia’s capabilities and intention” for almost eight years, William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said: “One of the many small acts of positive statesmanship which Richard M. Nixon could profitably perform early in his administration would be to tell the American people fully and frankly just what the United States government knows about the Soviet space program. ... It would lend credence to Mr. Nixon’s professed policy of openness. It would compromise no significant secrets. And it would enable the American public to make judgments about the future of the U.S. space program at a time when vital decisions along this line would be coming due.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C4)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster. Satellite entered orbit with 262-mi (421.6-km) apogee, 85-mi (126.8-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 110.5° inclination and reentered June 17. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 6/25/68,272)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to 108-mi (174-km) altitude to obtain UV radiation of bright star in constellation Cassiopeia, using gyro-stabilized spectrograph, ACS, and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. ACS stabilized rocket on target at star. Spectra were obtained on three exposures and payload was recovered in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt SRL)
fro said two reports—one by Dr. Eldon E. Kordes, NASA Senior Staff Scientist, to American Society of Mechanical Engineers and one by Chief XB—70 Pilot for fro, Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., to Flight Safety Foundation—indicated NASA—USAF XB—70 test program was providing valuable information for operation of large supersonic commercial and military aircraft. Results from XB—70’s participation in national sonic boom research program had shown methods used to predict overpressure and extent of boom were generally adequate for aircraft of this size and speed under “standard day” conditions but indicated unusual weather conditions and other factors could affect these predictions. XB—70 program was attempting to define intensity of turbulence at higher altitudes. System to improve stability, lessen turbulence-induced accelerations, and improve passenger riding qualities while lengthening aircraft’s fatigue life was being tested. New methods of presenting flight and engine information to pilot had evolved from XB—70 program, including digital form for more precise readout. Special warning systems prevented exceeding operating limits and attitude indicator with changeable sensitivity for smoother flight control had been evaluated. XB—70 flight had demonstrated need for further research in basic stability and control characteristics of its class of aircraft. Actual cross-country flight experience had been gained with trip from Edwards afb, Calif., to Carswell afb, Tex., and return. Both reports emphasized that, although XB—70 was not passenger aircraft, it was similar in size and performance characteristics to proposed sSTs and was only operational aircraft approaching SST size and speed, (fro Release 28-68)
Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, was awarded National Geographic Society’s Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1967 for “effective leadership and direction of U.S. Air Force in development and utilization of aerospace vehicles.” Award was presented annually to military or civilian member of usaf who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release; AP, NY News, 5/29/68, 22)
National Sporting Aviation Council, formed Feb. 16, adopted official charter at first meeting held in Washington, D.C., affirming its original mission to promote progress and development of all forms of sport aviation in U.S. through National Aeronautic Assn, and worldwide through Federation Aeronautique Internationale, (naa News)
In Washington Evening Star, David Lawrence asked, “What was really the big ‘miracle’ in the voyage of the American astronauts to the moon and back?” It could have happened, “and the rest of the world would not have witnessed the dramatic arrival of the astronauts aboard an aircraft carrier in the middle of the Pacific Ocean or the pictures sent from outer space for several days if it had not been for another great feat of science—transmission of television and radio from artificial satellites direct to every continent of the world.” (W Star, 12/30/68, A9)	_
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 266-mi (428.1-km) apogee, 88-mi (141.6-km) perigee, 90.5-min period, and 109.5° inclination and reentered Aug. 16. (SBD, 8/12/68, 177; GSFC SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt68)
Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon issued policy statement, “The Research Gap: Crisis in American Science and Technology”: U.S. was “shortchanging” its scientific community and risking research gap between U.S. effort and that of U.S.S.R. “Faced with dynamic possibilities for science, the current Administration is hobbled by the static philosophy that technological potentialities are limited. . . . This attitude is particularly perilous in the realm of defense. ... In few areas of development is activity so intense and productive as in Soviet military research and development.” While U.S.S.R. graduated twice as many scientists annually as U.S., American scientific community was “demoralized” by wavering attitudes toward R&D. “Scientific activity cannot be turned on and off like a faucet. The withdrawal of support disperses highly trained research teams, closes vital facilities, loses spinoff benefits, and disrupts development momentum. . . . The United States must end this depreciation of research and development in its order of national priorities. ... It would be an urgent goal of my administration to devise effective means by which it could cooperate with industry and the academic community in an effort to make maximum use of scientific advances to help solve major national problems. . . . Our goal is to make the United States first again in the crucial area of research and development.” (Text; Walsh, Science, 10/18/68, 335—7)
Aerospace sales reached record high of $30.1 billion in 1968, an increase of almost $3 billion over 1967, Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., told Washington, D.C., meeting of Aviation/Space Writers Assn. Commercial aerospace sales increased 39%, to record $6.4 billion; aerospace exports rose 32%, to $3 billion. Military space programs in 1968 rose 3%, from $1,088 billion in 1967 to $1,121 billion, reported AlA’s “1968 Aerospace Industry Review and Forecast,” which Harr released. N'onmilitary space sales declined 3.7%, from $4,202 billion in 1967 to $4,047 billion in 1968. Sales of products and services for use of aerospace technology in nonaerospace areas—such as marine science, water desalination, crime control, and rapid transit—increased from $2,579 billion to $2,726 billion. Harr predicted slight decline in total aerospace sales to about $29.6 billion during 1969 because of 25% drop in jet transport sales before deliveries of new high-capacity aircraft; continuing increase in helicopter, executive, and utility aircraft sales; modest increase in defense and nonaerospace sales; and decline in civil space sales. He noted that in third quarter of 1968 backlog of Government aerospace orders was less than that of other customers for first time since before World War II. (Text: aia Release 68—60; W Star, 12/19/68, A19)
NASA announced it would conduct 29 major launches from ETR and WTR during 1968. Surveyor-G launch, last in Surveyor series, was scheduled for Jan. 7. Launch of OGO—E would include last scheduled flight of Atlas-Agena launch vehicle from ETR; future unmanned interplanetary probes and high-altitude earth-orbital launches would use hydrogen-fueled Centaur. Two unmanned tests of Apollo lunar module and first manned test of Apollo spacecraft would use new Saturn IB vehicle. Three Apollo tests employing Saturn V would be launched from new spaceport complex at ksc. In addition to OGO and Surveyor, 11 scientific satellites would be launched from ETR—four Intelsats, ats—d, oao, oso, Biosatellite-D, heos (launched for esro), Pioneer-D and Skynet eomsat (launched for U.K.). Another 10 scientific satellites would he launched from wtr—four tos spacecraft (launched for ESSA), ogo—f, geos—b, Nimbus-B, imp—g, Radio Astronomy Explorer-A, and International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (joint American and Canadian program). About 250 sounding rockets and scientific probes of upper atmosphere would be launched from NASA Wallops Station. (NASA Release 67—315; ksc Release 451—67)
Japanese astronomer Minori Honda of Kurashiki Astronomical Observatory, Okayama, discovered new comet south of Capella in Auriga constellation. Tokyo Astronomical Observatory said July 14 discovery had been confirmed by three American observatories. Comet was named Honda Comet No. 6. (AP, C Trib, 7/15/68)
Chicago Tribune said, “Now that Apollo 8 and its three astronauts are home from their historic trip around the moon, we can safely call it one of the most memorable Christmas gifts ever given to the American people and mankind.” (C Trib, 12/28/68, 12)
Jet flying belt designed to propel wearer for minutes over multimile range at speeds from hovering to 70 mph and at varying altitudes was described by manufacturer, Bell Aerosystems Co., at Washington, D.C., press briefing. Miniature turbojet engine using kerosene fuel was designed by Williams Research Corp. for dod Advanced Research Projects Agency. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/28/68, 18)
At international symposium in Washington, D.C., sponsored by NAS and GSFC, Univ. of California scientist Dr. W. Ian Axford explained new phenomenon, “polar wind,” which was constantly blowing away small portions of earth’s atmosphere and losing them in space. In polar regions, earth’s magnetic lines of force plunged almost straight down, leaving considerable area “accessible to space. Charged particles moving rapidly could escape local entrapment by planet’s field. U.S satellites had observed such particles rising toward space at supersonic speeds. They climbed vertical magnetic force lines and wound up in long tail which protruded from earth on side away from sun (distortion of earth’s magnetic field by solar wind of charged particles flowing continuously from sun). Univ. of California scientist Peter M. Banks was credited with deducing existence of polar wind. (W News, 9/18/68, 18)
NASA would ask industry to submit proposals on $50-million “quiet jet engine” development program, said Hal Taylor in American Aviation. Contractor would be selected early in 1969 with fabrication of components to begin shortly after. Development would take three years. While engine would have takeoff thrust rating of about 23,000 lb, larger than JT3D engine in Boeing 707 and McDonnell Douglas DC—8, NASA officials had emphasized technology used would be applicable to all sizes of jet engines. Allison and Pratt & Whitney had performed preliminary design contracts and NASA felt General Electric Co. had facilities and personnel to undertake the advanced technology. Initial objective was minimum noise reduction below existing turbofan engines of at least 15 pndb on takeoff and 20 pndb at landing. Once engine was developed and run successfully, technology would be turned over to industry to be incorporated into future jet engines. {Am Av, 8/19/68, 23)
DOD announced second $1 -million installment on contracts for design of Navy vfx, substitute aircraft for F—111B, held by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., General Dynamics Corp., LTV Aerospace Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 19]. Five contractors would eventually get $3 million each under contract definition phase to end Oct. 1. (dod Press Off; W Post, 8/14/68, D9)
President Johnson at news conference announced that resignations of A. B. Trowbridge as Secretary of Commerce and Charles Murphy as member of Civil Aeronautics Board had been accepted. With Senate approval, Trowbridge would be succeeded by C. R. Smith, Chairman of Board of American Airlines, and Murphy, who would become consultant to President, by John H. Crooker of law firm Full-bright, Crooker, Freeman & Bates. {PD, 2/19/68, 295—300)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Lewis Research Center Director, received one of six $10,000, 1968 Rockefeller Public Service Awards—highest privately sustained honor for Federal career service—in Washington, D.C., ceremonies. (Causey, W Post, 12/5/68, A22)
J. S. Butz, Jr., in Air Force and Space Digest article “The Men Behind Soviet Aircraft Design” wrote: “Top Russian designers are exuberant realists; and they operate under a ‘prototype’ system of development that is probably the most competitive and technically stimulating in the world. This system is similar to the one employed in the United States until the mid-1950s and the odds appear strong that the U.S. will return to such an approach in the 1970s, rejecting the strong dependence on ‘systems analysis’ and ‘cost-effectiveness’ studies that characterized the 1960s.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 62-7)
Cornell Univ.’s association with Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory had been ended by Univ.’s Board of Trustees on recommendation of special committee headed by Univ.’s law professor W. David Curtiss. Reasons cited included overlap and potential conflict between Laboratory’s overseas research projects and Univ.’s expanding program of international studies. {Science, 2/2/68, 515)
naa selected Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) to receive its 1968 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “more than two decades of dynamic leadership in developing national and international policy that has assured United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world and has contributed immeasurably to the health and vitality of America’s economic structure.” Trophy would be presented Dec. 17 at Annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
In answer to queries [see Nov. 16] DOD issued statement on increased cost of C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. “At the beginning of this program over three years ago, the Air Force estimated that the cost of development and production of the first 58 airplanes would be $2.3 billion. The corresponding estimate for the 120 airplanes ultimately contemplated was $3.1 billion. Current estimates, including economic escalation and all other factors, are $3.25 billion and $4.3 billion, indicating increases of 41% and 39% respectively.” Additional costs had resulted from increased labor and materials costs due to Vietnam war and “unprecedented demand for civilian aircraft,” introduction of new technology, and modifications to overcome technical difficulties. (Text; WSJ, 11/20/18, 2; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, A3; Kelly, W Star, 11/20/68, All)	_
Juan T. Trippe, founder, Chairman, and Chief Executive Officer of Pan American World Airways, Inc., announced his retirement at annual meeting in New York. Board of Directors selected President Harold E. Gray, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and Senior Vice President Najeeb E. Halaby, President. Citing Trippe’s 41-yr service with PAA, New York Times termed him “last of the aviation pioneers” to retire. One of four who forged major U.S. trunk airlines in industry’s infancy, Trippe had led PAA to be first airline to fly across Pacific, first to fly across Atlantic, first to order and fly American-made jets, first to order Boeing 747, and first to order SSTs. New Chairman Gray, hired by PAA in 1929 as its 10th pilot, had made first scheduled transatlantic flight, in 1938. He had served as President since 1964. Halaby, pilot since age 17 and former faa Administrator, had joined airline as senior vice president in 1965. (Hammer, NYT, 5/8/68, 63; 5/12/68,16)
Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. received $5,700,000 usaf contract for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb from Oct 1, 1967, through Sept. 30,1968. (dod Release 64—68)
nasa announced that North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. injector would be used in Bell Aerosystems Co. engine of first manned lunar module. Decision on whether to use Bell or nar injector for lunar mission had not yet been made, (msc Release 68-41)
Charles W. Mathews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed Society of Automotive Engineers Space Technology Conference in Washington, D.C.: “A major goal of the Apollo Applications Program is to accelerate the evolution of the utility of space flight using the very major capability that has been developed in the Apollo Program. . . . First, our experience to date leads to the conclusion that the utility of space flight will be greatly enhanced by the participation of men onboard the spacecraft. Second, in manned space flight our ability to maintain operations for durations considerably in excess of those now obtained is necessary for efficient operations. . . . The initial step in this approach is the establishment of a workshop in earth orbit.” Saturn IB orbiting workshop, manned after launch by three-man crew, would be followed by manned Apollo Telescope Mount, which would dock with workshop for 56-day mission to study solar phenomena—“first application of man in space to conduct advanced scientific experiments.” Features and operating modes of Saturn V workshop, to follow, would be based on information gained from Saturn IB workshop. (Text)
Command module for Apollo 7, first manned Apollo flight, left North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant enroute to Kennedy Space Center. Service module had arrived at ksc May 17. (nasa Release 68—100)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., unique conditions in space suggested use of orbiting space stations for certain manufacturing processes. “For instance, liquid floating in a weightless environment takes the shape of a perfect sphere. Thus, it is conceivable that metal ball bearings could be manufactured in space to tolerances impossible on earth, yet at a cost, including transportation, less than we can now achieve. Perfect bearings would reduce friction and noise levels to the vanishing point. Free-fall casting techniques could be utilized to cast large flawless optical blanks for telescopes and by proper combinations of spinning and electrostatic forces we should be able to shape the surface as well.” Stable foams for mixtures of liquefied materials and gases, impossible to produce satisfactorily on earth, could be produced in weightlessness, resulting in “a steel foam almost as light as balsa wood with many of the properties of solid steel.” Composite materials like steel of different densities and properties and glass also could be produced. (Text; Schmeck, NYT, 11/27/68, 48; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/27/68, A6)
Long-nosed USAF C—131 research aircraft was being developed for Air Force Systems Command by Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., as unique flying simulator to test controls, instruments, and aircraft configurations of advanced aircraft such as Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa), military C—5A cargo and passenger aircraft, and SST. Total In-Flight Simulator (tifs) configuration—with nose length varying to simulate advanced aircraft and with second cockpit below and ahead of main cockpit and six independent controls—would realistically reproduce handling conditions of modeled aircraft and enable USAF to determine inexpensively in advance correct design and instrumentation for advanced aircraft, (afsc Release 45.68)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner, Washington, D.C., sponsored by NAA, Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) received Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “assuring United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world.” (naa pao)
Dr. Gardiner L. Tucker, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Electronics & Information Systems), told Military Operations Subcommittee of House Committee on Government Operations dod would proceed with new phase of Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs), procuring more than three advanced synchronous satellites and developing over six new ground terminals. Funding of satellites, which would use very narrow-beam steerable antennas illuminating 1,000- to 2,000-mi-dia area of earth, would start in FY 1969. dscs satellites would be comparable to Intelsat IV series under consideration for commercial service. New dod phase represented technological advance over advanced dscs considered in 1967 but was less ambitious in cost and size, with cost range of $100—200 million, contrasted with earlier $500 million. Current system had 25 satellites in orbit and operational, each equipped with switch to turn it off after six years in orbit. Number of terminals had grown from original two in field and seven transportable to worldwide operational system with terminals near Washington, D.C., and in New Jersey, Colorado, California, Hawaii, Guam, Australia, Korea, Okinawa, Philippines, South Vietnam, Thailand, Ethiopia, and Western Germany, plus six shipboard terminals. Cooperative programs with Allies in satellite communications included procurement of two synchronous Skynet satellites for U.K. as part of Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) with first launch scheduled for mid-1969. Joint efforts were under way to ensure operability of U.S. and U.K. satellites and terminals, and work was under way to procure two Skynet satellites for NATO under program similar to that of U.K. First launch was planned for late 1969, with U.S. controlling satellite. U.S. had signed Memorandum of Understanding with six NATO countries establishing joint testing program utilizing Les V experimental satellite, launched July 1, 1967. (Transcript: dod Release 603—68; Johnson, Av Wk, 6/24/68)
World’s largest commercial jet—360- to 490-passenger Boeing 747 with mach 0.84 to 0.90 cruising speed—was rolled from factory for first time in ceremony at Everett, Wash. The $20-million aircraft was scheduled for first flight in December 1968 and first passenger service, with Pan American World Airways, Inc., one year later. (Boeing pio; AP, W Post, 9/30/68, A22; 10/1/68, A9; Witkin, NYT, 10/1/68, upi, W Star, 10/1/68, A6)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 316-mi (508.5-km) apogee, 300mi (482.8-km) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 74.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
Dept, of Commerce announced that “the exploration of Antarctica has now been virtually completed,” with conclusion of two-month, 815-mi scientific journey led by C&GS geophysicist Norman W. Peddie. “There are now no major areas [of Antarctica] which have not been explored,” Peddie said. Expedition, which started Dec. 5 and ended Jan. 30, was made by nine-man party of Belgian, Norwegian, and American scientists. Trip covered region in Queen Maud Land between South Pole and Princess Ragnhild Coast in direction of Africa (W Post, 4/21/68, A12)
Second stage of vehicle expected to be first manned Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle was shipped from Kennedy Space Center launch site to Mississippi Test Facility for cryogenic proof pressure test by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel. Test, scheduled for June, would further certify integrity of stage’s liquid-hydrogen tank and would be conducted on all 2nd stages for manned Apollo Saturn missions. Stage would be reshipped to ksc about July 1. (msfc Release 68—93)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 243-mi (391.1-km) apogee, 111-mi (178.6-km) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 83° inclination and reentered Oct. 8. Second satellite entered orbit with 318-mi (511.8-km) apogee, 312-mi (502.1-km) perigee, 94.7-min period, and 83.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)	_
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 254-mi (408.8-km) apogee, 77-mi (132.9-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 111.4° inclination and reentered Feb. 4. (SBD, 1/19/68, 98; GSFC SSR, 1/31/68; Pres Rpt 68)
Prototype four-engine turboprop stol aircraft built in France as Breguet III and in U-S. as McDonnell Douglas 188 was demonstrated for press in flight over Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Eastern Airlines, McDonnell Douglas, and faa were testing aircraft as possible replacement for jet aircraft on Eastern’s crowded shuttle service between Washington, New York, and Boston. When fully developed, aircraft would carry 100 passengers at 400 mph with all-weather capability. It would take off and land on less than 800-ft runway and operate on more direct routes closed to conventional aircraft under noise-abatement rules. Airline spokesman had said aircraft could be operational in “early 1970.” (Yarborough, W Star, 9/18/68, Al; Valentine, W Post, 9/19/68, Bl)
naa Executive Director, m/g B. E. Allen (usaf, Ret.), in Washington, D.C., ceremony presented awards to Allen Bourdon, William Diehl, and Ernest Hall, last three living civilian flight instructors of World War I air service, for “their patriotism, devotion to duty, and capability as pilots [who performed] an outstanding service toward our achievement of victory in World War I.” (naa News)
German scientist Dr. Otto Hahn, who had won 1944 Nobel Prize for chemistry for his 1938 discovery of nuclear fission, died at Goettingen, Germany, of heart failure at age 89. He had been consistent opponent of use of atomic weapons, urging scientists to concentrate on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, (upi, W Post, 7/29/68, B4) July 28—August 3: Australian astronomers using Mills Cross antenna array at Univ. of Sydney had detected first two pulsars to be found in southern sky. They brought to nine total pulsars discovered to date. Pulse rates of once every 0.56 and 1.96 sec were similar to all others, which ranged between 0.25 and 2 sec. Cornell Univ. astronomer, Dr. Yervent Terzian, had observed that two-second pulse rate made it appear unlikely that pulsating neutron stars could account for the signals. Calculations indicated that, if they were quivering, or “ringing” like bell, it should be at much shorter intervals than those observed. Pulse rates were more compatible, he said, with proposal that they emanated from white dwarfs, “cinders” of stars that had consumed their nuclear fuel but were larger and less dense than neutron stars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/68, 30)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 335-mi (539.1-km) apogee, 285-mi (458.6-km) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 75.1° inclination. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 11; Pres Rpt 68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 176-mi (273.2-km) apogee, 115-mi (185.1-km) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 83.1° inclination and reentered May 15. (Pres Rpt 68)
At Fort Worth, Tex., ceremonies, Australian Minister for Defence Allen Fairhall accepted first of Australia’s 24 F—111C aircraft on order from General Dynamics Corp. U.S. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, told assembled dignitaries F—111 “institutes a new generation of aircraft. ... We have discovered . . . that when compared to fixed-wing aircraft, the variable geometry wing requires far fewer compromises to obtain the desired performance.” (dod Releases 779—68, 812—68; afsc Newsreview, 9/68,1)
Representatives of 43 nations signed space rescue treaty at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. At State Dept, ceremony in Washington, D.C., President Johnson said he hoped treaty would end wasteful competitive spacemanship between U.S. and U.S.S.R. and that next decade in space would increasingly become a partnership. Treaty, which provided for assistance to astronauts in emergency and safe return of astronauts and space hardware, had heen unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19, 1967. Secretary of State Dean Rusk signed for U.S. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Ward, B Sun, 4/23/68,1; PD, 4/29/68,1108)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Abraham N. Geller issued temporary order blocking sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to edp Technology, Inc., Washington, D.C., for $25 million. Order had been requested by State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz, who alleged alteration of Laboratory from public purposes to profit-making organization would be a “major change detrimental to the national interest, to the quality and effectiveness of the laboratory and to the . . . public.” New York State had sought to purchase facility but was reportedly unable to match edp Technology, Inc., offer. (AP, NYT, 11/13/68, 11) Day preceding conference, eldo meeting had resolved, with U.K. abstaining, to proceed with launcher development on scale designed to hold down costs. U.K. had proposed European nations abandon project, rely on U.S. boosters, and concentrate on space applications, particularly communications. U.K. agreed, however, to fulfill commitment to support launcher program until 1971. (W Post, 11/15/68, A20; Greenberg, Science, 12/6/68, 1108-9)
Press reported recently released testimony at February hearings of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Defense. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell had described Foxbat as only Soviet fighter aircraft “that we cannot match.” Undergoing late stages of testing, it had estimated mach 3 maximum speed, 70.000-	to 75,000-ft maximum altitude, 1,600-mi combat range without external fuel tanks, and 1,400-mph cruise speed at 50,000-ft altitude. U.S. observers believed fighter-bomber version could be operational in 1969 or 1970; advanced radar-equipped interceptor version with internally carried missiles could be in squadron service by 197Q or 1971. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, had testified that U.S. was not behind U.S.S.R. in aircraft development, while Gen. McConnell had said that F—X (fighter experimental), U.S. fighter in Foxbat class, was still being designed and was “a little late.” (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 6/11/68,1)
NASA announced completion of X—15 flight research program [see Jan. 21]. On final flight Oct. 24—199th in series which began June 8, 1969—nasa test pilot William H. Dana flew rocket-powered aircraft to 255,000-ft altitude. Attempt at 200th flight Dec. 20 was canceled because of adverse weather conditions. In nasa—usaf—usn program initiated in 1954, flights by three X—15 aircraft manufactured by North American Rockwell Corp. had included more than 82 min of flight at speeds exceeding mach 5 and total flight time of more than 30 hr. Peak altitude reached was 354,200 ft (67.04 mi) and top speed was 4,520 mph (mach 6.7)-—speeds and altitudes never before attained by any vehicle fully controlled by pilot from launch to landing. It had set two official world altitude records of 246,740 ft and 314,750 ft previously. X—15 flight program provided knowledge applicable to design and development of future spacecraft and commercial supersonic aircraft and data on aerodynamic heating in high-speed flight, which could cause deterioration of aircraft structural integrity. X—15 remained only aircraft capable of studying phenomena at hypersonic speeds, space-equivalent flight, and reentry flight.	“ It also had served as test bed for new components and subsystems, subjecting them to hypersonic flight environment. In 1962 four X—15 pilots received Robert J. Collier Trophy from President Kennedy for “the greatest achievement of aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, safety, or efficiency of air and space vehicles.” (nasa Release 68-221; NASA SP-60; nasa EP—9; AP, NYT, 12/21/68, 73; SBD, 12/23/68, 236)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 249-mi (400.7-km) apogee, 90-mi (144.8-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 106° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 20. (Pres Rpt 68)
India’s Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) was dedicated as international facility by Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi. nasa was represented by Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin, Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard.Jaffe, and nasa Wallops Station Assistant Chief of Flight Test Div. Robert T. Duffy. Duffy had served as advisor, and Wallops had assisted by helping to develop range, training scientists and engineers, and lending launching and tracking equipment. Teels had been established Nov. 21, 1963, by Indian National Commission for Space Research (incospar) and to date had launched 52 rockets: 17 American Nike-Apaches, 29 American Judi-Darts, and 6 French Centaures. Rockets launched as part of dedication included two Nike-Apaches, one Judi-Dart, and one Centaure. Payloads contained experiments involving French, Soviet, and American collaboration with India. India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy planned Centaure manufacturing unit at terls, and incospar would build space science and technology center at Veli (near terls) to design and develop space research systems, including vehicle, payload, instrumentation, and ground support. Mrs. Gandhi said: “This center represents only one facet of the tremendous industrial and technological revolution in which we are involved. . . . Technology is a key. It is a key to knowledge that opens the door to plenty as well as power. In a sense it is a key to independence, for it was the failure to advance technologically which made Asia and Africa dependent and poverty-stricken.” (nasa Release 68-14; WS Release 68—1; India News, 2/2/68, 4; LA Times, 2/3/68; B Sun, 6/30/68)
The Economist: “What did they think, those three men of Apollo 8 who risked their lives and their sanity to fly to the moon only to report that it looked like grey plaster of paris? What should we earthbound ones think? In New York City, there are at least 2,000 people who would rather have watched a football game and were sufficiently incensed to telephone the television networks and tell them so. The blame is not the astronauts’. A whole series of photographs, some taken from instruments actually on the moon’s surface, some in black-and-white, some in colour, had already warned them what to expect. The buck lies on the desks of the men who for the past 13 years have directed the United States’ $32 billion space programme, and spent 70% of it on getting men into space without planning anything constructive for them to do when they got there. . . . The cost of a manned moonshot is put at around $1 billion, and for that sum you could get a whole programme of unmanned moon launches. . . . “But man does not live by science alone. . . . the greatest achievements of men in space have so far been in the realm of the human spirit. . . . Apollo 8 is part of the unceasing restlessness, invention and ambition of our kind. Have we really any reason to believe that man’s evolution has come to a stop after a bare half million years on earth? It requires arrogance, a closed mind and absolutely no sense of history ... to say that sending men into space is an utter waste of time.” [The Economist, 12/28/68, 112)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) said on Senate floor: “I am now confident . . . serious consideration should be given to canceling the entire Air Force F—111 series. ... If the plane is fundamentally unsound—and that would now appear to be the case—its termination would prevent the loss of additional billions of dollars—and what is more important, save the lives of many pilots.” He said October report of Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee of Senate Committee on Armed Services “points up the grave security deficiencies that have resuited from the Department of Defense forcing the Air Force and Navy to put all the eggs of their aircraft development into one unfortunate basket.” (Text; CR, 10/7/68, S12148-51; Witkin, NYT, 10/8/68, 18; W Post, 10/8/68, All)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 260-mi (418.5-km) apogee, 82-mi (132-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 99.9° inclination and reentered March 24. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 3/14/68, 75)
NASA awarded North American Rockwell Corp. 12.575-million contract modification to continue Saturn V (S—II) “battleship” or ground test program at Santa Susana, Calif., test center through July. Modification increased total contract for S—II stage development testing and facility maintenance planning to $1,281 billion, (msfc Release 68—109)
Republican candidate Richard M. Nixon was elected President of United States, with 302 electoral votes from 32 states and popular vote of 30,041,582, or 43.42%. Democratic candidate Hubert H. Humphrey polled 191 electoral votes from 14 states and 29,817,385 popular votes, or 43.10%. American Independent Party candidate George C. Wallace won 45 electoral votes and 9,242,950 popular votes, or 13.36%. While space had not been major issue in election, candidates had made statements in support of space program in campaign speeches, (nasa eh; CQ Weekly Rpt, 11/8/68, 3071)
International comment on Apollo 8 mission:	, In statement distributed by Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., Boris Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, hailed “hardware” and “courage” of Apollo 8 astronauts but called attention to “considerable accent” placed on “automatic devices” in Soviet space program. He said, “The Soviet Union is engaged in a large-scale program of planned studies and exploration of outer space, which provides for the investigation of the earth’s upper atmosphere and of near-earth outer space and studies of sun-earth relationships and of our closest space neighbors—the moon, venus and mars, and later, on more remote planets.” Cuban National Radio called mission “a total success.” Toss: “Due tribute should be paid to the courage and mastery of Frank Borman, William Anders and James Lovell who have accomplished this outstanding scientific and technical experiment. The successful flight of Apollo 8 ushers in a new stage in the history of space exploration.” Ten Soviet cosmonauts telegraphed Apollo crew congratulations for “another milestone in scientific and technical progress.” Pope Paul VI, in message to President Johnson: “Giving thanks to God for the successful completion of the magnificent enterprise of the Apollo 8 mission, we congratulate you and the people of the United States of America and particularly the intrepid space travelers, and invoke divine blessing upon all contributing to this noble achievement.” U.N. Secretary General U Thant: “The powerful thrust of the rocket engines, the awesome speeds attained in flight, the vast distances traveled, the precision of navigation and the fidelity of communications, aural and visual, all stagger the imagination and defy the comprehension of man.” Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia: “a great milestone in man’s continued search of the unknown.” Gov. Gen. Roland Michener of Canada, in message to President Johnson: Canadians had followed astronauts’ flight with “admiration for their courage and the technical skill of all who have a part in the enterprise.” Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan to President Johnson: feat showed America’s “courage and the high level of scientific technology.” In Kaduna, Nigeria, New Nigerian said Apollo 8, “Apart from being the supreme technological achievement ... of all time,” was “another exciting chapter in man’s eternal quest to triumph over his own natural environment.” Same skills and resources which were helping to conquer space ’’could easily be diverted to giving man a better life on earth itself—if only all of us would allow the good that is inherent in all mankind to assert itself.” (AP, B Sun, 12/28/68, 1; New Nigerian, 12/27/68, 1)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $9,666,800 NASA contract for 10 additional Improved (Long-Tank) Delta launch vehicles for use in variety of launches, including TOS—E for ESSA in August, Intelsat III for Com-SatCorp in September, idscp/a for dod in May 1969, heos (Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite) for esro in late 1968, and ISIS—A (International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies) in late 1968. North American Rockwell Corp. was awarded $6,968,038 contract extension for material, facilities, manpower and equipment for XB—70 flight operations, and General Electric Co. was awarded $1,957,323 extension for maintenance of XB—70 engines. Both extensions covered July 1, 1968, through June 30,1969. (nasa Release 68-116; FRC Release 19—68)
New subdivision of Air Force Systems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (afhrl), became operational at Brooks afb, Tex., as focal point for USAF R&D effort to satisfy technology needs in human resources education, training, and management. It would also provide technical and management assistance in support of studies, analyses, development planning activities, acquisition, test evaluation, modification, or operation of aerospace systems and related equipment, (afsc Release 93.68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 161-mi (257.2-km) apogee, 100-mi (160.9-km) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 82.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 27 (gsfc SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt 68)
nasa successfully launched Stratoscope II, Princeton Univ.’s balloonborne telescope, from Scientific Balloon Flight Station, Palestine, Tex., to altitude of 80,000 ft. Purpose was to photograph sky from altitude above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 68—93)
Radar map of planet Venus had been produced by Cornell Univ. scientists from computer-assembled data. Radar-astronomy data had been gathered by world’s largest radiotelescope at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico. Principal scientist Raymond F. Jurgens said map was equivalent to what largest optical telescope on earth could obtain were it not for thick cloud cover obscuring Venusian surface. Measurements had been made in 1964 and 1967 when Venus was nearest earth, 26 million miles away. Cornell’s Center for Radiophysics and Space Research Director Thomas Gold concluded from measurements that Venus’ surface material was denser than moon’s. Scientists confirmed that Venus rotated with same face toward earth each time it passed nearest earth. Radar observations revealed rough areas near planet’s equator and probable steep mountain range in southern hemisphere. One-third of Venus had already been mapped; data needed for map of almost entire planet were available. (AP, NYT, 2/13/68, 30)
New York Times editorial commented on NAS report on status and needs of American mathematics [see Nov. 22]: “. . . this era—often called the age of the computer—is really the time of the most widespread and fruitful application of mathematics ever known. . . . The cost of supporting American mathematics is so slight in relation to the vast potential benefits that even the most economy-minded Congressman should be chary of using his ax” on Federal support. (NYT, 11/25/68, 46)
At signing in Washington, D.C., of nuclear nonproliferation treaty, President Johnson said: “The conclusion of this treaty encourages the hope that other steps may be taken toward a peaceful world. And ... I have described this treaty as the most important international agreement since the beginning of the nuclear age. . . . After long seasons of patient and painstaking negotiation, we have concluded just within the past five years, the limited test ban treaty, the outer space treaty, the treaty creating a nuclear-free zone in Latin America. And the march of mankind is toward the summit and not the chasm.” Agreement had also been reached between TJ.S. and U.S.S.R., President Johnson announced, “to enter in the nearest future into discussions on the limitation and the reduction of both offensive strategic nuclear weapons delivery systems and systems of defense against ballistic missiles.” At Moscow signing of treaty, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin called agreement a “major success for the cause of peace.” He disclosed contents of U.S.S.R. memorandum to all nations proposing nine-point disarmament and arms control program and called on 18-nation Geneva disarmament conference to take up proposal. (PD, 6/8/68; Sherman, W Star, 7/1/68, Al; upi, 7/1/68; Grose, NYT, 7/2/68, 1, 2)
dod announced usaf scientists, in study conducted by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, would fly KC—135 flying ionospheric laboratory around auroral oval in Arctic during seven-day series of first flights attempted along this route. Purpose was to obtain data on spatial extent and intensity of optical and radio auroras in midwinter and define relationships between them, usaf was interested in influence of auroras on radio communication and navigation and on radar surveillance. afcrl scientists hoped, eventually, to predict occurrence and severity of auroral activity, (dod Release 1065—68)
faa awarded $3.8-million contract to IBM’s Federal Systems Div. to modernize air traffic control at 100 U.S. facilities by installing printers and keyboards for faster coordination and reduction of controllers’ oral and manual workload. Delivery of equipment, to begin April 15, would be coordinated with delivery of other automation components for National Airspace System, (faa Release 68—24) U.S. Public Health Service in Washington, D.C., and Univ. of Texas. Demonstration was directed by itt World Communications, Inc., with cooperation of ComSatCorp and Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co., Ltd., Japan. (ComSatCorp Release 68—17: AP, W Star, 4/10/68, A18; dpi, W Post, 4/12/68, A15)	'
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 177-mi (284.8-km) apogee, 108mi (173.8-km) perigee, 88.8-min period, and 82.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 23. (Pres Rpt 68)
Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Government Operations, praised March 28 decision of Senate Committee on Armed Services to disapprove additional funds for F—111B aircraft and urged that F—lllAs in combat zone “be brought back immediately . . . and not returned to combat until they are fully tested and ready.” He said it was “imperative that the production line be held up until the design of the airplane number 160 configuration is completed and tested and can be incorporated into the very next plane the Air Force buys. If this drastic step is not taken, then we will truly be committing another billion dollar blunder in this tfx program which already has cost the American taxpayers many, many fruitless billions of dollars.” (CR, 3/29/68, S3657-60)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, addressed International Meeting of American Nuclear Society in Washington, D.C. In past decade NASA had developed “impressive capability” in “competent and creative people who make up our government-university-industry team.” It was “prepared to accomplish any goal in space exploration which the new administration may establish.” NASA future included “broad, balanced, Planetary Program” emphasizing Mars but examining other planets like Mercury and Jupiter; major lunar exploration program in 1970’s; astronomy program covering optical astronomy, x-ray and gamma ray fields, and low-frequency radio astronomy; and increased emphasis on space applications programs, with maj or efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space and continuing developments in meteorology and communications. (Text)
edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., independent concern providing technical support in computer use and technology, had announced it would purchase Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Buffalo, N.Y., from Cornell Univ. for $25 million, (nyt, 9/26/68)
In Air Force and Space Digest interview General Electric Co. Vice President Gerhard Neumann, head of GE Aircraft Engine Group, said postponement of essential R&D during past several years had “mortgaged” nation’s techological future. He saw hazards in current DOD contracting policies which kept industry from taking “reasonable risks” because they imposed implacable performance guarantees. He blamed parsimonious funding on Vietnam War requirements and urged lost ground be regained as soon as priorities permitted. In era of R&D austerity, Neumann advocated “lot more” work in advanced-engine research by nasa. (AF/SD, 11/68, 58)
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it had asked fcc to authorize its acquisition of 70 additional satellite communications circuits from ComSatCorp. Purchase would boost AT&T circuits to 396. (WSJ, 11/8/68, 5)
usaf successfully launched OV 1—15 and OV1—16 research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F booster. OV 1—15 entered orbit with 1,032-mi (1,660.8-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 103.0-min period, and 89.8° inclination and reentered Nov. 6. OV 1—16, nicknamed “Cannonball,” was 600-lb, 23-in-dia Low Altitude Density Satellite (loads) launched to measure atmospheric density between 90- and 110-mi altitudes for 25—30 days. Densest satellite U.S. had orbited, OV 1—16 had 162-lb-per-cu-ft density, which enabled it to orbit closer to earth than any previous spacecraft. Orbital parameters: apogee, 286 mi (460.3 km) ; perigee, 82 mi (132.0 km) ; period, 90.4 min; and inclination, 89.8°. OV 1—16 reentered Aug. 19. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/12/68, A21; SBD, 7/15/68, 44; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt68)
msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, addressing National Capital Area Chapter of American Society for Public Administration, praised U.S. space program for “unequaled competence and unlimited opportunity.” After 10 yr in space, he noted, U.S. had launched 514 spacecraft into earth orbit and 28 to moon and other planets. “The moon has been completely mapped, the composition and texture of its soil analyzed, and sites . . . selected for manned lunar landings. Our scientific knowledge of Mars and Venus . . . has been advanced tremendously by . . . unmanned, instrumented probes. . . . American astronauts, who have a total of almost 2,000 hours in space to their credit in the Mercury and Gemini Projects, will begin the third phase of manned space flight this year with the first manned launches in Project Apollo. These achievements in space, fruits of the advanced science and technology of our times, mark the first decade of the Space Age as one of the finest periods in American history. And they are forerunners of even greater discoveries and widespread applications to come during our second decade in space.” Dr. von Braun credited nasa Administrator James Webb’s direction with adaptation of systems approach to space research without which “we would never be able to go to the moon.” Approach, Dr. von Braun believed, could also be tested on river pollution and satellite communications. (Text; W Post, 3/21/68, H14)
Sen. John S. Cooper (R-Ky.) led bipartisan drive in Senate to deny dod FY 1969 funds to begin deployment of Sentinel abm system. There was “no present threat to American security from a Chinese intercontinental ballistic missile attack,” he said, and it was “difficult to believe they would invite the certain destruction of their country by a nuclear attack upon the U.S.” when they attained the capability. Coalition hoped to postpone Sentinel deployment for at least one year by striking approximately $600 million for further r&d. (Finney, NYT, 6/14/68, 18; AP, W Post, 6/14/68, A28)
New York Times editorial on U.S.S.R.’s Zond V mission: “Until the nation [U.S.] has a better idea of the progress achieved during this long interval between American manned flights, it is premature to conclude that the Russians have a significant over-all lead in space capability and that Soviet citizens will certainly paint their flag on the lunar surface before American astronauts. “In any event, as the Soviet rape of Czechoslovakia has recently reminded the world so dismayingly, a nation’s image and prestige depend primarily upon what it does here on earth, not on its feats in space.” (NYT, 9/23/68, 32)
Fiftieth anniversary of U.S. Airmail Service was celebrated in Washington, D.C., with gathering at National Air and Space Museum of pioneer airmail pilots and presentation by Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson of commemorative 10-cent postage stamp. Watson observed that, from small beginning, “virtually all first class mail which can be effectively airlifted is now so moved and almost 80 per cent of all letter mail now travels by air.” (Text; Lidman, NYT, 5/16/68, 30; Aerospace, Spring 68)
Sen. Claiborne Pell (D-R.I.) told 33rd American Assembly in Harriman, N.Y., “The proportion of government expenditures in oceanology must be brought much closer to our outer space program.” Increased Federal investment in oceanology was justified by promise of economic returns, he said. Material benefits from space program were more remote. (Text; W Post, 5/5/68, A25)
Inauguration of direct air service between New York and Moscow had been set for “on or after July 15” by letters between U.S. Moscow Embassy and U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry. Soviet airline Aeroflot announced 11—62 jet aircraft service would start from Moscow July 15. U.S. carrier Pan American World Airways expected to start Boeing 707 service from New York same date. Bilateral air agreement of Nov. 4, 1966, had stipulated once-weekly return flights over 4,700-mi route. May 6, 1968, agreement added intermediate stop at Montreal, Copenhagen, Stockholm, or London, (cab Docket 6489; State Dept Release 94; AP, NYT, 7/9/68, 65; Ward, B Sun, 7/9/68,1; AP, W Post, 7/9/68, A15) First had interfered with short-wave transmissions worldwide, according to ESSA Chief of Forecast Services, Robert Doeker; second had seemed weaker. Scientists were watching for effect of cloud of electrons spawned by first solar flare, biggest and brightest since 1966. (AP, LA Her-Exam, 7/10/68; AP, NYT, 7/10/68, 17)
Some 25 Mexican and Brazilian scientists began four-month study course at msc to learn how aircraft-borne sensors could enable them to map natural resources. Program, initial step toward development of earth resources satellites which would carry sensors for international exchange of data, included 12-wk technical course taught by Univ. of Michigan instructors under $92,000 contract; 6-wk field trip to Government and university sensor development centers; and additional 2-wk study at msc. After completing program, scientists would initiate test programs for remote sensing techniques in their countries, first with NASA aircraft and then with native-owned aircraft. (H. Chron, 2/15/68; AP, NYT, 2/16/68,1) *	John D. Hodge, msc, and Dr. George F. Pezdirtz, larc, received Arthur S. Flemming Award, presented annually to 10 outstanding young men in the Federal Government. Pezdirtz had developed pyrones, new family of polymer plastics, and Hodge had been flight director of manned flight missions beginning with Project Mercury. (NN; PD, 2/19/68, 289-90) *	INTELSAT comsats had carried heaviest load of traffic across Atlantic in their history during interruption of service on two transatlantic cables, ComSatCorp announced. With cooperation of earth stations overseas, ComSatCorp used 177 additional circuits on Intelsat I and II—C. Satellites and stations functioned precisely. (ComSatCorp Release 68-6) *	Current U.S. aerospace test facilities were becoming outdated, afsc Commander, Gen. James Ferguson, told Los Angeles Chapter of American Ordnance Assn. Warning that U.S. was “stretching present-day facilities to a thin point and reaching a limit in . . . ability to ‘make do’ on a year to year basis,” Gen. Ferguson urged that an “imaginative, comprehensive, long-range plan” be instituted for design, development, and acquisition of new facilities. Major facility needs, he said, included: wind tunnel for testing vtol aircraft over entire performance range, ' 200-ft vacuum chamber capable of simulating space environment, shock interaction facility to simulate aerodynamic flow and strong shock generated over warhead models and true-temperature wind tunnel (tripl-TEe) to duplicate flight conditions at hypersonic speeds and temperatures. (Text) *	Dr. Stephen J. Lukasik, Director of Nuclear Test Detection in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) and Acting arpa Deputy Director, was appointed arpa Deputy Director, (dod Release 157—68) *	USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded General Electric Co. $2,600,000 increment to a previously awarded contract for reentry vehicle flight testing, (dod Release 162—68)
Ralph Hazlett Upson, aeronautical engineer who won James Gordon Trophy in 1913 International Balloon Race from Paris to England and American National Balloon Races in 1913, 1919, and 1921, died in Burien, Wash., at age 80. (NYT, 8/15/68, 35)
USN awarded five Sl-million contracts for preliminary design and engineering work on FB—11 IB replacement to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., ltv Aerospace Corp., General Dynamics Corp., North American Rockwell Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp. Substitute for F—111B, designated VFX—1, would have vertical sweep wings and same jet engine. (AP, NYT, 7/20/68, 27; W Post, 7/21/68)
USAP-Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft, takes of} from Dobbins afe on first test flight. C—5 reached 230 mph and 10,000-foot attitude on 94-minute flight, not attempting maximum speed of 350 mph. (afsc photo) commercial plane of this size.” (AT5C Neimreview, 6/68, I; Witkin, ATT, 7/1/68, 1; AP, W Star, 7/1/68, 1; AFHF Newsletter, 8/68, I) * Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of gsfc Institute for Space Studies, reviewed Arthur C. Clarke’s The Promise of Space. Clarke had described chronology of Apollo decision as “politics and astronautics combined” and had written: “The verdict of history may well be that the United States made the correct decision even if from dubious motives.” Dr. Jastrow said Clarke “seems to betray a point of view that the primary purpose of the space program is, or should be, the exploitation of its scientific potential and the search for knowledge in the space around the earth and on the other bodies of the solar system. “My own view is that he is mistaken. Spacecraft have yielded important scientific discoveries , , . but it seems clear to me that preservation of national security, and not scientific research per se, was the motivation for the Kennedy proposal. Kennedy acted out of a deep gut instinct, shared by the Congress and the American people, that the United States had been presented with a major challenge to which it must respond effectively or pay a heavy penalty. The decision on the expanded space program may have been accelerated by the events of the spring of 1961, but the Soviet challenge . . . was permanent.” Dr. Jastrow saw promise of space as “dollars-and-cents return in increased productivity in the U.S.” To Clarke it was “the universe—or nothing.” (W Post, Book World, 6/30/68, 1; CR, 7/9/68, E6290) During June: Last of 11 JC—130 Hercules turboprop aircraft left Patrick afb, Fla., to be replaced by larger, high-speed jet EC—135N Apollo Range Instrumentation aircraft. With complex electronic instrumentation, Air Force Eastern Test Range Hercules had supported hundreds of Cape Kennedy space and missile launches, including Atlas, Titan, Polaris, Minuteman, Saturn, Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo. When fully operational in 1961, they had replaced earlier C—54s. (afsc Newsre-view, 6/68, 4)
USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded North American Rockwell Corp. $1-million initial increment to $4-million fixed-price contract for production of Thor propulsion systems, (dod Release 215-68)
Taccomsat 1, world’s largest synchronous orbit satellite, was scheduled for launch by usaf Titan III—C booster in February 1969, Aerospace Daily reported. Spacecraft would be six times as powerful as any other comsat. Initial command and control of satellite, to be positioned near Galapagos Islands for undetermined checkout period, would be accomplished by Air Force Satellite Control Facility (afscf). Taccomsat 1 would have 6 kw of effective radiated power. Intelsat II satellites had 50 w. Its 1 kw of raw dc solar power was 10 times that available in Intelsat II. While Intelsat II communications bandwidth was 125 mhz, Taccomsat 1 would have down-link bandwidth of 10 mhz at X-band and 500 khz at uhf frequencies. (Aero Daily, 8/14/68)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Cornell Univ. experiment to 100.3-mi (161.3-km) altitude to examine sky in far infrared (5 micron to 1,600 microns) using copper-doped-germanium, two gallium-doped-germanium, and indium-anti-mo nide detectors in conjunction with telescope. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Preliminary results indicated detectors functioned properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Dr. Walter Haeussermann was selected to Fellowship in American Astronautical Society for “direct and significant contribution to the field of astronautics,” as Director of Astrionics Laboratory, msfc. (msfc Release 68—102)
Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of Marine Resources Council, told new American Oceanic Organization in Washington, D.C., “We are ready for the next step in Federal management of marine affairs—creation of an independent civilian operating agency.” Chairman of new group, Rep. George E. Shipley (D-Ill.), member of House Appropriations Committee, said, “I think that we will see the time that this country will spend as much in oceanography as we are spending in the space program.” (Corrigan, W Post, 11/17/68, Kl)
Post-launch investigations at msfc and at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Rockwell Corp,, J—2 manufacturer, had revealed J—2 rocket engine malfunctions on April 4 Apollo 6 mission had been caused by ruptures of small-diameter fuel lines feeding engine igniters. Improved designs for lines had been completed and new lines were being manufactured for extensive testing before use in next Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. (Marshall Star, 5/22/68,1)
Saturn V launch vehicle has passed Design Certification Review conducted over communication facilities linking NASA and contractor personnel at Washington, D.C., Houston, Tex., Cocoa Beach, Fla., and Huntsville, Ala., into one conference. Purpose was to certify overall design of rocket, including engineering modifications after two previous Saturn flights. Certification for manned mission was issued, subject to verification of data in minor areas in later, limited review. Under particular consideration were engineering changes to correct pogo, or excessive oscillations, during second Saturn V flight and anomalies experienced by J—2 engines on upper stages. Solutions had been tested to satisfaction. Major efforts on both items would continue, (msfc Release 68-216)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 529-mi (838.3-km) apogee, 497-mi (799.8-km) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 99.0° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 561-mi (902.8-km) apogee, 509-mi (819-km) perigee, 102.1-min period, and 98.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
MIT physicist Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro, speaking at American Physical Society meeting in Boston, said he and associates had successfully tested refined radar technique that might prove validity of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Using 20-ft-dia Haystack, Mass,, dish antenna, scientists observed impulses which they bounced off of Venus and Mercury as planets passed behind sun. Results, which confirmed theory’s prediction that signals would be slowed down slightly by gravitational pull, were more precise than those from previous tests but were not clear enough to resolve completely debate on theory’s validity. Dr. Shapiro believed greater precision could be achieved. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/28/68, 22; O’Toole, W Post, 2/28/68, 1)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences heard testimony in support of NASA FY 1969 budget from U.S. scientists. Dr. Harry H. Hess of Princeton Univ. presented statement for record by National Academy of Sciences President Dr. Frederick Seitz. Space program, Dr. Seitz said, was “the latest and one of the greatest human exploratory adventures in a long sequence that has enriched mankind. It offers us the promise of extending the range of our domain ... to the entire solar system. We can expect many benefits along the way, some of conceptual and some of direct material value . . . but those which will prove to be the most rewarding are probably, in the main, still hidden from us over the horizon.” Dr. John A. Simpson of Enrico Fermi Institute and Univ. of Chicago noted: “Researches in space have made, through the bold programs which NASA established with universities in the early 1960s, major contributions to the critical problems of generating, developing and retaining first-class scientific manpower. . . . The great fear at present ... is that the momentum established will be dissipated by the preferentially deep budgetary cuts made by NASA in those areas which most affect the universities.” He stressed “deeply felt conviction” that U.S. was “in danger of unwittingly destroying what we wish to save and need . . . pre-eminence in science and technology which is crucial for each major problem of the nation, from poverty to war.” Actions taken in Congress in 1968 might “largely determine whether the U.S. will retain its leadership in the space sciences.” Dr. Simpson urged early start of Pioneer concept since it was “absolutely clear that discoveries important for the progress of science and technology may be made by . . . experiments and observations on spacecraft moving outward from the orbit of the Earth . . . the program is not a gamble and a hope, but an objective of high importance and certain to produce fruitful results.” (Testimony; NYT, 4/24/68, 24; W Star, 4/24/68, A21)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from wsmr. First carried Princeton Univ. Observatory payload to 106.4-mi (171.2-km) altitude to point two spectrographs toward hot stars in Scorpius to study their EUV radiation with 1 A resolution and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Second Aerobee 150, launched 30 min later, carried Columbia Univ. experiment to 2.1mi (3.3-km) altitude to search for x-ray emission Irom known extragalactic objects in radio galaxy M—87 and in quasi-stellar object 3C273. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because sustainer did not ignite. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
San Francisco Chronicle said: “In their meteoric flitting about the skies the crew of the Apollo 8 did more than thrill their fellow Americans and pump up the national ego. They drew commendations from directors of the Soviet space project whose considerable achievement they had outstripped.” They made believers of “informed skeptics such as Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Observatory, who had more than ever scoffed at the value of the moon venture. (They also drove the stubborn adherents of the flat-earth theory into confusion.) All this they accomplished in faultless style.” (SF Chornicle, 12/27/68, 30)
Apollo 7 commander Walter M. Schirra, Jr., received from Italian Ambassador to U.S. Egidio Ortona gold medallion awarded by Assn, of Man in Space, group of Italian scientists and jurists, at Washington, D.C., party in his honor. (Billington, W Star, 11/11/68, B7)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
U.S. patent No. 3,390,853 was issued to North American Rockwell Corp. mechanical engineer Raymond P. Wykes for inflatable drag balloon (ballute) to be released behind reentry vehicle or lifting-body vehicle at end of a cable which pulled spacecraft’s wings out from its body on reentry and slowed it down for landing. Patent No. 3,390,492 was issued to General Electric Co. engineer Edwin T. Myskowski for glass deep-submergence module in titanium alloy frame usable as laboratory or living quarters on ocean floor in anchored or mobile form. (Patent Off pio ; Jones, NYT, 7/6/68,25)	_
Commenting on reductions in NASA authorization bill, Kansas City Times editorial said: “We have supported the space program in the past, not as a window dressing but as an expression—and a catalyst— of the inventiveness and technical energies of the American people. We still support it, and believe it is beneficial. “We recognize, nonetheless, that it is but one of many costly and sometimes competing activities. Congress has decided that in a time of burdensome military expenditure, and of pressing domestic needs, the space budget is one logical place to apply the knife of economy. NASA planners will simply have to find creative ways to live with that decision.” (KC Times, 6/20/68)
U.S.S.R.’s leading geneticist, Prof. Nikolay P. Dubinin, told International Symposium on Genetic Effects of Space Environment^ in Tokyo biological experiments on various Soviet satellites beginning with Sputnik I had disclosed that space flight caused higher frequency of mutation, chromosome damage, and disruptions in normal cell division mechanisms. “Dynamic flight factors,” he said, were responsible; doses of cosmic radiation registered were too small to account for all . genetic changes observed. Symposium was held in conjunction with 12th International Congress of Genetics. American scientists also suggested “dynamic flight factors” of vibrations, acceleration, and weightlessness might be factors in genetic damage observed aboard American spacecraft. (Reinhold, NYT, 8/26/68)
Washington Post editorial praised “magnificent achievement” of U.S.S.R.’s Zond V: “In its own way, Zond-5 should serve to shake this Nation’s complacency once again. Our national goals in space exploration are fuzzy, our hopes have been out of line with our commitments. From President Kennedy’s glowing picture of Americans in space we have slipped into a program put together in fits and starts—fits brought about by a realization of how much it would cost to do it right and starts caused by a basic desire never to be second to anybody. Because of this, there is no use in seizing upon Zond-5 as a reason to go all-out to beat the Russians in a race for men on the moon. Our program . . . ought to move at its own pace. If that pace is sufficiently rapid to bring American astronauts to the moon first, fine. If it is not, so be it. The Russians will deserve the honor and praise they will win if their men make the first landing. In space exploration, it is more important to do things right than to do them first.” (W Post, 9/24/68, A16)
Washington Daily News story by London Express Service said scientists “have told the military that a new infra-red sensing device tested in a secret American reconnaissance satellite may be able, from space, to detect the elusive submarines as they lurk under water. And the invention is said to work whether the quarry is moving, hovering in midwater, or even lying silently on the bottom. . . . More tests are to be made. But it . . . seems fairly certain that the system will be put into full operation soon.” (W News, 9/5/68, 6)
usn Aquanauts Fernando Lugo and Don C. Risk, wearing standard neoprene wet suits and Mark VIII breathing apparatus, dived to record 1,025-ft simulated ocean depth and, with three other aquanauts, accumulated record 48 hr each at 825-ft depth during tests at Washington, D.C., Navy Yard. Experiment was in preparation for usn’s 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living scheduled to begin in fall 1968. (dod Release 180—68) *	r/a John E. Clark (usn, Ret.), former Commandant of Twelfth Naval District in San Francisco, became JPL Deputy Director. He had been Commander of Naval Air Missile Test Center (1954), arpa Deputy Director (1958—61), and Commander of pmr (1961—65). (JPL LabOratory, 2/68, 3) *	Jodrell Bank Observatory Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, claimed explosion of Soviet spacecraft in orbit during 1962 Cuban missile crisis led U.S. to believe U.S.S.R. was launching massive icbm attack and warned that World War III could be triggered by misidentified space debris falling to earth. (JV News, 2/20/68, 3; SBD, 2/20/68, 281) *	U.S.S.R. was closing its missile gap and could equal U.S. 1,054-icbm force by mid-1969, according to dod sources. Between October 1966 and October 1967 Soviet icbm force had increased from 340 to 720 missiles; currently, U.S.S.R. had more than 720 icbm sites in operation and about 280 under construction. In addition, U.S.S.R was reportedly developing new 16-tube nuclear submarines, missiles that could travel long distances underwater, mach 3 interceptor aircraft, and mobile, solid-fueled icbms. (Beecher, NYT, 2/19/68, 1; 2/20/68, 18; Wilson, W Post, 2/20/68,1) * Preliminary to joint NASA—USAF flight testing, X—24 manned lifting-body vehicle built by Martin Marietta Co. had been sent to arc for full-scale wind-tunnel tests, to begin Feb. 26, FRC announced. Prime purpose was to verify aerodynamic predictions obtained from small-scale model tests, (frc Release, 5—68)
Wall Street Journal reported interview with Prof. Edwin L. Resler, Jr., Director of Cornell Univ. Graduate School of Aerospace Engineering, on possibility of reducing sonic boom created by supersonic transports to tolerable level by changing design of engines for big aircraft to slow down expansion of exhaust stream. “We can . . . reduce the shock wave effect and its consequent boom to a tolerable level so that overland flights of supersonic transports would be feasible,” Prof. Resler said. (WSJ, 6/28/68)
Cal Tech trustees announced choice of Dr. Harold Brown, Air Force Secretary, to replace Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who resigned effective Jan. 20 to become Science Adviser to President-elect Richard M. Nixon. (upi, W Star, 12/14/68, A3; W Post, 12/15/68, A6)
William Leavitt in Air Force and Space Digest asked: “Are antiballistic missile systems necessarily provocative and ‘destabilizing’ in the sense that they will inevitably set off a new spiral in the arms race? Many— but hy no means all—scientists answer ‘yes’ to these questions, despite impressions to the contrary.” Director of Oak Ridge National Laboratory Dr. Alvin Weinberg, who would answer “no” to abm question, was quoted: “The deployment of abms on both sides has been deplored as the first step in the unending arms spiral that eventually will consume everything, including our vision of abundance. But suppose ABMs and other defensive measures turn out to be effective, and at the same time there is no escalation of offense in unending spiral. The knife-edge of delicately balanced terror would then be blunted.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 1/68, 72-4)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., U.S.S.R. in 1968 had been surpassing its 1967 payload successes numerically and, “what is more significant . . . surpassing substantially the number of successful payloads launched this year by the United States. While our activity curve is moving down . . . theirs is headed up.” U.S.S.R. had “orderly, persistent, and well planned space program, including a vigorous project for a manned landing on the lunar surface.” U.S. had operational lead in communications, navigation, and meteorology but U.S.S.R. showed “considerable activity” in those fields. U.S. had been generally more successful in unmanned lunar and planetary performance, but U.S.S.R. was more active. (Text)
Four navsats (satellites resembling comsats) in synchronous equatorial orbit could control entire air traffic of U.S. and 18 could handle entire world’s air traffic, according to trw Systems Div., which demonstrated system during Air Force Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C. Satellites would serve as reference points for aircraft in flight, ships at sea, or mechanized ground equipment and could locate user’s longitude and latitude to accuracy within 60 ft and his altitude to within 120 ft. They would operate like comsats but, instead of relaying messages from point to point, would beam signals to aircraft. By taking bearings on any two satellites, computerized unit in aircraft could pinpoint aircraft’s location by radio. Militarily, system could lead to accurate allweather bombing capability and armored column movements in poor terrain or weather, or help infantrymen in the field. For civilian air traffic control, it could overlap existing equipment and eventually phase it out. (Lannan, W Star, 9/18/68) Boeing Co. confirmed it was most likely to submit conventional fixed-wing design resembling large F—4 Phantom fighter as design for U.S. SST when firm’s final proposal became due at faa, no later than Jan. 15. If approved, aircraft'would start moving from paper to titanium, Boeing President T. A. Wilson told Air Force Assn, seminar, m/G Jewell C. Maxwell, faa’s sst Program Director, said aircraft could fly in first half of 1972 and be ready for passenger service as early as 1974 (1976 if Government decided to test prototype before starting production line). A. H. C. Greenwood, Assistant Managing Director for British Aircraft Corp., said Anglo-French Concorde would fly in 1968 and be in commercial operation by summer 1972. (Wilson, W Post, 9/19/68, Dl)
Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., received AIAA Structures and Materials Award for his “original, definitive, and continuous research leading to the use of random processes in aircraft gust loads design.” (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
Cal Tech said Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar observatories were keeping close watch for developing sunspots that might threaten Apollo 8 astronauts with dangerous x-ray radiation. (Reuters, W Post, 12/5/68, H9) December 4: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 454-mi (730.6-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 106.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 12. (Pres Rpt 68)
Dr. Frank D. Drake, Director of Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, said he had detected first distinct pattern to radio signals from two pulsars. He told radioastronomy seminar at National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., pulse rate could be explained only if source were star of extraordinary density spinning at incredible speed—such as neutron star. If correct, findings would be first scientific proof that hypothetical neutron stars actually existed. (Wilford, NYT, 10/2/68; Lannan, W Star, 10/2/68, A20)
nasa successfully launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory and Univ. of Maryland payload to 111.3-mi (179-km) altitude to flight-test flight design verification unit (fdvu) of high-resolution spectroheliograph planned for use on Apollo Telescope Mount-A. Second rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 93.7-mi (151-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active region of sun during solar flare and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload of first rocket failed to separate, preventing functioning of parachute recovery system, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Oran W. Nicks described applications of Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter techniques to Mars exploration before aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Two 1971 Mariner Orbiter missions would provide new tools for survey of dynamic Mars, arriving when most striking seasonal changes were evident in Southern Hemisphere. Their combined orbits and life expectancies would allow observations of dynamic changes in clouds and surface features over several months. In 1973, two additional orbit-ers would survey Mars from different orbits during different seasons, with support of landing mission as prime requirement. Also planned for 1973 was survivable landing spacecraft to make local measurements of environment, photograph surface and topography, and analyze soil. “Burning question of immediate concern to you and me will be addressed by use of our new tools,” Nicks said: “Is there life elsewhere? Has life existed on nearby planets and disappeared for any reason? Can nearby planets be made suitable for life?’ Together, orbiters and landers form a powerful team for the study of Mars and for seeking answers to these questions. Together, they will continue to extend our capabilities in what is probably the most challenging, open-ended arena for expansion of science and technology in the decade ahead.” (Text)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb using Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor (lttat) -Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 242-mi (481.0-km) apogee, 114-mi (183.5-km) perigee, 90.2-min period, and 83.1° inclination and reentered April 10. Second entered orbit with 326-mi (524.6-km) apogee, 299-mi (448.2km) perigee, 94.6-min period, and 31.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 3/18/68, 91)
usaf launched two Orbiting Vehicle research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F booster. OV 1—13 entered orbit with 5,789-mi (9,316.2-km) apogee, 346-mi (556.7-km) perigee, 199.5-min period, and 100.5° inclination to determine flexibility of cadmium sulfide solar cells in space and to measure proton/electron energy spectra and angular distribution of electrons. OV 1—14, launched to obtain high-resolution measurements of proton/electron flux, spectra, decay, and time variations, entered orbit with 6,173-mi (9,934.2-km) apogee, 348-mi (560.0-km) perigee, 207.8-min period, and 100.0° inclination. (upi, C Trib, 4/8/68; SBD, 4/9/68, 220; GSFC SSR, 4/15/69; Pres Rpt 68)
NASA announced it had terminated production of 60 H—1 engines for post-Apollo Saturn IB missions under contract with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. Delivery of 32 engines to msfc had already been completed. Of remaining 28 engines, 1 would be complete; 1, complete without firing; 6, assembled; and hardware for 20, delivered in present production state, (nasa Release 68—154; msc Roundup, 9/13/68, 1)
nasa announced that H. Julian Allen, who joined naca in 1936, would retire as Director of Ames Research Center Nov. 15. arc Associate Director John F. Parsons would serve as Acting Director. Leading authority on supersonic and hypersonic wind-tunnel design, Allen had originated concept of bluntness for reentry shapes—as used in Apollo spacecraft—and had received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, and Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy. After his retirement Allen would be available to NASA as a consultant, (nasa Release 68-183; SBD, 10/28/68, 272; nasa Ann)
History of lunar nomenclature and tradition in naming lunar features was reviewed by Director of Fels Planetarium, Dr. I. M. Levitt, in Air Force and Space Digest. Knowledge from space research had created complications for specialists who had to name lunar features. In past, craters, mountains, rills, and seas on moon had heen named for scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers. In 1647, Johannes Hevelius had published Selenographica in Danzig, setting stage for naming lunar features. Ground rules were set down in 1932 hy International Astronomical Union (iau) , which formed committee of astronomers to select names. U.S.S.R. had asked 1967 General Assembly of iau to pass on 153 more names for features on moon’s hidden side. Levitt recommended that names of dead astronauts—both American and Russian—be accepted for lunar nomenclature; later, living astronauts could be similarly honored. Also pioneers in space research—“such as Goddard, von Braun, Gilruth, Newell, Ley, Lovelace, Flickinger, Stehling, and so on” —and astronomers and; benefactors of mankind could be considered. (.AF/SD, 1/68, 66-9)
White House announced from Johnson City, Tex., that President Johnson would present NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders during “Astronaut Day” ceremonies in Washington, D.C., Jan. 9, 1969. (AP, W Star, 12/31/68, A5; upi, NYT, 1/1/69, 10; W Post, 1/1/69, 2)
ComSatCorp Chairman James McCormack submitted Annual Report to shareholders’ meeting at Washington, D.C. Intelsat I, II F—2, II F—3, and II F—4 were reasonably loaded with commercial communications traffic. Intelsat III series was scheduled for late summer delivery and launching during fall 1968 and spring 1969. Intelsat IV series would be presented for Government approval shortly. It was hoped development could be under way before end of 1968. More than half the 40 earth stations anticipated to be in operation by 1969 were expected to be operating by end of 1968. Despite technical problems, satellite operating circuits maintained 100% reliability. Total of 48 nations were represented by Interim Communications Satellite Committee, to which ComSatCorp had submitted several U.S. proposals: relating investments of global members directly to amount of their use of system; limiting voting power to 50% maximum with substantive issues decided by two-thirds majority; ComSatCorp’s continuing as Consortium manager with contractual obligations made more specific. ComSatCorp opposed authorization by Federal Communications Commission of separate satellite system for broadcast distribution as had been proposed. With first quarter operating income of $372,000 and investment income of $1,426 million, ComSatCorp realized net income of $1,798 million. At close of first quarter 1968, investments in communications facilities amounted to $73 million. ComSatCorp expected this to exceed $100 million at end of 1968. (Text)
nasa launched two Aerobee sounding rockets from WSMR. One carried American Science & Engineering, Inc., payload to 96.2-mi (154.8-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active regions on sun and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Ten percent loss in rocket performance suggested sustainer ruptured; instruments performed satisfactorily. Data would be degraded by pointing control failure. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 95-mi (152.8-km) altitude to collect data on x-rays from Crab Nebula and its proximity, using six collimated x-ray detectors. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Entire payload was recovered in excellent condition. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nimbus B spacecraft launched by NASA from wTR failed to enter orbit because of malfunction in booster. Thorad-Agena D booster and spacecraft were destroyed by Range Safety Officer. Satellite, third in Nimbus meteorological series, contained two 25-\v SNAP—19 radioisotope electric power generators fueled with plutonium 238 to supplement solar panels and enclosed in capsules designed to withstand impact and corrosion. Debris fell into Pacific between Vandenberg afb and San Miguel Island, (wtr Release; AP, W Star, 5/18/68; P EB, 5/18/68; AP, W Post, 5/19/68, A3; AP, NYT, 5/18/68; 5/25/68)
aec Chairman, Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, was named 1968 winner of Arches of Science Award presented annually by Pacific Science Center of Seattle, Wash., to American who had contributed to public understanding of science. Award of $25,000 would be presented Oct. 16 to Dr. Seaborg, who won Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1951 and was codiscoverer of plutonium. (W Post, 9/18/68, B5; AP, NYT, 9/18/68, 12)
Senate approved reappointment of Gen. John P. McConnell as Air Force Chief of Staff effective Aug. 1, 1968. {CR, 7/3/68; S8200; W Post, 7/4/68,4)
President-elect Richard M. Nixon introduced his Cabinet on nationwide TV from Washington, D.C. Among appointments, William P.	Rogers, Washington attorney and Eisenhower Administration Attorney General, would serve as Secretary of State; Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R-Wis.), as Secretary of Defense; and Massachusetts Gov. John A. Volpe, as Secretary of Transportation. (Herbers, NYT, 12/12/68)
Two-volume Review Board report, Status of Actions Taken on the Apollo 204, was submitted to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ kasa Oversight Subcommittee by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. According to report, major changes made in Apollo project included: installing quickopening hatch; eliminating most combustible materials in cabin; remaking spacesuit, primarily of glass fiber instead of nylon; equipping and training launch pad workers for fire fighting; placing metal shielding over exposed electrical wiring; and replacing aluminum oxygen pipes with more-fire-resistant stainless steel pipes. NASA reported spacecraft had been modified by North American Rockwell Corp. so that it could use ordinary air or oxygen-enriched air, as well as 100% oxygen, while on launch pad. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 1/20/68, 1)
At Washington, D.C., ceremony, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, Chief of Naval Operations, usn, presented Distinguished Service Medal to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Capt. usn), for space deeds “exceeded by no one afloat or airborne.” (AP, W Star, 12/18/68, B2; W Post, 12/18/68, A3)
New York Times editorial commented on failure of swing-wing design for SST: “More than ever now the burden of proof is on those who urge that billions of taxpayers’ dollars be spent on an American SST. The fallibility of their judgment has been demonstrated in the loss of the swing-wing gamble. Is there reason to suppose that their optimistic forecasts about the profits to be made from such an airplane are any sounder? The aerodynamics of different wing configurations is not the only thing that needs to be assessed in the current re-examination of the sst.” (NYT, 10/25/68, 46)
msfc announced it had awarded American Science and Engineering, Inc., $5,413,000 addition to contract for final design, fabrication, assembly, integration, test qualification, and acceptance of prototype and flight unit x-ray spectrographic telescope for Apollo Telescope Mount. Award brought total value of contract to $11,617,471. (nasa Release 68-170; msfc Release 68-234)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, delivered Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture to National Space Club in Washington, D.C. He warned the U.S.S.R. had moved forward steadily with new and more diversified strategic threat highlighted by development of orbital missile and sophisticated space systems. U.S. comparative missile strength, he noted, was declining steadily, with emphasis still on updating existing force. “What is missing so far in our military space program is the necessary high priority research and development aimed at protecting us in the high ground of space. In space, as elsewhere, the Soviets say one thing—even sign agreements—but consistently do whatever is in their own self-interest. The orbital missile is merely the latest example of their policy. In light of their development of an orbital missile, it would be totally irresponsible ... to assume that we do not need to initiate any r&d to prepare us to meet a Soviet space threat.” Attributing loss of endorsement of national space program to change in national value scale because of Vietnam and domestic problems, Gen. Schriever said: “The old criteria, national security and national prestige, are no longer the only justifications for our space efforts, important though they are.” If public understood “the practical, dollars and cents worth of the program to this country and to the world,” they would support it. U.S. was on verge of receiving annual return larger than its annual investment in space, and within one decade, “those returns should be several times our annual investment.” (Text; Aero Tech, 3/11/68, 16)	.
Scientific team headed by Nobel Prize winning physicist, Dr. Charles H. Townes, announced discovery of ammonia molecules in direction of Sagittarius toward Milky Way center, 30,000 light years away from earth. Finding was made through spectrographs at radioastronomy observatory of Univ. of California at Berkeley during studies supported by nasa, Office of Naval Research, and nsf. Ammonia was considered chemical ancestor of organic compounds and necessary step toward origin of life. Team said discovery “marks the first time that a relatively complex molecular compound has been definitely identified in the vast regions between the stars.” It would spur intensified search for additional combinations of life-essential elements detected in space. Former mit provost and inventor of maser, which led to development of laser, Dr. Townes had been named Dec. 3 to head President-elect Richard M. Nixon’s task force to make recommendations on space program. Report would be published in Physical Review Letters of American Institute of Physics, (upi, NYT, 12/16/68, 93; AP, W Post, 12/16/68, Al)
Dr. Frank D. Drake, Director of Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory (Puerto Rico), told meeting of Council for the Advancement of Science Writing at Evanston, 111., that pulsar discovered Nov. 14 near Crab Nebula was almost certainly a neutron star. It was second discovery during week [see Nov. 6] and was located by Arecibo radio dish telescope. (Randal, W Post, 11/16/68, A5; Sullivan, NYT, 11/20/68, 31)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched largest research balloon—28.7-million-cu-ft polyethylene sphere—to record 158,000-ft altitude from wsmr. Flight carried instruments for atmospheric measurements near stratopause and terminated near Needles, Calif., after 18 hr. Previous record size for polyethylene balloon was 13.5 million cu ft. Previous balloon record, 26 million cu ft, was held by five fiber-reinforced Mylar balloons flown by AFCRL for NASA in 1966 and 1967. (oar Research Review, 1—2/69, 8—9)
usaf announced launch of 200th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg afb. Since September 1962, Vandenberg had been launch site for missiles fired over Pacific Ocean for crew training, reliability tests, and developmental work. (Boeing Release)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer /, launched by abma—jpl team with Jupiter C booster. In defiance of original prediction of three-year lifespan, 30.8-lb stovepipe-shaped spacecraft had traveled 1 y2 billion miles and was expected to continue orbiting through 1968, though silent. Explorer /, currently in orbit with 771mi (1,241-km) apogee, 215-mi (346-km) perigee, and 100-min period, had stopped transmitting data May 23, 1958, after supplying data on cosmic rays, micrometeoroids, and temperature and discovering one of earth’s radiation belts later named after Dr. James A. Van Allen, designer of satellite’s radiation-detection experiment. At National Press Club Ceremony in Washington, D.C., commemorating anniversary, Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, reviewed
USAF launched navigational satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Scout booster into orbit with 711-mi (1,444.2-km) apogee, 640-mi (1,030.0-km) perigee, 106.9-min period, and 89.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/15/68; Pres Rpt 68)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 148-mi (238.3km) apogee, 109-mi (175.4-km) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 81.0° inclination and reentered Dec. 28. Second satellite entered orbit with 916-mi (1,474.1-km) apogee, 862-mi (1,387.2-km) perigee, 114.4-min period, and 80.3° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial: “Those who argue that the country should be spending more money on important domestic programs are correct. But these increases should not have to come at the expense of American space exploration and newly-won world prestige. NASA’s needs deserve high priority. There should he no lost opportunities. When the first American sets foot on the moon next year, his accomplishment should symbolize a beginning, not an ending.” (C Plain Dealer, 12/30/68)
First short-takeoff-and-landing strip for commercial aircraft in U.S. opened at La Guardia Airport in New York. Called STOLport, it was 1,095 ft long. Shortest regular runway at La Guardia was 4,000 ft. FAA said STOLport would be used for visual flying only, stol aircraft landed and took off at 60 mph, rather than regular commercial aircraft’s 105 mph. Three more stolports were to open Sept. 1 to provide taxi service between National and Dulles Airports in Washington, D.C., and Friendship Airport in Baltimore. (Shipler. NYT, 8/6/68, 1; AP, W Star, 8/6/68, A5; W Post, 8/14/68,1)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB by Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor (lttat)-Agena D booster. One satellite entered orbit with 269-mi (432.9-km) apogee, 112-mi (180.2-km) perigee, 90.6-min period, and 81.5° inclination and reentered Feb 27. Other satellite entered orbit with 338-mi (543.9-km) apogee, 294-mi (473.1-km) perigee, 94.9-min period, and 81.7° inclination. Flights were fifth and sixth since lttat vehicle was activated on May 9,1967. (SBD, 1/26/68,137; Pres Rpt 68)
Approximately 36 Soviet Air Force flights with more than 85 bombers had been identified off northern coasts of North America during first half of 1968, six times scale of operations reported during last half of 1967, according to Charles W. Corddry in Baltimore Sun. Soviet aircraft had cruised over international waters, dod reportedly considered flights routine. (B Sun, 6/9/68, 1)
Goddard Space Flight Center fired its 1,000th sounding rocket. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Coi payload to 97.9-mi (160.5-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in 2- to 30-kev interval with eight proportional counter x-ray sensors, solar aspect sensors, and yo-yo despin unit. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa RptSRL; GSFC Historian)
New York Times editorial commented on award of all 1968 Nobel Prizes in science and medicine to U.S. citizens: “. . . there are real and important roots of American scientific prowess which need to be understood and fostered so that future achievement may match or excel that of the past. This country’s hospitality to refugees from political tyranny and to those seeking to better themselves economically has brought rich rewards particularly in science and technology. The nation’s huge investment in education has permitted able young people to develop their talents. Generous Government support of basic research has given the nation’s scientists the tools and the material security needed for the realization of their potential excellence. The abundant returns from these policies provide good reason for maintaining them so that American science can continue to flower.” (NYT, 11/4/68, 46)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 92.6-mi (149-km) altitude to collect data on celestial x-ray sources in 1- to 20-kev range. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
President Johnson presented Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1968 to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former nasa Deputy Administrator and now NASA consultant and MIT visiting professor, in White House ceremony. National Space Club award named for the late Dr. Robert H. Goddard, “father of American rocketry,” was given Dr. Seamans for helping “develop the policies, plans and programs that have led to the outstanding achievements and United States leadership in the field of rocketry and astronautics.” President Johnson had received trophy in 1966. {PD, 3/1/68, 475; Program, Goddard Memorial Dinner, 3/5/68; W Post, 3/6/68)
Boeing Co. in Washington, D.C., displayed scale model of new fixed-wing design for SST with downward-bent wings inboard toward fuselage and vertical tail placed well forward of horizontal tail. SST Program Director m/g Jewell C. Maxwell said in interview, “I think we have a much greater feeling of confidence than we have had in some time. We now have a design in hand that seems able to do the job.” Boeing would submit new design to Government in mid-January but, said New York Times, “there is some nervousness about the receptivity of the new Congress for a budget request that will probably come close to $300 million for the fiscal year ending June 1970.” Current estimates of overall sst cost were $1.5 billion. {NYT, 11/18/68, 93)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center, was announced winner of Rockefeller Public Service Award in science category. He had supervised plans for rocket installation on Lunar Orbiter and Surveyor spacecraft. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined naca at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. He was transferred to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, where he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic propulsion wind tunnels. After serving in Washington, D.C., three years he returned to LeRC as Director in 1961. Leonard C. Meeker, State Dept, legal adviser, won award in foreign affairs and international administration for his work on 1967 space law treaty. (W Post, 11/14/68, B7; lerc Biog, 4/67; Lewis News, 11/22/68,1)
New Tanay earth station near Manila participated in U.S.-Philippines commercial satellite television inaugural with telecast between Washington, D.C., and Manila via landline to satellite earth station at Brewster Flat, Wash. Facility functioned through Intelsat—II F—2 at 22,300mi altitude over Pacific. (ComSatCorp Release 68—22)
Air Force, Academy announced selection of Gen. Carl A. Spaatz (usaf, Ret.) to receive its Thomas D. White Award, given annually for contribution to national defense and security. Gen. Spaatz was fighter pilot in World War I. During World War II he helped plan strategic bombing of Germany and commanded air forces in North Africa, U.S. Strategic Air Forces in Europe, and final bombing operations against Japan. (Rocky Mountain News, 5/4/68, 13)
nasa announced it had selected North American Rockwell Corp, Rocketdyne Div. to provide injector for Apollo lunar module ascent engine under $10-million subcontract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. Bell Aerosystems Co., also under subcontract to Grumman, would continue to provide engine hardware for assembly with the injector. (nasa Release 68—164; msc Release 68-71; WSJ, 9/26/68, 3)
arc Director H. Julian Allen had been elected Fellow of U.K.’s Royal Aeronautical Society for outstanding contributions to aeronautics, ARC Astrogram announced. Allen, who had served naca and its successor NASA since 1936, had received naca Distinguished Service Medal for originating concept of bluntness as aerodynamic technique for avoiding severe reentry heating, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy, and NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, (arc Astrogram, 3/28/68, 1)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford wrote in Air Force and Space Digest: “Not too many years ago, the War and Navy Departments were concerned almost exclusively with men and simple machines. Defense industries were regarded as mere munitions-makers. ... We now have a military-industrial team with unique resources of experience, engineering talent, management and problem-solving capacities, [and it] must be used to help find the answers to complex domestic problems as it has found the answers to complex weapon systems. Those answers can be put to good use by our cities and our states, by our schools, by large and small businesses alike. The nation will be the better and the stronger.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 76—7)
Dept, of State said it would issue visas to 35 Soviet space scientists to attend 19th Congress of International Astronautical Federation (iaf) in New York Oct. 13—19. However, it might recommend cancellation of sightseeing tour of KSC arranged with NASA by AIAA for scientists from 34 countries attending both IAF Congress and AIAA annual meeting in Philadelphia Oct. 21—25. No Soviet scientist had yet visited ksc, “apparently out of concern that the United States would ask for reciprocal rights in Russia for American scientists,” said New York Times. Rep. Paul G. Rogers (D-Fla.), in letter to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, had said visit was inappropriate in light of U.S.S.R.’s invasion of Czechoslovakia, imprisonment of Pueblo crew by> North Korea, Soviet aid to North Vietnam, and existence of Communist regime in Cuba. (NYT, 10/9/68)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
Food, land, and raw material shortages might compel man to establish mining operations on other planets and to grow food in space stations, according to Dr. K. A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. He said farms growing food in chemicals could be established in earth-orbiting stations fertilized by chemicals produced on Mars and other planets. (AP, NYT, 7/15/68, 6)
Panel of scientists testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics symposium on unidentified flying objects (UFOs) in unanimous support of further, more detailed UFO research. Northwestern Univ. astronomer Dr. J. Allen Hynek said U.S. should seek U.N. cooperation in setting up “international clearing house” for scientifically respectable UFO reports because there was almost a total lack of quantitative data about the phenomenon. Cornell Univ. exobiologist Dr. Carl Sagan told Committee it was not inconceivable that there were other planets with civilizations and technologies more advanced than earth’s, but he cautioned against a widespread UFO investigation program which would require “some harder evidence than is now present,” thus being expensive. Computer Science Corp. mathematician and celestial mechanics specialist, Dr. Robert L. Baker, Jr., revealed space-based sensor system operated from Colorado Springs Air Defense Command Hq. had received several anomalous UFO alarms that had not been explained. Dr. James A. Harder, Univ. of California at Berkeley engineer, suggested that power which permitted UFOs to undertake their reportedly incredible maneuverings might depend on a theoretically possible “second gravitational field” interacting with electrical field in a manner corresponding to reaction between conventional electrical motors and generators. (Transcript; Lyons, NYT, 7/30/68, 10; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/68, A3)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, told Los Angeles Junior Chamber of Commerce that if U.S.S.R.’s long-range bomber force improved, U.S. might need new 2,000-mph F—12 interceptor rejected by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara in 1967. Although U.S.S.R. had about 155 long-range bombers and U.S. had 680, USAF officials feared U.S.S.R. might build advanced manned aircraft to overpower what McNamara had acknowledged to be an obsolete conventional air shield. DOD had announced major cutbacks in existing air defense units May 13. (Text; Omaha W—H, 5/15/68, 21)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart successfully completed checkout of Apollo spacecraft cabin flight equipment provisions under simulated mission conditions at North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., facility, (nar Skywriter, 7/26/68,1)
LaRC Associate Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., John P. Campbell, had been selected by American Helicopter Society to receive its Paul E. Haueter Award for 1968, Langley Researcher announced. Award was given annually for significant contributions to development of vertical lift aircraft other than helicopters. Campbell was cited “for his personal contributions to and direction of NASA research programs which have provided a sound technology base for a large number of vtol designs.” {Langley Researcher, 5/17/68,1)
New York Times editorial on F— 111 A aircraft: “The difficulties that have beset the controversial F—111 swing-wing plane recently provide new evidence of the folly of allowing political factors to veto Or dilute technical judgment. “These additional blows to a plane that still has great potential promise emphasize what most experts have been saying for seven years —the F— 111 has been built the wrong way from the beginning. It reflected former Secretary of Defense McNamara’s insistence, in the name of ‘commonality’ and savings, that the Navy and the Air Force buy one plane for two entirely different missions. “But, though the Navy’s version may never—as Congress believes— meet the Navy’s needs, the Air Force model has great potential capabilities as a supersonic high- and low-level all-weather fighter-bomber . . . [and] must be developed, tested and utilized to its fullest capability.” (NYT, 4/1/68)
Naval Research Laboratory scientist, Dr. Richard C. Henry, speaking at dedication of nrl’s new E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research in Washington, D.C., presented data strongly supporting closed universe concept. Aerobee sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range Sept. 7, 1967, carrying soft x-ray detector, had detected radiation from large, unexpected amount of thinly spread intergalactic hydrogen gas, evidence of existence of intergalactic matter previously supposed but undetected. Amount detected indicated presence of 100 times as much matter between galaxies as in all stars in universe— enough to fill up all space and satisfy all theoretical requirements for a closed universe. (Text; Cohn, W Post, 4/18/68, 1)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, and JPL Director William H. Pickering had been named cowinners of American Astronautical Society’s 1967 Space Flight Award for outstanding achievement in advancement of space flight and space science. (AP, W Star, 4/21/68, A5)
Arthur C. Clarke, co-author of 2001: A Space Odyssey, told Los Altos Morning Forum proposed Federal cuts in NASA budget would curtail progress in “medicine, agriculture, weather forecasting, communication and other endeavors.” NAS^t budget now was “smaller than the amount American women spend oil cosmetics in a year.” (Anderson, San Jose Mercury, 5/23/68)
aec announced selection of Dr. John Archibald Wheeler of Princeton Univ. to receive its $25,000 Enrico Fermi Award for 1968 for “his pioneering contributions to understanding nuclear fission, and to developing the technology of plutonium production reactors, and his continuing broad contributions to nuclear science.” Award would be presented in ceremony Dec. 2, 26th anniversary of first sustained controlled nuclear reaction, (aec Release I,—224)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb using III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 262-mi (421.6-km) apogee, 79-mi (127.1-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 111.4° inclination and reentered April 29. (Pres Rpt 68; upi W Post, 4/18/68; SBD, 4/18/68, 275; gsfc SSR, 4/30/68)
In Christian Science Monitor, Robert C. Cowen asked, “Is U.S. space ability eroding?” and warned, “Even if it beats the Soviet Union to the moon, the American space capability relative to that of the Soviet Union may have atrophied.” At Boeing Co. Space Div. some valuable space teams were splitting up. “It will take time as well as money to buy this kind of asset back, if and when it is wanted.” At JPL, officials had said personnel cutbacks now were “reaching the bone.” More than any other facility, JPL “embodies American competence in this challenging field.” Plight of Boeing, as an industrial contractor, and JPL, “as an outstanding government space laboratory, typify the peril the American space program faces. Loss of funds . . . means more than postponement of certain projects. ... It threatens also at least partial loss of the competence to carry out such projects in the future.” {CSM, 9/27/68)
USAF awarded contracts totaling $28.8 million to Fairchild Hiller Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. for contract definition for ZF—15A advanced air superiority fighter aircraft. (dod Release 1147—68) During December: NASA issued Objectives and Goals in Space Science and Applications—1968. NASA Office of Space Science and Applications had participated in 1968 agency-wide planning to detail program objectives and options from which program could be built. Many tools required for future space program had already been developed and many future ventures would require only modest improvements. Spacecraft pointing accuracies and stability would improve, and their lifetimes would increase. More powerful transmitters would communicate data across ever-widening expanses. Spacecraft weight would increase and man would have increasing capability to work and navigate in space. Advances in chemical propulsion, introduction of nuclear and electric propulsion, and new combinations of existing stages, would permit growth of launch vehicle capability to meet mission demands. FY 1969 support of program recognized need for austerity and provided for continuance of existing programs at economical level and initiation of only “projects of great merit, including those where a unique opportunity might be lost.” Future emphasis would be on applications of space and space technology for benefit of man: surveying earth’s resources, TV broadcast from space, and weather forecasting. Knowledge of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, and other outer planets would be expanded. Introduction of larger, more accurate telescopes would provide man perhaps with “his greatest step in understanding the nature of his universe.” (Text)
nas released Space Applications Summer Study, 1967 Interim Report, Volume I, Central Review Committee Conclusions and Recommendations and Summaries of Panel Reports. Chaired by Dr. W. Dem-ing Lewis, study treated aspects of space technology “likely to produce practical benefits to large segments of the American and world economies.” Report urged extensive and coherent program and said NASA should double $100 million it currently spent to develop technology of space applications. (Text; Clark, NYT, 2/9/68, 6)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 251-mi (403.9-km) apogee, 113-mi (181.8-km) perigee, 90.3-min period, and 85° inclination and reentered July 16. Second entered orbit with 322-mi (518.2-km) apogee, 273-mi (439.3-km) perigee, 94.1-min period, and 85.1° inclination. (SBD, 6/25/68, 272; Pres Rpt 68)
Addressing Women’s National Democratic Club in Washington, D.C., Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “. . . we must not seriously impair or hamper our progress in space because we cannot foresee immediate payoffs to offset the investment we are making.” He urged that U.S. “come to grasp the unlimited opportunities and the promise of space exploration.” (Text; SBD, 4/26/68, 321; W Post, 4/26/68, C3)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 200-mi (321.9-km) apogee, 89mi (143.2-km) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 106° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 25. (Pres Rpt 68; gsfc SSR, 9/15/68, 9/30/68)
