Reporting findings from four months of Oao II data to 129th meeting of American Astronomical Society in Honolulu, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer Dr. Arthur D. Code said: “It puzzles me to see so much ultraviolet light from the Andromeda galaxy (M31) and so little from M81 because they are rather old ‘garden variety’ galaxies. . . . There is a possibility that we might have discovered an old quasar a few million light years away.” Full impact of Oao II data would not be felt for couple of years. “Some theories on cosmology will have to be modified and others discarded. Practically all phases of optical astronomy will be affected.” Temperature figures assigned to young, hot stars with masses more than 15 times sun’s would require alteration. “These stars are considerably hotter than 20,000 degrees absolute. They are aging about twice as fast as we thought and are burning hydrogen at a very rapid rate.” OAO data thus far provided argument against steady-state theory of universe which maintained universe always looked same, from any point at any time, Dr. Code said. At same meeting, Joseph Purcell, oao Project Manager at gsfc, said Oao II’s observatory control system had exceeded its pointing accuracy requirement of one minute of arc by factor of two. “A subsequent oao will be 100 times more stable.” (nasa Release 69—51; Lannan, W Star, 4/4/69, A5)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
msfc announced it had completed negotiations with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. on $4,075,490 contract modification extending F—1 engine deliveries through June 1970 to align engine effort to stretchout in production rate of Saturn Y boosters. F-l engines for initial order of 15 Saturn V boosters had been slated for April 1969 delivery. msfc also announced award of $1,239,045 contract modification to ibm for work in connection with 31 launch-vehicle data adapters and 31 launch-vehicle digital computers. Adjustments, necessitated by changes in Apollo launch schedule, provided for streamlining contractor’s plan for product identification control and accounting system. (msfc Releases 69—78, 69—81)
nasa sponsored one-day meeting to review progress in its five-year research program on fog-shrouded airports. In one test during NASA-sponsored work by Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory in Project Fog Drops, small aircraft carrying 700 lbs of salt had opened wide path in dense warm fog in five minutes, (nasa Release 69—17; Transcript)
Drone aircraft was reportedly impaled with spear of light from experimental laser and destroyed in three milliseconds at Air Force Special Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland afb, N. Mex. Account in Aviation Week & Space Technology was later denied by usaf officials. Tri-service laser weapon research programs, principally sponsored by arpa, were studying number of military applications of lasers, according to magazine, usaf had increased planned funding of high-energy gas laser development in FY 1969 from $0.5 million to $2.5 million to make use of power output increase achieved by United Aircraft Corp. in 1968. And $1.5 million had been given to exploratory development of high-power solid-state lasers. For FY 1970 usaf had asked $8 million to exploit United Aircraft development. (Av Wlc, 1/12/70, 16-7; usaf pio; A&A, 4/70, 16-21)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 265.3-mi (426.9-km) apogee, 86.4-mi (139.0-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.0° inclination and reentered June 14. (gsfc SSR, 6/15/69; upi, W Post, 6/4/69, A18; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Psychological, technical, and political factors had combined to enable U.S. to win lunar landing race over U.S.S.R., said Harry Schwartz in New York Times. Moscow had shown overconfidence in underrating American capabilities, ignored lunar rendezvous technique adopted by U.S., and purged Nikita S. Khrushchev, who had been “enamored of space exploits and the propaganda they gave him.” New Soviet leaders had changed priorities to concentrate on domestic problems. Since U.S. lunar landing, however, “two very different reactions are visible in the Soviet Union.” Scientists, engineers, and many ordinary people were overcome with admiration. Ideologists and Soviet propaganda managers were deeply unhappy, “and their regret that it was not Soviet cosmonauts who went to the moon is scarcely hidden.” (AIT, 7/27/69)
NASA’s Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C., with keynote speaker Dr. Charles H. Townes, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist and member of President’s Task Force on Science Policy. Recipients of NASA Distinguished Service Medal were: l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.), msc Associate Director; Robert E. Bordeau, Assistant Director for Projects, GSFC; Dr. John F. Clark, gsfc Director; Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator, OMSF; Ozro M. Covington, Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, gsfc; George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Rocco Petrone, Apollo Program Director; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systerns Organization (samso) and former Apollo Program Director; Julian W. Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator; and Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Distinguished Public Service Medal was awarded to Dr. Harry H. Hess (posthumously), former Princeton Univ. geologist and Chairman of NAS—NRC Space Science Board, and to Dr. Townes. Exceptional Bravery Medal was awarded to Charles J. Beverlin and Billy B. McClure of General Dynamics Corp. at ksc, each for prompt action during “accidental depressurization of an Atlas launch vehicle” which “prevented destruction of a Mariner Mars space vehicle and potential injury to his comrades.” Special recognition given to employees of NASA and leading aerospace industries for their role in successful Apollo lunar landing resulted in largest number of annual awards to date. Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal was awarded to 25 persons, Exceptional Service Medal to 97, and Public Service Group Achievement Award to 29. Other awards included Group Achievement Award, Public Service Award, and Certificate of Appreciation. (Program; NASA Release 69—143; nasa Personnel Div)
Aerospace Corp. announced election of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology and first nasa Administrator (1958—1961), as Chairman of Board of Trustees. Sherrod E. Skinner retired as Chairman and l/g James H. Doolittle (usaf, Ret.), Vice Chairman, also retired during annual meeting of Board of Trustees. Skinner and Gen. Doolittle were awarded usaf Exceptional Service Award by Under Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in El Segundo, Calif., ceremony Sept. 12 (Aerospace Release; CR, 9/25/69, E7813)
NASA announced termination of joint NASA—dod XB—70 flight research program, for which it had assumed management responsibility in March 1967. Aircraft had been productive for studying sonic boom, flight dynamics, and handling problems peculiar to advanced supersonic aircraft. Of two XB—70s constructed by North American Rockwell Corp., one had been destroyed in June 8, 1966, midair collision. Remaining aircraft would be flown from frc to Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, where it would be delivered to usaf Museum. During 2,000-mi flight NASA planned to obtain data on its handling qualities and structural response to air turbulence. First flight of XB—70 was made Sept. 21, 1964. Top speed of mach 3 (2,000 mph) and peak altitude of 74,000 had been attained in four-year flight program, (nasa Release 69—10)
Princeton Univ. scientists had observed sudden speedup in fastest and youngest pulsar, in heart of Crab Nebula, Walter Sullivan reported in New York Times. With second discovery of periodic phenomenon, astronomers had taken word “glitch” from electronic engineers and astronauts to describe sudden departure from normal pulsar behavior. {NYT, 12/8/69)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Associate and Deputy Administrator, delivered 1969 Minta Martin Lecture at MIT as 1968—69 Jerome Hunsaker Professor of Aeronau-• tical Engineering. Describing origins and development of U.S. space program as well as decision-making and implementation in commitment to manned lunar landing, paper would be presented also at Univ. of Maryland March 20 and at LeRC April 24. Citing need for set of national goals, Dr. Seamans defined national agenda for allocation of R&D that might be acceptable to man in street: understanding, forecasting, and controlling environment; supplying basic resources of food, fuel, minerals, and water; improving quality of life; improving transportation; improving communications; encouraging economic growth; and assisting international development and providing national security. Space program contributed to all categories. Studies of sun’s transmissions, of Mars and Venus atmospheres, of moon’s origin, and of earth itself contributed to understanding of environment for practical use of man. Space R&D might aid search for alternative basic resources; it could establish facilities for detecting available resources and speed communications to meet problems. Biological and medical investigations in space program held greatest promise in study of reactions of biological specimens, animals, and man. Impact on education had been cited by some as greatest value of space exploration. Program had required in-depth investigation of waste management, fire prevention, materials development, and microminiaturization. Space technology influenced new vehicles being tested for transportation—hydrofoil ships, surface-effect and air-cushion vehicles, high-speed trains, electric cars, vtol and v/stol aircraft, jumbo subsonic aircraft, and supersonic aircraft. Communications satellites, already in commercial use, ultimately could broadcast directly to home receivers. In international cooperation, NASA was working with 64 nations in space activity. Returns from NASA’s scientific satellites and communications satellites, development of manned space flight capability, and tracking facilities contributed to national defense. (Text)
Tass carried Apollo 12 report shortly before launch. Report described mission objectives and ended: “We wish a successful flight and a safe return to the courageous team of the American spaceship Apollo 12.” (Reuters, W Post, 11/15/69, A6)
Boeing 747 slated for passenger service with Pan American World Airways beginning mid-February 1970 flew from Seattle, Wash., to John F. Kennedy International Airport with 176 passengers in first public preview of jumbo jet flight. Passengers—PAA officials, flight crew, and press—were startled by shudder as plane’s wheels were buffeted by rough spots on runway. Phenomenon was repeated when plane touched down in New York after 4-hr 5-min flight. Passengers also were critical of “interior noise level in the rear half of the plane.” (Witkin, NYT, 12/3/69, 1)
Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and wife inspected container vessel American Astronaut in London and signed autographs for longshoremen. Mrs. Lovell had christened vessel in April. (Reuters, C Trib, 10/7/69)
National Telemetry Conference of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., presented award for telemetry achievements to NASA team responsible for directing, planning, engineering, implementing, and operating Manned Space Flight Network in support of Apollo program. At Washington, D.C., luncheon, award was accepted by GSFC Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, Ozro M. Covington. (gsfc Release G—1—69)
Smithsonian Institution celebrated 50th anniversary of May 8, 1919, takeoff of first aircraft to cross Atlantic Ocean with display on Washington, D.C., mall of original NC-4 (restored by Smithsonian Air Museum Curator Paul Garber) and with presentation to Institution of Plaque and aircraft’s log. Glenn Curtiss-built, long-range seaplane ordered by usn as bomber during World War I but completed too late to see service had been flown by usn crew from Rockaway Beach, N.Y., to Plymouth, England, with two sister aircraft which crashed in Azores. NC—4, known as “Nancy,” made journey in 53 hrs 58 min flying time and 23 days elapsed time. (Lydon, NYT, 5/1/69, 22; Durbin, W Post, 5/8/69, Cl)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced it had reduced its activity on usaf’s Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa) but was maintaining team effort in connection with program. Reduction was made to permit maximum attention to F—15 fighter weapon system competition. (nar Release NN—28; Wilson, W Post, 5/31/69, Al)
At international airline conference in Dublin, U.S.S.R.’s First Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Gen. Leonid V. Zholudev, denied Tu-144 supersonic transport had been in accident, American Aviation said. It was “undergoing tests according to our program,” Gen. Zholudev said. He declined to speculate when Soviet aircraft would go into service and said “many complex problems must be solved.” Tu-154, 170-passenger trijet, would enter service “in near future”; An-22 turboprop, with reported maximum takeoff weight of 551,160 lbs, was being used exclusively as cargo carrier. (Amer Av, 4/28/69, 17)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. to conduct parallel $2.9-million, 11-mo design and planning studies of 12-man earth orbital space station which could be developed by 1975 and have 10-yr lifetime. Companies would also include conceptual design of 50-man space base composed of specialized modules assembled in low earth orbit in late 1970s and early 1980s to serve as centralized scientific and technical facility in orbit. Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., and Hughes Aircraft Co. had been selected for final competitive negotiation of contract to develop advanced optical communications experiment. Companies would compete for one $5-million contract to develop wideband laser communications system to be placed on board Applications Technology Satellite ATS—F, scheduled for launch in 1972, for communications between satellite and transportable ground station. (NASA Releases 69—108, 69-109)
Research to improve materials and lubricants for aerospace might aid in replacement of human hip joint with prosthesis better than any yet developed, LeRC scientist Robert L. Johnson announced. Bearing properties of materials—like cobalt alloy—used in commercial hip joints could be improved by changing crystal structure of metal to hexagonal form, Johnson had found in NASA studies. Interest in these alloys had led to cooperative program with Cornell Medical Center in New York. (LeRC Release 69-66)
Classical astronomical data on figures of moon and terrestrial planets were being supplemented by new information from Lunar Orbiter program. Comparable future planetary probes would provide fundamental . data from simple experiments, Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, and Dr. Carl Sagan said in Science. Lunar Orbiter results had revealed lunar mascons’ nonuniform surface distribution that could explain lunar dynamical asymmetries “and perhaps similar asymmetries for Mars and Mercury.” {Science, 8/15/69, 651—7)
Walter Rundell, Jr., of Iowa State Univ. Dept, of History described U.S. Government historical programs at National Convention of Southern Historical Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “NASA’s historical program began in 1959 under the leadership of Eugene M. Emme. Two years later Emme launched the official publications with his Aeronautics and Astronautics: An American Chronology of Science and Technology in the Exploration of Space, 1915—1960, This has been followed by similar annual chronologies and chronologies devoted to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo projects. Since 1966 the office has published several monographs, some written under contract by private scholars, rather than being undertaken by the permanent staff. A good example is This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, by Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander.” (Text) During October: The Atlantic commented on Apollo 11: “We enthusiastically join the rest of human kind in applauding the feat of the Apollo 11 astronauts and their NASA sponsors. It is an achievement far greater, even, than the construction and successful launchings of The Brick Moon, which happened in these pages exactly one hundred years ago.” Story, by Edward Everett Hale, had told of group of New Englanders who had constructed artificial moon of bricks and launched it into orbit to provide perpetual navigation aid for seamen. “So far as we can determine, the launching of The Brick Moon provoked considerably less public interest than the latest American lunar expedition.” (Atlantic, 10/69, 3)
Termination of Project Blue Book—usaf investigation of UFOs—was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Project’s continuation could not be justified “on the ground of national security or in the interest of science.” Decision was based on evaluation of Jan. 9 report by Univ. of Colorado, NAS review of Univ. of Colorado report, and usaf investigations of UFO reports since 1948. usaf had concluded: no UFO reported, investigated, and evaluated by usaf had threatened U.S. security; there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings represented technological developments or principles beyond range of scientific knowledge; and there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings were extraterrestrial vehicles. Project Blue Book records would be retired to usaf archives at Maxwell afb, Ala. (dod Release 1077—69)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Frederick M. Marshall issued temporary injunction to block sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., for $25 million. He directed case be given preference on trial calendar. {NYT, 1/4/69, 23)
Dr. Arthur Rudolph, former Saturn V Program Manager at msfc, was honored by W. Randolph Lovelace II Award at American Astronautical Society banquet in Denver, Colo. Award was presented for his sustained contribution to space travel in directing Saturn V launch vehicle program 1963 through 1968. It was accepted for Dr. Rudolph by Dr. Helmut G. Krause of msfc. (Release 69—144)
faa Government-industry conference in Washington, D.C., discussed faa role in stol development, stol noise sources, stol operational considerations related to noise abatement, noise source reduction techniques, and review of existing aircraft certification concepts and considerations for stol noise certification, (faa Release 69—5)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Dr. William D. McElroy, Chairman of Johns Hopkins Univ. Dept, of Biology, as Director of National Science Foundation. Dr. McElroy would replace Leland J. Haworth, whose six-year term had expired. He was director of Mc-Collum-Pratt Institute at Johns Hopkins, former member of President’s Science Advisory Committee, and member of nas, aaas, American Chemical Society, and American Society of Biological Chemists. {PD, 6/23/69, 877)
Economist editorial commented: “If the Russians are ever going to get another prestige victory over the United States, and not the sort of worldwide humiliation they have endured with Luna 15 during the American moon landing, and then with the triple Soyuz anti-climax, they will have to pull something off soon. For if not the Soviet planners may see increasingly less reason to continue spending even 1 per cent of the country’s gross national product on its cosmonauts. . . . What is ironic is that a Soviet slowdown could be seen as a mirror image of the running battle in the United States between the scientists and the space engineers, but with the Russian scientists coming out on top. The Academy of Sciences is widely regarded as the repository of all that is most stuffily conservative in Soviet science. That may have been the central cause of the Russian flop.” It was also blow to Americans who relied for new space funds on Nixon Administration’s “continuing fear of what the Russians may yet do.” (Economist, 11/8/69, 12-3)
Senate passed S.J.R. 140, providing for striking of medals honoring American astronauts who had flown in outer space. (CR, 7/30/69, S8786)
Study of possible Space Technology Applications and Research Laboratory (starlab), sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education, was completed at MSFC. Eleven-week design project focused space-developed technology on earth resources use, crop-maturity prediction, soil analysis, vegetation vigor, sea farming, and other earth problems. Final presentation in project, which had participation of 21 faculty members from 18 colleges and universities, was report on orbiting space laboratory illustrating systems approach that could be valuable in solving major earth problems, (msfc Release 69-179)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
White House announced President Nixon would observe Apollo 11 splashdown and recovery aboard U.S.S. Hornet and proceed to Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, India, and Pakistan. He would meet with Asian leaders “to reemphasize his longstanding concern with peace and progress in Asia.” Announcement was released in New York City. (PD, 7/7/69, 926)
Worldwide audience focused on Apollo 11 launch: At summer residence, Castel Gondolfo, Italy, Pope Paul VI asked for prayers for U.S. astronauts a few hours before launch toward moon. U.S.S.R. radio and TV gave factual accounts of Apollo 11 launch but maintained third day of silence on Luna XV. Major Soviet news program at 8:30 pm Moscow time showed tape of Apollo 11 liftoff taken from live comsat coverage. In U.K. TV viewers saw launch via transatlantic satellite. BBC scheduled live coverage through July 24 splashdown and would relay broadcasts to continent by cable. London newspapers frontpaged Apollo 11. Daily Express headline read, “Ho Hum—Anyone for the Moon Today?” over report on Telaxed astronauts. Polish TV viewers saw launch via 45-min transmission directly from Cape Kennedy. Hundreds of Germans and Americans crowded Apollo 11 exhibit in Mannheim, Germany, department store. Swedish TV viewers were advised by state broadcasting company not to turn off sets Sunday night—so they could be awakened for scheduled moon landing Monday. Hippies in Iran held milk and honey pots in Teheran restaur ant to toast astronauts. In Egypt, Moslem world’s leading moon expert, Sheikh Ahmand Haredi said, “The Koran urges Moslems to look up from their earthly abode to what lies behind the moon and stars.” Japanese department stores featured models of Apollo command module. In Greece, Aspis-Pronoia insurance company issued first outer-space life insurance policy, to cover Apollo 11 crew at $10,000 each. In Spain people called event most interesting since Columbus discovered America.	• Israel’s state radio broadcast in Hebrew from Cape Kennedy while Israelis stood around TV sets and portable radios in streets. U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv and U.S. Consulate in Jerusalem opened Apollo 11 information offices. Apollo 11 reaction was “generally tepid” in Lagos, Nigeria. Radio Nigeria reported launch seven minutes into its morning broadcast. Later it became number one newscast item. Most of Latin America missed launch on TV because of failure of Intelsat-111 F—2 June 29. Latin American newspapers and TV correspondents traveled to U.S. to cover launch and were reported to be outraged by absence of TV coverage in their countries. In Colombia, government asked TV manufacturers to put sets in all town squares. Bogota students would have July 21 off to watch lunar landing. (NYT, 7/17/69, 21, 22; Bishop, C Trib, 7/17/69)
President Nixon announced decision to continue development of SST. “The supersonic transport is going to be built. The question is whether in the years ahead the people of the world will be flying in American supersonic transports or in the transports of other nations . . . whether the United States, after starting and stopping this program . . . finally decides to go ahead. ... I have made the decision that we should go ahead . . . because I want the United States to continue to lead the world in air transport. And it is essential to build this plane if we are to maintain that leadership. ... I have made the decision, also, because . . . through this plane we are going to be able to bring the world closer together in a true physical and time sense. . . . This is a massive stride forward in the field of transport.” President said prototype would be flown in 1972. (PD, 9/29/69, 1309)
Saturn V (left) thrust Apollo 11 spacecraft toward the moon, watched by former nasa Administrator James E. Webb (below at left), former President Lyndon B. Johnson, and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Kennedy Space Center. In ksc Launch Control Center (above) mission officials relaxed after launch; left to right were Charles W. Matthews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr, George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and l/g Samuel C, Phillips, Apollo Program Director. was heading was in center of large, rugged crater with 5- to 10-ft-dia boulders. Consequently crew flew past crater to more suitable touchdown point by controlling attitude manually and adjusting descent rate and horizontal velocity. Officials later attributed change in course to malfunction in onboard radar and subsequent critical overload of computer, which caused warning alarms and could have aborted mission. lm landed on moon at 102:46 get (4:18 pm edt July 20) in Sea of Tranquility, 20,800 ft west and 4,000—5,000 ft south of center of planned landing ellipse. Landing-point coordinates were approximately 23,5°E and 0.64°N and site altitude was approximately 8,600 ft below moon’s mean radius. Armstrong reported: “Houston, Tranquility Base here—the Eagle has landed.” Mission Control replied: “Roger, Tranquility. We copy you on the ground. You got a bunch of guys about to turn blue. We are breathing again. Thanks a lot.” Armstrong said landing area contained numerous boulders up to two feet in diameter, some apparently fractured by LM engine exhaust, and surface color varied from very light to dark gray. Crew immediately adapted to one-sixth (earth) gravity in lm and moved with ease. About two hours after landing astronauts requested and were granted permission to perform extravehicular activities (eva) on moon’s surface before sleep period—about 4Vs hrs earlier than originally scheduled. After postlanding checks, Armstrong opened LM hatch, descended lm ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera, which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Aldrin remained inside LM and recorded Armstrong’s descent with 16-mm Maurer camera. Armstrong took man’s first step on moon at 109:24 get (10:56 pm EDT July 20). Some 600 million viewers on earth—one-fifth of world population—watched live TV transmission and heard him describe feat as “one small step for a man—one giant leap for mankind.” Collins, orbiting moon alone in CSM Columbia, was unable to see landing and subsequent eva because csm was not equipped to receive TV transmission. Armstrong said moon had “stark beauty all its own"’ like desert in southwestern U.S. Lunar surface was “fine and powdery” and could be kicked up loosely- “It adheres like powdered charcoal . . . but I only go jn a small fraction of an inch. I can see my footprint in the moon like fine grainy particles.” Armstrong checked EM exterior and reported penetration of EM footpads into lunar surface was three to four inches and that strut collapse was minimal. Blast of descent engine had not formed crater in surface and about one foot of clearance remained between engine bell and lunar surface. He reported only problem was seeing his footing in darkness of lm shadow. He emplaced microdot containing messages from world leaders, collected contingency sample of lunar soil near lm ladder, and reported that, although surface consisted of soft loose material, material six or eight inches under surface was very hard and cohesive. Rocks were very slippery, apparently because vesicles (pores) were filled with powdery surface material. Armstrong photographed Aldrin’s descent to lunar surface at 11:15 pm edt and astronauts unveiled plaque mounted on strut behind ladder and read its inscription to tneir worldwide TV audience; “Here men from the planet earth first set foot on the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.*’ Armstrong then removed TV camera from MESA, obtained panorama, and placed camera on tripod 40 ft from LM to view subsequent EVA, Aldrin experimented to assess mobility on moon by walking, running, leaping, and doing twofooted kangaroo hops between LM and camera. He indicated some difficulty in maintaining balance but said that his agility was better than expected and that he was able to move with great ease. Mass of backpack affected inertia and caused “slight tendency ... to tip backwards, If I’m about to lose my balance in one direction, recovery is quite natural and easy. You’ve just got to be careful landing in die direction you want to go in.” Aldrin deployed solar wind composition experiment in sunlight north of LM and joined Armstrong in erecting three, by five-foot American flag on eight-foot aluminum staff. Astronauts saluted flag and then talked by radiotelephone with President Nixon at White House in what President called “most historic telephone call ever made from the White House,” President said: “Because of what you have done the heavens have become a part of man’s world. As you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to earth. For one priceless moment in t	mn 1 rssi xh-e mi m First footsteps on H.-Kficn: TM* ■#* tLCtt UTI, EfMMK, JDIT H, I*, ’I.K JQTTWat LA UHIE GOHOIIi; 1g_ll*k u*w JtAVU *1 THE TIMES sS JMan takes first steps on the moon . |..rsn magnthg, r y«m\ && | ip- * l=ij s the whole history of man all the people on this earth are truly one— one in their pride in what you have done and one in our prayers that you will return safely to earth.” Astronauts saluted President and expressed honor and privilege of representing U.S. and world on moon. Continuing eva, Armstrong collected bulk sample of assorted surface materia] and selected rock chunks, inspected lm, deployed passive seismic experiment package and laser ranging retroreflector, and collected two core samples and 20 lbs of discretely selected material. Throughout EVA continuous black-and-white coverage of crew activity provided live documentation, with telemetered data and voice comments. Lunar surface photography included both still and sequence coverage using Hasselbtad, Maurer data-acquisition, and Apollo lunar surface close-up cameras. Astronauts completed eva, transferred film and samples to LM, reentered LM and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by Hl:39 get (1:11 am edt July 21). Armstrong and Aldrin rested inside LM seven hours and checked out systems. At 124:22 get (1:54 pm July 21) lm successfully lifted off moon, after 21 hrs 36 min on lunar surface. All lunar ascent and rendezvous maneuvers were nominal. Eagle reported to Mission Control: “Eagle TOUm 0EU5MDE, YLtEOIMWA. JULY Jl, BMHTHIfJ! [ISSl RMlflBM	jiebUwJ ^LV¥~l* J_—
Across U.S. on eve of Apollo 11 launch, newspaper editorials commented on lunar landing mission: Los Angeles Herald-Examiner; “It is with an almost breathless sense of awe that we await tomorrow’s blast-off from Cape Kennedy—the launching of three space explorers on the most ambitious and fearsome adventure in all human history. Mere words cannot capture the immensity of the flight of Apollo 11. Quite literally, man will be attempting a final break of the chains which have bound him to this earth.” (LA Her-Exam, 7/15/69) Newport News, Va., Times-Herald: “Now, this triumph of human courage and knowledge stands poised on the threshold of accomplishment. For a few fleeting moments, the attention of the world will follow the Eagle as it ferries its two astronauts toward a destiny until now only dreamed of in our history. Then, most probably, our attention will filter back to the pressing problems on earth.” (Times-Herald, 7/15/69) Milwaukee Journal: “Apollo 11 is providing insight into the meaning of life and the imperatives of human society. It is forcing us to face the grim paradox of exploiting human reason and the marvels of machinery to soar into the majesty of space while the world becomes fragmented into selfish national sovereignties—some armed, some arming, with the hideous capacity to end life itself.” (Milwaukee Journal, 7/15/69) Denver Post: “The Soviet attempt to send an unmanned spaceship to the moon in advance of Apollo 11 is a bold bid to draw attention to Soviet space prowess. But even if it succeeds ... in mechanically scooping up samples of the moon and returning to earth, the Soviet project will not overshadow the American mission. Instead, the Soviet flight will serve to underscore the expensive duplication of effort created by the space race. If the Russians and Americans had cooperated, rather than competed, the risks and the costs involved in landing a man on the moon would have been far less.” (Denver Post, 7/15/69) Washington Evening Star: Soviet Luna XV seemed strangely timed. During their Moscow discussions on space cooperation, U.S.S.R. President Nikolay V. Podgorny had not given Astronaut Frank Borman “slightest hint that the Kremlin was planning to send an unmanned spacecraft to the moon to coincide with the history-making Apollo 11 American mission.” Was it really possible “to work together in space exploration with a country that seems to be playing tricks with ours at a moment when we are engaged in a historic effort to land men on the moon?” (W Star, 7/15/69, A12)
Strategic threat to U.S. security was rapidly increasing, Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Chamber of Commerce Armed Forces Day luncheon in New Orleans. U.S.S.R. had built intercontinental missile force from 250 in 1966 to 1,150 operational or under construction. “With their large SS—9 missiles, the Soviets will soon have about twice as much missile payload ... as our missile force, even including our advantage in submarine launched missiles. In addition, the Soviets have already deployed an antiballistic missile system that includes some 60 long-range ABM missiles.” (Text)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR with VAM—20 boosters. Aerobee 150 carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 124.0-mi (199.6-km) altitude to photograph images of sun and part of corona in 150-400 A and 400—650 A region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and excellent spectroheliograms were obtained. Aerobee 150 MI carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution pictures of time development of solar flare in x-ray region of spectrum. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, photographing IB limb flare with appreciable x-ray emission that lasted throughout flight. (nasa Rpts srl)
Apollo 11 cm was being readied at North American Rockwell plant in Downey, Calif., for tour of 50 state capitals and final resting place at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., Associated Press reported. NASA was sponsoring tour. {CSM, 11/20/69)
New York City held ticker-tape parade for Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, followed by presentation at City Hall Plaza of Medals of City of New York, luncheon at Lincoln Center, appearance at U.N., and Waldorf-Astoria dinner attended by 2,500 political leaders and guests. (NYT, 1/10/69, 30; Aarons, W Post, 1/11/69, Al; AP, B Sun, 1/11/69, A4)
Washington Post editorial said: “The fact that the Russians may be able to complete a floating [space] station substantially before the United States is ready to attempt it should be of no great concern. Although the psychological impact of knowing that men are up there looking down on us constantly is bound to be great, this should be more than offset by the successes of the Apollo program. The important things are for the American space effort to proceed in a logical fashion designed to reap the largest possible scientific benefits and to remain largely under civilian control.” (W Post, 1/22/69, A26)
usaf magazine Airman published interview with Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator. NASA—usaf X—15 program had been highly successful in providing data for many disciplines and “very good test bed” for atmospheric probe instrumentation. XB—70 program, initiated as manned supersonic bombing system, was “very bold step” in speeds over mach 3. When technological difficulties and rising costs resulted in decision against XB—70 production, NASA with usaf had initiated experimental program. Dr. Seamans felt usaf was not using NASA expertise to fullest extent, usaf needed new manned bomber, new fighter, and modernization of air defense. He was not convinced usaf had yet established “best relationships with industry to get these things done.” (Airman, 9/69, 7-9)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed need for improved manned bomber at joint national meeting of American Astronautical Society and Operations Research Society of America, in . Denver, Colo.: “Those who criticize the bomber as an obsolete system in the missile age are often the same people who refer to our alleged 4-to-l superiority over the Soviets in individually targeted warheads.” Ratio would be “nearly 1-to-l, with total payload running heavily against us, if it were not for our bomber force with its multiple weapons on each aircraft. If our bombers are to continue to provide deterrence, they must be able to survive an attack and then penetrate the ever-improving Soviet defenses. The B—52 is still a good aircraft, but the prototype was flying in 1952 and ths latest models were produced in 1962. An advanced bomber will take advantage of the many improvements that have been made in airframe and engine design. It would have short take-off and landing capability needed for dispersal and payload, structure, and speed necessary for penetration.” In security terms, space age presented dangers, but also afforded opportunities for increasing strategic stability. “Each generation of space vehicles will provide additional improvements in our ability to monitor enemy activities. We are now working on a satellite early warning system that would detect missiles as they are launched from land or sea. With the aid of such a warning system a dispersed bomber force would be able to take off from its bases before the impact of enemy weapons, even if the time of flight of the latter were greatly reduced.” (Text)
President Nixon addressed 2,000 American Field Service students from 60 countries on White House lawn: “. . . in the year 2000 we will, on this earth, have visited new worlds where there will be a form of life. I know this will happen, and I want to tell you as I look forward and dream about that future . . . this is the kind of world I would like to see and the kind of exploration of that new world that I know all Americans want. I hope that when the next great venture into space takes place that it will be one in which Americans will be joined by representatives of other countries.” (PD, 7/28/69, 1016—7)
FRC announced award of $1.8-million NASA contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for construction of new supercritical aircraft wing. Wing, which utilized airfoil shape with flat top and rear edge curved downward, had been developed by Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb and tested at LaRC. Wind tunnel tests indicated new shape could allow highly efficient cruise flight at nearly 600 mph at 45,000-ft altitude. By increasing cruise speeds without increasing power, wing might significantly reduce operational cost of subsonic jet transport flights and allow faster travel, lower fuel consumption and costs, increased operational range, or increased payload. Wing would be mounted on modified Navy F—j fighter aircraft at frc for flight testing, (frc Releases 4-69, 15-69)
In $100,000 experiment to evaluate claims that jet noise had caused female minks to panic and eat their young, usaf planned to send jet aircraft through sound barrier over Univ. of Alaska’s experimental mink farm near Petersburg. On ground, observers from Dept, of Agriculture and Cornell Univ. would study mink reaction to sonic boom. Since 1962 usaf had paid 25 claims totaling $67,000 for mink problems alleged to have been caused by supersonic aircraft. (Pinto, W Star, 10/26/69, A22)
Terms of Reference for joint NASa/dod study of space transportation systems were approved by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. Two-part study to assess practicality of common system would correlate needs of both agencies, assess technical feasibility of various systems, compare costs, assess economic sensibility of systems, and recommend concepts of space transportation system with rationale for each concept. Group would report to President’s Space Task Committee June 15. (Terms of Reference)
usaf YF—12A supersonic aircraft made its first research flight from Edwards afb, to open a joint nasa-usaf program to advance knowledge of high-performance flight. Special instrumentation installed by NASA increased the value of the flying test bed for accumulating data. Pitots were from NASA and the Air Force. trator, Dr. T. Keith Glennan; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; and others. (Natl Archives Pio)
Full-color lunar photos from Apollo 11, including one of man first setting foot on moon, would be released by NASA to press and TV four days after splashdown, following two-day decontamination of film, NASA announced. Superintendent of Documents, gpo, was taking orders from public for photos to be filled in late August. Series of reproductions of paintings by American artists recording space program, “Eyewitness to Space,” also would be released. (NASA Release 69-83J)
Intelsat conference of 67 countries and observers from Communist bloc and underdeveloped nations ended at State Dept, without agreement on method of sharing control over international satellite communications. Committee of Intelsat members was appointed to work through summer on alternate drafts of final agreement to be presented to conference in November. Leonard H. Marks, American chairman of conference, had announced his resignation and would return to private law practice in Washington, D.C. (Lydon, NYT, 3/23/69, 31; Rpt of US Del)
House Appropriations Committee approved full $95.9 million requested by President Nixon for continued sst development. (CR, 11/13/69, D1065; AP, B Sun, 11/14/69) At 42nd scientific session of American Heart Assn, in Dallas, Tex., Dutch scientist Dr. A. C. Arntzenius described application of jet propulsion principle—for every movement in one direction, there is an equal opposite movement—in experiments to increase blood pumped by animal heart without increasing heart action. With research team from medical faculty of Rotterdam he had strapped piglets and dogs to “frictionless” table that slid in synchronization with animal heartbeat. Movement made it unnecessary for ventricle to expend energy to accelerate blood as it left heart. When blood started toward animal’s head, table was moved in direction of its feet, forcing blood in opposite direction without adding to demands on heart, (tipi, W Star, 11/23/69, All; Am Heart Assn pio)
Canadian Isis I (isis—a) International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV—3E) booster. Satellite entered orbit with 2,188.5-mi	(3,522-km) apogee, 356.7-mi (574-km) perigee, 128.3-min period, and 88.4° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place Isis I into elliptical earth orbit that would permit study of topside of ionosphere above electron peak of F region and to extend cooperative Canadian-U.S. program of ionospheric studies initiated by Alouette I (launched Sept. 28, 1962) by combining sounder data with correlative direct measurements for time sufficient to cover latitudinal and diurnal variations during high solar activity. Third in series of five satellites to improve understanding of ionospheric physics, Isis I weighed 520 lbs and carried six Canadian and four American experiments. First launch in series (isis x project, Nov. 28, 1965) orbited Canada’s Alouette II and U.S. Explorer XXXI. isis program was joint undertaking of NASA and Canadian Defence Research Board (drb) under December 1963 Memorandum of Understanding. drb was responsible for spacecraft design, fabrication, electrical testing, experiment integration, and satellite control. NASA provided launch vehicles, launch facilities. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Releases 69—14, 69—22)
Tom Barker, owner of bingo hall in Cardiff, Wales, had written to American and Soviet embassies in London for permission to open first amusement and bingo hall on moon, Reuters said. U.S. Embassy spokesman had replied: “There are no proposals to colonize the moon and many factors inhibit large-scale development.” (NYT, 5/9/69, 16)
Washington Post editorial praised Nov. 20 speech of RCA President Robert W. Sarnoff which called for use of space technology in “full-scale pilot program” to rehabilitate Washington, D.C.: Nation “needs to know whether the computer-age technology that sent us to the moon twice can be used to solve the problems of American cities. That question in a slightly different form has been plaguing the space community. Are vital national resources needed to meet the crisis at home being diverted to the moon and beyond?” Sarnoff speech “picks up from a series of addresses by Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, suggesting that modern technology can assist in solving the problems of cities, provided there is a national commitment to do so.” {W Post, 12/2/69, A18) December 3; Dr. George M. Low was sworn in as NASA Deputy Administrator by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator. (NASA Release 69—159) •
London Economist editorial: “When Europe drew pride and status from its colonies, the Americans had none: the tables are turned now. While the United States rings July 21st red on its calendar, Europe faces the probability that when the planets are opened up we Europeans will have no part in doing it. The idea, at this late stage, of a European manned space programme is nonsense. The policy that would make more sense would be to approach the United States to see if the Administration will accept some foreign collaboration in the hugely expensive next years of its space programme. If the next American objective is Mars, a sensible Administration may welcome help and participation—especially if this excludes pressure to co-operate with the Russians. . . . There will be no opportunity in this generation that it would cost us more to miss.” {CSM, 8/1/69)
February 5: dod launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 171.0-mi (275-km) apogee, 91.7-mi (147.6-km) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 81.6° inclination and reentered Feb. 24. Second satellite entered orbit with 894.9-mi (1,439.9-km) apogee, 866.4-mi (1,394.0-km) perigee, 114.1-min period, and 80.4° inclination. (Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Sir George Edwards, Chairman and Managing Director of British Aircraft Corp., told American Newcomen Society meeting in New York that Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport had completed 75 flights and approximately 128 flying hrs. (bac Release 42/69)
hud Secretary George W. Romney addressed International Platform Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “I do not propose that we now abandon our efforts to extend man’s reach still further beyond our planet, any more than we abandoned our domestic goals while we were reaching for the moon. But I do believe the time has come for a revision— in fact, a reversal—of our national priorities. I believe that in the decades ahead, the public interest and indeed our national survival require us to assign our housing and urban goals a high priority-—at least comparable to the priority we gave our space program in the decade just ending.” (HUD News; Hutchens, W Star, 1/22/69, A6)
Economist said of Soviet Soyuz “fiasco” U.S.S.R. had tried “highly ambitious link-up of the components of a permanent, orbiting space station, something the Americans will be in no shape to do for perhaps five years. The fact that the Russians apparently failed must have been humiliating to them, and gratifying to the Americans, but it is unlikely to be more than a temporary check to a programme that has rolled with considerable success since the Russians put the world’s first satellite in orbit more than a decade ago. The slow progress reflects the state of Soviet industry, but is steady progress with few loose ends. The American programme, trimmed and squeezed by political pressure and public opinion, is trailing appreciably more loose ends; despite the victory on the moon Nasa will have to set about tidying them up. And it is then that the Russians will have the last laugh.” (Economist, 10/25/69, 20)
State Dept, announced U.S.S.R. had accepted U.S. invitation to participate in international conference on communications satellites scheduled Feb. 24 in Washington, D.C. U.S. had notified all U.N. members it would extend “observer” invitations to any nation having “serious interest” in possibility of becoming Intelsat member. Bulgaria and Yugoslavia also would attend. At least 80 nations were expected to participate. (Finney, NYT, 1/23/69, 1; AP, W Post, 1/24/69, A5)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 234.3-mi (377.0-km) apogee, 85.8-mi (138.1-km) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 108.1° inclination and reentered Sept. 7. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; 9/15/69; SBD, 8/26/69, 190)
West German ambassadors in Moscow, Washington, D.C., and London signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty sponsored by U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Morgan, W Post, 11/29/69, Al)
Copy of original tape recording of excited voices of astronomers as they discovered first optical pulsar on night of Jan. 15—16 had been deposited in Niels Bohr Library, American Institute of Physics Newsletter noted. Tape, made accidentally during moment when optical pulses from Crab Nebula were discovered, had been preserved by discovery team, W. J. Cooke, M. J. Disney, and D. J. Taylor at Steward Observatory, Univ. of Arizona, (aip Newsletter, 5/69)
San Francisco Mayor Joseph Alioto urged San Franciscans to fly U.S. flag from Apollo 11 blastoff to splashdown and to sound every bell, siren, and whistle in the city at splashdown. (AP, W Post, 7/17/69, A27)
Washington Post editorial said: “It is a pity that the Soviet Union continues to wrap its space program in secrecy. The flights of Soyuz 6, 7 and 8 were launched in secret and on a mission also kept secret from the people whose labor supports the government that is paying for it. The contrast with the openness of the American space program could not be sharper and it is our lack of knowledge of what the Russians are doing that makes difficult any assessment of the meaning of these flights.” As long as U.S.S.R. preferred to operate in secret, “there is little that Americans can do other than congratulate them on their successes.” (W Post, 10/15/69, A18)
Committee of air traffic controllers said it had evolved program which would enable FAA to postpone restrictions scheduled to go into effect April 27 at five major airports. Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization would petition Secretary of Transportation John A. Voilpe to substitute “revamped procedures which would make operations safer and more efficient,” said F. Lee Bailey, counsel. Restrictions would curtail services into New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. {NYT, 2/8/69)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 333.1-mi (536-km) apogee, 288.9-mi (464.8-km) perigee, 94.6-min period, and 75.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Europeans were “as excited as many Americans” about Apollo 11 launch, New York Times reported. But “only the sharpest observer of the Soviet news media could guess, as he went to bed tonight, that Americans will try to send men to the moon tomorrow,” according to Baltimore Sun. Last mention of Apollo 11 in Soviet press had been July 9 meeting of President Nikolay V. Podgorny with Astronaut Frank Borman. In U.K., bbc and commercial TV were planning extensive Apollo 11 coverage, some live via comsat. British newspapers were competing with special space supplements and guides. Exceptions to generally “adulatory” reportage was The Times of London article in which philosopher Lord Russell had said: “Men will not be content to land upon the moon and try to make it habitable. They will land simultaneously from Russia and the United States, each party, complete with H-bombs and each intent upon exterminating the other.” American Embassy in Warsaw was packed every day with Poles viewing space films. Spain’s Evening Daily Pueblo had sponsored contest to send 25 readers to Apollo 11 launch. In France 22-page space supplement issued by France-Soir had sold 1.5 million copies at $1 each. Bild Zeitung in Germany had noted 7 out of 57 Apollo supervisors were of German origin. Austrian press had lionized Dr. Wernher von Braun during recent visit to Salzburg. Volume of Western European newspaper space devoted to lunar landing mission rivaled that in U.S., New York Times said, and “the whole story of the moon effort is improving the ‘prestige’ of the United States. . . . But. .. respect voiced by individuals is often for America’s technological power, not her humanity or civilization.” (Lewis, NYT, 7/16/69, 20; B Sun, 7/16/69, A8, Mills, A9)
Following successful Apollo 9 launching, President Nixon issued statement: “The successful launching of the Apollo 9 spacecraft marks another milestone in the journey of man into space. The hopes and prayers of mankind go with Col. James A. McDivitt, Col. David R. Scott, and Mr. Russell Schweickart on their courageous mission. The genius of the American scientist and technological community, which created and designed the Saturn V, the command ship, and the lunar module, once again stirs the imagination and gratitude of the world. We are proud of this American adventure; but this is more than an American adventure. It is an adventure of man, bringing the accumulated wisdom of his past to the task of shaping his future. The 10-day flight of Apollo 9 will, we hope, do something more than bring America close to the moon; it can serve to bring humanity closer by dramatically showing what men can do when they bring to any task the best of man’s mind and heart.” {PD, 3/10/69, 356)
Glazing discovered on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts was analyzed in Science by Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., senior investigator for close-up photography. Glossy surfaces similar to glass found clumped in centers of small lunar craters appeared to have been swept in after craters had been formed. Glazed areas were also concentrated toward tops of protuberances and, in some cases, droplets appeared to have run down inclined surface and congealed on sides. Glazing might have originated from effect of exhaust of lm descent stage, splashing of liquid drops from larger impact elsewhere, shock heating or volcanism on moon, same impact that created craters in which glazing was found, or intense radiation heating. Intense radiation was most probable cause, Gold said. Source could have been impact fireball on moon, impact fireball on earth, or most likely, solar outburst in geologically recent times. (Science, 9/26/69, 1345—9)
Apollo 11 launch brought mood of reflection across Nation, New York Times said. Dawn was breaking in western U.S. when blastoff occurred. Workers in San Francisco’s open air fish markets stood in silence to hear radio report. In San Diego motorists crossing U.S.-Mexican border listened to countdown on car radios. In mid-America, classes were postponed at Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colo., while cadets watched launch on TV. Cowhands at northern Wyoming ranch, inaccessible to radio or TV, interrupted work to honor Apollo 11. Ranch owner Dr. Oakleigh Thorn II said, “We feel so close to the moon shot out here, because we’re so close to the stars and sky.” In Biloxi, Miss., harbor fishermen paused on wharf to hear countdown. In Tennessee, tobacco farmers listened to transistor radios in fields. Washington, D.C., schoolteacher said, “The astronauts didn’t just go to the moon. All our minds went to the moon and intellectually man’s horizons have jumped leaps and bounds beyond the historical situation they’ve always been confined to.” (Fosburgh, NYT, 7/17/69, 1)
On arrival in Saigon, Republic of Vietnam, President Nixon said: “I am happy that the moon landing, which in its universality signifies a symbolic drawing together of all mankind, has provided an occasion for me to meet with President Thieu in the capital of his country.” Later, after discussions with President Nixon, President Nguyen Van Thieu said, “The Vietnamese people fully concur in the message of peace which the three brave American astronauts deposited on the moon for all mankind.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1051—4)
oar Research Review summarized 1968 research activities of Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories: During 1968 afcrl scientists had “placed more instruments on board more research vehicles than any other research group” in U.S. Experiments included 46 research rockets, 75 small meteorological rockets, 110 research balloons, and 374 research flights by 6 flying laboratories. Eight of nine satellite experiments were successfully orbited; most significant was 600-lb OV 1—16 (“Cannonball”) low-altitude-density satellite launched July 11 to measure atmospheric density, (oar Research Review, 5-6/69, 9)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, as Field Director of Space Station Studies for NASA, told Pasadena, Calif., press conference before addressing annual meeting of Chamber of Commerce there were five valid reasons for continuing space program despite high cost: (1) need for program that challenged U.S. in only way it could in time of peace, (2) educational impact of space technology in lower grades as well as among graduates, (3) scientific findings in space, (4) sheer quest and exploration, and (5) tendency of all countries to cooperate and perhaps realize earth’s fragility. Borman said, “I hope we can isolate successes and failures from funding because I think space exploration is an important phase of American life.” {LA Times, 5/28/69; Pasadena Star-News, 5/28/69)
Eastern Airlines, Inc., Vice President A. Scott Crossfield told Aero Club in Washington, D.C., that seven-week experiment with stol aircraft at Boston, Washington, and New York airports begun Sept. 1968 had been “unqualified success.” Airline’s engineers were drafting specifications for STOL aircraft to carry 125 passengers at 250 mph, capable of maneuvering at speeds of 70 mph. It could double landing capacity of airports by using taxiways and ends of unused runways. McDonnell Douglas version of French-designed Breguet 941 aircraft used by Eastern in experiments had used onboard computer-controlled system, “heart” of which was manufactured by Decca in England. It used existing navaids and was accurate within 25-ft altitude and 100-ft latitude. (Koprowski, W Post, 1/29/69, A8)
ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk told Annual Meeting of Shareholders in Washington, D.C., key goal of establishing global comsat system was “within immediate view.” When Early Bird [Intelsat /] “was launched just four years ago, there were only a handful of experimental stations in Europe and the United States. Today, there are 25 earth stations operating in 15 different countries of the world, with many more nearing completion. It is expected that a total of 43 stations will be in service by the end of this year and that 26 different countries will have direct access to all forms of high quality communications that the global system of satellites makes economically available to them.” By 1972 “there will be more than 70 stations operating in nearly 40 countries of the world, thereby making this high quality means of communications available directly to practically every nation on earth.” At end of first quarter of 1969 1,209 full-time circuits were being leased, up from 777 at end of 1967. Leased voice and record tariffs published by international carriers represented 40% reduction in Atlantic and Pacific areas since advent of comsats. Transmission of TV via satellite increased from 225 hrs in 1967 to 666 hrs in 1968, with 40% reduction in TV rates. (Text)
American Security Council published The ABM and the Changed Strategic Military Balance, U.S.A. vs. U.S.S.R. Although U.S. GNP ran almost twice that of U.S.S.R., latter was investing two to three times more in strategic military forces annually. Report concluded: “Antiballistic missile defense is not a cure-all for the security of the United States. It is not the ultimate defense system, for technology knows no limits and each decade produces fresh challenges and fresh need for response on the part of free nations. But anti-missile defense is an essential component in the network of military systems designed to give the American people a seamless garment of security in an age of acute danger. . . . We firmly believe that an American abm system is the soundest insurance for peace and against war that the United States can buy in 1969, for the 1970s. ... It may well be . . . the single most important step the United States can take toward a real and lasting peace at this moment in history.” (Text)
Mascons might be excess mass deposited by water and supported by internal strength of rigid moon, jpl scientist Paul M. Muller said in address before American Physical Society in Washington, D.C. Muller was codiscoverer of mascons [see April 25]. Mascons probably were not floating on liquid lunar interior as were earth’s continents and mountains, but were held there by moon with structural strength. He illustrated with photos taken by Lunar Orbiters and Apollo 8 theory that lunar features might have been cut by primordial lunar water. (nasa Release 69-62; jpl Release 515)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin Feoktistov spent half hour riding into Grand Canyon on mules after arriving in Arizona from San Francisco during two-week U.S. tour, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A3)
Pakistan President Yahya Khan sent “hearty felicitations” to President Nixon and American people on Apollo 12 success. “May your endeavor lead to increasing expansion of the bounds of human knowledge and bring forth newer possibilities of lasting peace and progress on earth.” (AIT, 11/26/69, 24)
LaRC had awarded 10-mo, $155,000 feasibility study contract to North American Rockwell Corp. to design two-man, lunar emergency, escape-to-orbit vehicle which could be carried aboard LM on Apollo missions. (SBD, 3/27/69, 125; nar Skywriter, 4/4/69, 1)
MSFC announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. to receive 11-mo, $2,899,986 contract for preliminary design and planning for 12-man earth-orbital space station for possible mid-1970 launch. Station— initial element of large space base and means of investigating effects of long-duration space flight on man—would have 10-yr lifetime, subject to expendables resupply and crew rotation. Parallel effort' was being conducted by Msc and North American Rockwell Corp. (msfc Release 69-204)
Eureka, Calif., high school senior Ronald Titus had identified sketch of future space station released by Tass Oct. 11 as identical to drawing in Sperry Gyroscope Co. advertisement in February 1962 Scientific American, New York Times reported. Original Soviet caption had said it was “Soviet sketch of a future space station.” Sketch had appeared in Eureka Times-Standard and New York Times as concept of Soviet space station. (NYT, 10/26/69, 11)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried American Science & Engineering, Inc., payload to 109.4-mi (176-km) altitude. Objective was to obtain high-resolution pictures of general x-ray emission from solar corona in quiescent state, using 9-in-dia x-ray mirror and 12-frame rotating camera with variety of filters. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; x-ray exposures of considerable scientific value were anticipated, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Into the New Realm,” exhibit of documentary history of U.S. Government in space from early balloon ascensions to origination of Apollo program, opened at National Archives in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included original of National Space Act of 1958, which created NASA, and copies of correspondence on establishment of U.S. space program from President Eisenhower; President Kennedy; first NASA Adminis
Apollo 11 was producing noticeable effect on business and consumer products, Washington Post said. Snoopy the Astronaut dolls were selling out; sales of color TV sets had risen in some stores; and sales of “moon maps and globes, as well as toy rocket ships and lunar exploration vehicles had also lifted skyward.” Two Washington, D.C., department stores were offering Japanese telescopes ranging from $19.99 to $1,000.00. One toy store manager said sales of space-related toys had jumped 70% or 80% in two months. Rockets propelled by solid-fuel inserts sold for $1.50 to $5.00 complete with recovery parachute. One Washington store had sold out supply of $10 spacesuits. Demand for rental of color TV sets in Washington area had been “terrific,” according to area dealer. (Cushing, W Post, 7/16/69, Dll)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner booster into orbit with 531.5-mi (855.2-km) apogee, 488.4-mi (785.8-km) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 98.8° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
ksc announced selection of Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, to receive 1969 Career Service Award of National Civil Service League at Washington, D.C., banquet June 13. Citation said: “The development of Complex 39, the installation from which the Apollo program launches take place, is the crowning achievement of Dr. Kurt H. Debus’ career. His leadership was pivotal in both the design and construction of the famed Apollo launch complex. Further, he has been responsible for many of the technical advances in launch technology, and for the formation of the government-industry launch team which has carried out more than 150 successful launches, including several notable firsts.” Award—consisting of $1,000, inscribed gold watch, and citation—was one of most prestigious for which civil service career employees were eligible. Also among 10 selected was George S. Moore, Associate Administrator for Operations, FAA, for “an extraordinary record in the development of up to date methods of evaluation of aircraft worthiness.” (ksc Release 154-69; W Star, 4/30/69, A2)
msfc announced two contract awards. Definitive $38,340,000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for J—2 engine operational and flight support Jan. 1, 1969, to June 30, 1970, replaced letter contract which earlier authorized $9 million. Contract modification of $15,253,945 was given to Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for extending delivery schedule of Saturn IB boosters and stage storage. (msfc Releases 69—97, 69—96)
Soviet Embassy Second Secretary Oleg M. Sokolov said in Washington, D.C., that U.S.S.R. definitely would display supersonic Tu-144 airliner at 28th Paris Air Show, May 29—June 8. He said aircraft would beat Anglo-French Concorde into operation and plans were under way to set up worldwide logistics support for Tu-144. dot officials said West would be watching closely to see whether U.S.S.R. could fulfill pledge and, if so, would take good look at Tu-144, which could hurt commercial market for sst if it had worldwide logistics backup, (Bentley, B Sun, 5/19/69, A5)
msfc announced $48,142,823 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. to provide for 14-mo extension of S—II program as part of overall Apollo program stretchout. S—II was 2nd stage for three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle. MSFC also announced $1,896,916 modification to Apollo Applications program contract for further Harvard College R&D of modified uv scanning spectrometer to fly in space on Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), (msfc Releases 69—76, 69—77)
U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov would arrive in New York Oct. 20 to begin two-week visit to U.S. as guests of astronauts, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman announced. He had extended invitation during his July tour of U.S.S.R. Beregovoy had flown Soyuz 111 mission, Oct. 26—30, 1968; Feoktistov was scientist aboard Oct. 12, 1964, Voskhod I flight. Itinerary was expected to include msc, Grand Canyon, California, Detroit, and Washington, D.C. (nasa Release 69-141; AP, W Star, 10/21/69)
FAA announced proposal to extend hourly flight quotas in effect at five high-density airports serving New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., for 9-12 mos beyond Dec. 31 expiration date. Experience with quota system since June 1 inception indicated it had relieved congestion and reduced delays, (faa Release 69—125)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 672.5-mi (1,082-km) apogee, 92.0-mi (148-km) perigee, 96.9-min period, and 106.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 3. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/69; 2/15/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
U.S. Geological Survey Director William T. Pecora said in Washington, D.C., that rocks brought back by Apollo 11 were geologic “hors d’oeuvre” but Apollo 12 rocks “will be a veritable feast.” Geologists were delighted “by the onsite descriptions provided by astronauts Conrad and Bean” who were “eager rock hounds.” (upi, NYT, 11/25/69, 32)
North American Rockwell Corp. consolidated its Rocketdyne Div. and Atomics International Div. into new Power Systems Divs. headed by Jay D. Wethe, Vice President of Aerospace and Systems Group, (nar Release N—14)
At dod news conference, Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said current estimate of cost to Government of C—5A aircraft was $4,348 billion, increase of $882 million (25%) over original estimate of $3,466 billion on which Lockheed Aircraft Corp. contract was based. Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Robert H. Charles said usaf had not disclosed Feb. 1, 1967, “cure order” to Lockheed on aircraft procurement contract because of concern over its effects on financial community. He maintained data on cost overruns had been developed too early in program to be solid enough for publication and that subsequent firmer cost estimates had been made public. (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 5/3/69, A4)
usaf announced award to North American Rockwell Corp. of $700,000 initial increment to $2,473,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for research on feasibility of using advanced composite materials for production of aircraft wings, (dod Release 200-69) Proposed design and selection of candidate sensors for ERTS had been closely coordinated with other Government agencies. . . . NASA was requesting FY 1970 funds to initiate development of flight hardware for two experimental satellites, erts—a and B, with erts-a scheduled for launch in late 1971 or early 1972. nasa also would proceed with techniques for infrared sounding of atmosphere with Nimbus B-2 and D launches in 1969 and 1970 and had begun construction of Nimbus E and F for development of microwave sounding techniques. Prototype second-generation operational meteorological satellite Tiros-M was being prepared for launch in few months. Study to define third-generation Tiros-N would start in FY 1970. NASA planned to accelerate basic studies of remote sensor signature relationships, instrument development, data processing, user decision models, and aircraft use. Synchronous satellite ats—e would be launched in 1969 with gravity gradient experiment, ats-f and G would not be ready for first launch before late 1971 or early 1972. Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms), new FY 1970 effort for 1971 and 1972 launches, would use existing technology and be prototypes for National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). National Geodetic Satellite program would complete objectives with geos—c launch in 1970. Cooperative Applications Satellite (cas), French satellite, would be launched on NASA Scout booster in 1970 to track some 500 meteorological balloons to determine wind direction and speed. (Testimony)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced plans to develop for NASA flying lunar excursion experimental platform (fleep)—one-man, jet-propelled craft with adjustable hand controls—to transport astronauts across lunar surface. (AP, NYT, 11/22/69, 38)
President Nixon addressed Air Force Academy commencement in Colorado Springs, Colo.: “A nation needs many qualities, but it needs faith and confidence above all. Skeptics do not build societies; the idealists are the builders. Only societies that believe in themselves can rise to their challenges. Let us not, then, pose a false choice between meeting our responsibilities abroad and meeting the needs of our people at home. We shall meet both or we shall meet neither. “This is why my disagreement with the skeptics and the isolationists is fundamental. They have lost the vision indispensable to great leadership. They observe the problems that confront us; they measure our resources and then they despair. When the first vessels set out from Europe for the New World these men would have weighed the risks and they would have stayed behind. . . . “Our current exploration of space makes the point vividly, here is testimony to man’s vision and man’s courage. The journey of the astronauts is more than a technical achievement: it is a reaching-out of the human spirit. It lifts our sights; it demonstrates that magnificent conceptions can be real. “They inspire us and at the same time they teach us true humility. What could bring home to us more the limitation of the human scale than the hauntingly beautiful picture of our earth seen from the moon? “When the first man stands on the moon next month every American will stand taller because of what he has done, and we should be proud of this magnificent achievement. “We will know then that every man achieves his own greatness by reaching out beyond himself, and so it is with nations. When a nation believes in itself—as Athenians did in their Golden Age, as Italians did in the Renaissance—that nation can perform miracles. Only when a nation means something to itself can it mean something to others. “That is why I believe a resurgence of American idealism can bring about a modern miracle—and that modern miracle is a world order of peace and justice.” (PD, 6/9/69, 797—802)
Pan American World Airways took delivery of first Boeing 747 to be turned over to commercial line in ceremony at Boeing Field in Seattle, Wash. Later in day, 362-passenger transport left on six-hour flight to Nassau, Bahamas. It was scheduled to fly to New York same day. (AP, W Star, 12/14/69, A25)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
Robert E. Bernier, former ComSatCorp systems engineer for Intelsat III program, became NASA European Representative in Office of International Affairs. He replaced Clotaire Wood, who would return to Office of Advanced Research and Technology at nasa Hq. Bernier would begin his duties at American Embassy in Paris in early October. (nasa Release 69—125)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster, carried Cornell Univ. payload to 97.8-mi (157.4km) altitude to examine sky in far infrared (5 p—1,600 p), using copper-doped-germanium, two gallium-doped-germanium, and indium-antimonide detectors. Loss of residual helium at 162 secs disabled attitude-control system. Timing failed in experimental payload and no useful scientific data were obtained. Some useful engineering data were collected, (nasa Rpt srl)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $544,302 faa contract to Laboratory for Electronics, Inc., to develop two low-cost, solid-state, microwave-instrument landing systems (ils) for stol aircraft operations at faa’s National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center in Atlantic City, N.J., and at suitable operational STOLport such as Dulles International Airport near Washington, D.C. (faa Release 69-38)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) told House Dr. Franklin A. Long of Cornell Univ. had been asked to withdraw from nomination as nsf Director after refusing to support Administration’s abm system. “It is unfortunate that the Nixon administration is sacrificing the National Science Foundation on the altar of the abm, and, by so doing, seriously affecting its unique capability to be of service to our country.” (CR, 4/17/69, H2759)
New York Times commented on Soviet linking of Soyuz spacecraft: “It is probably not too soon to begin planning for- standardization of space vehicles—a move that would permit joining these vehicles regardless of their national origin. It would be tragic, for example, if a group of Soviet spacemen needed rescue and could not be saved because the only available vehicle was an American space ship impossible to link with the Soviet ship. Here is an area in which international cooperation could not only save lives but help pave the way for the joint operation of stations in space for the benefit of all mankind.” (NYT, 1/17/69, 46)
Science published letter from Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, former NASA scientist-astronaut: Comment from NASA officials that he had resigned from NASA program because he did not want to become pilot was oversimplification. “The budgetary delays in plans for scientific space flights and the inability to carry on a reasonable amount of scientific research in the meantime were equally important reasons.” (Science, 10/17/69, 313)
Aerospace Systems Laboratory had been established at Princeton Univ. to investigate U.S. space program and other broad areas of applied research, including transportation systems, New York Times said. Project was assisted by NASA and other Federal agency grants. (NYT, 7/14/69, 23)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
American Academy of Achievement presented 1969 Gold Plate “Man of Achievement” Awards to Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and to Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders and Frank Borman. (LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69; AFJ, 6/21/69, 30)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. as prime contractor for development and production of F—15 advanced tactical fighter aircraft. Initial award would be $1,146,385,000 fixed-price contract for engineering, design, and fabrication of 20 aircraft. First wing of 107 aircraft would be produced under later contract, not to exceed $936,591,000. (dod Release 1095—69)
At opening session of Governors’ Conference in Washington, D.C., President Nixon presented to governors mementos from Apollo 11 mission for people of 50 states, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, District of Columbia, and Trust Territories of Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa. Each presentation, consisting ‘ of state flag and chip from moon’s surface, bore inscription: “This flag of your state was carried to the Moon and back by Apollo 11, and this fragment of the Moon’s surface was brought to Earth by the crew of that first manned lunar landing.” (PD, 12/8/69, 1696)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 292.7-mi (471-km) apogee, 78.9-mi (127-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 108.7° inclination and reentered April 30. (gsfc SSR, 4/15/69; 4/30/69; SBD, 4/25/69, 264)
President Nixon announced nomination of NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs Philip N. Whittaker to be Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Installations and Logistics. He also announced appointment of former Gov. William W. Scranton of Pennsylvania as U.S. Representative to Intelsat Conference with rank of Ambassador, replacing Ambassador Leonard H. Marks, who resigned March 21. (PD, 4/14/69, 533-4; W Star, 4/9/69, A8)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy viewed Apollo 11 lunar rock sample at Smithsonian Institution during tour of Washington, D.C. (W Star, 11/2/69)
President Nixon’s Space Task Group had established that less expensive space operations in future depended on nasa and usaf development of lower cost boosters, J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest. Joint effort on booster selection would be made within understanding signed by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Two major complicating factors existed: “First nasa and the Air Force must overhaul their bureaucracies.” Second was “requirement for a compromise between military and civil needs.” While usaf needed vehicle which could be launched quickly in large numbers and carry sufficient fuel for extensive space maneuvers, NASA wanted larger vehicle to carry more people and large cargo volume. More difficult would be choice of reentry vehicle. Both NASA and USAF wanted winged configuration for operational flexibility and airliner-style landings, but development costs would be high. (AF/SD, 6/69, 79—81)
In Astrophysical Journal, Princeton Univ. astronomers Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn predicted few pulsars should be found with periods more than 1.5 secs, from results of their quarantine exploration of pulsar model. (Astro Journ, 9/69, 1395—1417)
Following successful completion of Apollo 12 President Nixon issued statement: “This mission has shown conclusively that the system we have developed has enormous scientific potential and we can now look forward to utilizing that capability. . . . The triumph of Apollo 12 is not only an American triumph. This second voyage to the surface of the moon represents another great victory of the human mind and spirit, one which will lift the sights and raise the spirits of men everywhere.” {PD, 12/1/69, 1659)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers told Washington, D.C., news conference Nixon Administration was resolved to continue test firings of advanced strategic missiles. He said tests would not affect chances for U.S. success in disarmament talks with U.S.S.R., scheduled for summer, and that they should be continued even after negotiations had begun, (Grose, NYT, 6/6/69, 1)
Four contract modifications totaling nearly $10 million, for- change orders issued in connection with Saturn Y 2nd stage, had been awarded to North American Rockwell Corp., MSFC announced, (msfc Release 69-127)
Discovery of approximately 621.4-mi-dia (1,000-km-dia) mascon—mass concentration of gravitational pull—on moon’s far side and of fact that Mare Marginis at eastern edge was flooded fraction of mascon basin Was reported in Science by Cornell Univ. radiophysicists Dr. Malcolm J. Campbell, Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, and Dr. Carl Sagan. Discoveries were made from study of Lunar Orbiter and Apollo 8 photos and gravitational data. New mascon was 2.8 times heavier than mas-cons associated with Mares Imbrium and Serenitatis on moon’s near side. If mare material was confirmed in basin, discoverers proposed calling it Mare Occulum (Hidden Sea). Dr. Campbell said they believed mascons explained moon’s entire “out-of-balance” appearance as seen from spacecraft. While some Apollo mission planners believed moon to be pear-shaped because of its effects on spacecraft, Cornell team believed moon was nearly perfect sphere. Mascons explained unexpected variations in lunar gravity which, according to msc officials, had dragged Apollo 10 off course. With mascons, scientists were close to answering question of origin of lunar seas, Dr. Campbell said, “But we haven’t quite gotten the whole story.” (Science, 6/13/69, 1273—5; Cohn, W Post, 6/14/69, Al)
NASA announced msfc award of $98,200,000 definitive contract for payload integration in support of Apollo Applications program to Martin Marietta Corp. Work—which started under Jan. 16, 1968, letter contract—would extend through Nov. 30, 1972, and cover flights 1, 2, 3, 3A, and 4. msfc also awarded North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. $1,142,294, 26-mo contract for additional work on aerospike (plug-nozzle) engine evaluated by Rocketdyne under previous msfc contract. Ring-like engine had tiny throats along circumference that discharged engine exhaust down sides of plug, making aerodynamic extension for plug, providing nozzle during launch ascent, and simulating performance characteristics of full-length nozzle without increased weight and length, (msfc Releases 69—43, 69—87)
At 12th annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by National Space Club, Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, said: “. . . we are witnessing another spectacular example of the utilization of scientific knowledge, accumulated by many generations of scientists, some famous and some obscure, who worked away in their laboratories trying to probe the secrets of nature. We have seen how once these secrets . . . have been revealed, engineering skills could be put to work. We see in our space program also an example of the reverse process. ... New technological developments lead to new techniques and new instruments which . . . speed up our basic work in science and lead to new ways of uncovering new secrets of nature. Thus, during these past ten years the advance of science has been enormously aided by the advance of space technology.” (CR, 3/12/69, S2755) Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to NASA’s l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) in absentia since Apollo 9 mission was still under way. Citation read: “For his personal direction of the Apollo program throughout development and into the final phases of flight to the Moon dramatically illustrated by the two successful all-up flights of the Saturn V and the error-free flights of Apollo 7 and the extraordinary flight of Apollo 8 to the Moon and back. His engineering skill and leadership throughout the development and execution of this complex program have made possible an outstanding American success.” Richard J. Allen of nasa Apollo Program Office Test Div. was awarded Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship presented to NASA employee adjudged “a deserving individual in disciplines applicable to science, astronautics and space administration.” Mitchell R. Sharpe of Systems Safety and Manned Flight Awareness Office, MSFC, received certificate, trophy, and $500 award for winning entry in 1969 Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay competition. (His Development of the Lifesaving Rocket: A Study in 19th Century Technological Fallout was released by NASA June 10 as msfc Historical Note 4.) National Space Club Press Award “for penetrating, consistently informed and lucid writing on all phases of the national space program” was awarded Evert Clark, Washington science correspondent, Newsweek. North American Rockwell Corp. received Nelson P. Jackson Award “for its major contribution to the success of Apollo during 1968.” (Program; msfc Historical Note 4)
U.S.S.R. was testing 150-ton, 250-passenger “compound” helicopter, American Broadcasting Co. reported. Largest helicopter in Western world was 19-ton Sikorsky CH-54H Flying Crane. Soviet 47-ton Mi-10 was world’s largest. New compound helicopter had wings that assumed lifting function from rotors at cruising speed; it obtained most of its thrust from conventional propulsion when it converted from vertical to cruising flight. Sikorsky had proposed 32.5-ton compound helicopter to dod and U.S. civilian transportation authorities. (NYT, 1/12/69, S23)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said in Washington, D.C., that committee of academicians, committee within DOT, and committee representing other agency executives had begun extensive review for Nixon Administration to determine whether Government should continue subsidizing SST development. (Herbers, NYT, 2/8/69, 1; Reuters, W Post, 2/8/69, A2)
Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev told Soviet gathering in honor of four Soyuz IV and Soyuz V cosmonauts U.S.S.R. was “fully justified in saying that the successful flight . . . [see Jan. 14-18] is a great achievement of Soviet science and engineering, and a new triumph of the courage, boldness, intellect and labour of the Soviet people. The recent outstanding flight made by the American astronauts round the Moon, the confident start made by the Soviet automatic interplanetary stations ‘Venus-5’ and ‘Venus-6’ towards their distant target, and the successful flight made by the . . . [Soyuz] spaceships—all this constitutes man’s new, major steps along the road to conquering the mysterious world of outer space. . . .” (Moscow News, 2/8—15/69, Supplement, 3—5)
White House announced President Nixon had established interdepartmental ad hoc committee to review SST program’s technology, commercial potential, schedule and costs, and environmental side-effects, particularly sonic boom phenomenon. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs was designated chairman of 11-member committee, which also included Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge; Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator Charles W. Harper. (PD, 3/3/69, 329-30)
Proposed Nixon Administration program of low-budget oceanic and marine science activities was announced in Washington, D.C., by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. Program sought establishment of coastal zone management program, modest grants for state planning and regulatory mechanisms, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, currently under consideration by Congress and Ash Commission on Federal Reorganization. Program also proposed coastal laboratories for regional problems, pilot project of lake restoration, International Decade of Ocean Exploration, and accelerated program of Arctic research. (Lannan, W Star, 10/19/69, A12)
Walter Sullivan described mystery of cosmic rays in New York Times. “No natural phenomena with which we have intimate contact are more awesome.” Scores of these high-energy particles flashed through human body every second with energy capable of piercing six feet of lead. Some believed them accountable for aging process. Recent Australian observations had shown some particles (mostly protons) hit atmosphere with 100-billion-bev energy. Princeton Univ. physicists Dr. Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn had suggested pulsars might be superaccelerators of cosmic ray particles. (NYT, 10/12/69,8)
msfc announced resignation of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), Director of Program Management, would be effective July 31. Gen. O’Connor, on loan to NASA from USAF for past five years, would become Vice Commander of Air Force Aeronautical Systems Div. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Saturn V Manager, msfc. (msfc Release 69—166)
At meeting of American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research, proposed detonation of nuclear device on moon to assist analysis of lunar interior. He announced tentative plans for placement of one- to five-kiloton bomb on lunar far side by unmanned Atlas-Agena rocket between Apollo 15 and 16 missions in November 1970 and envisioned possible cooperative effort with U.S.S.R. “I expect to run into a large number of political snags. But these problems are not insurmountable if we include the Russians . . . and agree to share the data with them. ... I would like to ask them to put the bomb on the moon.” Proposal was to be submitted to nas for approval. Nuclear blast would send seismic waves through moon’s core. These would be measured to yield information on nature and origin of lunar interior. (Reuters, W Post, 12/16/69, A2)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, President’s Science Adviser, told aiaa board luncheon in Washington, D.C., that President’s Space Task Group had forged ahead with plans for new space program by Apollo program’s end but he did not see specific mechanism in Nixon Administration for handling “tremendous” aviation problems. He had raised question at first Task Group meeting, but budget squeeze had cut dot request for civil aviation research by two-thirds. Noise would be dealt with by Cabinet-level committee on environmental quality. President Nixon was “anxious to extend our technical and scientific collaboration with other nations.” Recent visit to U.S.S.R. by U.S. scientists had led to plans for more extensive collaboration in high-energy physics. (A&A, 4/69, 5; aiaa pio)
Senate confirmed nomination of Philip N. Whittaker, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, to be an Assistant Secretary of the Air Force. (CR, 5/5/69, S4668)
At American Cancer Society Seminar in New Orleans, La., Clarence D. Cone, Jr., head of LaRc’s Molecular Biophysics Laboratory, discussed his discovery of intercellular linkages and its application to understanding behavior of certain cancer types. His basic research into effects of space radiation on body cells had enabled him to observe phenomenon in which dividing cancer cell appeared able to induce connected cells to divide by transmitting chain-reaction stimulation through thin linkage of cytoplasm. Networks of these stimulus-transmission bridges permitted continued division of cells and, in human body, might constitute basic mechanism for cancer spread, (nasa Release 69—45) During March: NSF published Scientific Activities of Nonprofit Institutions, 1966	(nsf 69—16). Full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed by independent nonprofit institutions in January 1967	totaled 24,300, annual increase of 12.4% from 1954 to 1967. In 1966 expenditure for R&D in independent nonprofit institutions was $800 million—about seven times the $100 million in 1953. Federal r&d expenditures contracted to nonprofit institutions reached $540 million in 1966, nine times 1953’s $60 million. (Text)
Five-year program to improve detection of clear air turbulence (cat) — with cooperation of NASA, dot, dod, and ESSA—was announced in Washington, D.C., by ESSA Administrator, Dr. Robert M. White. Project would seek improvement of long-range weather forecasting and development of onboard portable detection devices for aircraft to locate cat in time to permit pilot to take evasive action or prepare for penetration, (upi, NYT, 12/29/69, 57)
President Nixon sent telegram to Apollo 11 astronauts: “On the eve of your epic mission, I want you to know that my hopes and my prayers—and those of all Americans—go with you. Years of study and planning and experiment and hard work on the part of thousands have led to this unique moment in the story of mankind; it is now your moment and from the depths of your minds and hearts and spirits will come the triumph all men will share. I look forward to greeting you on your return. Until then, know that all that is best in the spirit of mankind will be with you during your mission and when you return to earth.” President also telephoned astronauts: “. . . as you lift off to the moon, you lift the spirits of the American people as well as the world. . . . You carry with you a feeling of good will in this greatest adventure man has ever taken. . . .” {PD, 7/21/69, 997)
Discovery of possible planet, in orbit around NPO—532 pulsar about 6,000	light years from solar system, was reported by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Discovery, by astronomers at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, was indicated by wobble in pulsation rate from NPO—532, pulsar or neutron star in Crab Nebula. Planet was same distance from neutron star as Mercury was from sun. (W Post, 10/22/69, A9)
OV 1—17, OV I—17A, OV 1—18, and OV 1—19 research satellites, carrying 41 experiments, were successfully launched by USAF pickaback on Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg AFB. OV 1—17 weighed 312 lbs and carried experiments to measure incoming solar electromagnetic radiation and its reaction with earth’s upper atmosphere, make electricfield and vlf energy propagation studies, evaluate ionized meteor trails in calibration of ground-based radars, and make engineering tests on spacecraft materials and solar-cell power system. Orbital parameters: apogee, 287.7 mi (462.9 km); perigee, 246.7 mi (396.9 km); period, 93.1 min; and inclination, 99.1°. OV—17 reentered March 5, 1970. OV I—17A, 487-lb payload consisting of OV—17 propulsion module and Naval Research Laboratory two-beacon orbis-cal ii experiment to study unusual transmission of radio waves through ionosphere, entered orbit with 233.0-mi (347.9-km) apogee, 106.9-mi (172.0km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 99.0° inclination and reentered March 24. OV 1—18 weighed 275 lbs and carried experiments to study ionosphere and measure radio-wave interference, electric-field intensity, and hazardous radiation. Orbital parameters: apogee, 362.3 mi (582.9 km); perigee, 288.3 mi (463.9 km); period, 95.0 min; and inclination, 98.8°. OV 1—19 weighed 273 lbs and entered orbit with 3,592.9-mi (5,780.9-km) apogee, 288.0-mi (463.4-km) perigee, 153.5-min period, and 104.7° inclination, where it would study events resulting in and sustaining trapped radiation in Van Allen belts and hazards to man. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; 3/31/70; oar Research Review, 6—7/69, 23—4; Pres Rpt 70 [69]; W Post, 3/19/69)
George J. Vecchietti, NASA Director of Procurement, would serve as Acting Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, replacing Philip N. Whittaker, who had assumed new duties as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, NASA announced, (nasa Ann)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said nasa Administrator was “the last big Federal post President Nixon has left unfilled.” He asked, “Is it because he can’t find the man he wants? Is it because no man he wants wants the job? Or is Mr. Nixon playing with the possibility of appointing [Acting Administrator Thomas O.] Paine to the post of Administrator?” Washington “space watchers” felt job could not be kept vacant much longer, “if only because the program to land American astronauts on the moon is rapidly nearing its goal.” (W Post, 2/9/69, All)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, mit Dean of Engineering, received faa’s highest honor—Extraordinary Service Award—in Washington, D.C., ceremony for service as technical adviser on SST program. Gold medal, lapel ribbon, and citation for exceptional contribution were presented by Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs. He noted Dr. Bisplinghoif’s extraordinary competence and knowledge of aeronautics had played significant role in analyzing complex technical aspects of SST development program. Dr. Bisplinghoff had served as technical adviser to faa Administrator on SST program since April 1966, had held key scientific posts with NASA since 1962, and was member of NASA Historical Advisory Committee, (faa Release 69—69)
Coming age of economy space flight was discussed by J. S. Butz, Jr., in Air Force and Space Digest. Space shuttle was key to opening of space “much as the railroads opened a stream of travel into the American West.” It was “complex and expensive system that is within our grasp if the nation’s technology and management are willing to meet challenges of herculean proportions.” In prospect was day when astronauts would be as numerous as present day airline pilots, space flights would be scheduled- almost daily, and “virtually any young man who yearns to voyage into space will be able to do so at some point in his life.” (.AF/SD, 12/69, 37-44)
Eyewitness to Space,” exhibit of works of over 70 U.S. artists commissioned by NASA to document its activities, opened at National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. Show included paintings, drawings, and sculpture by James B. Wyeth, Mitchell Jamison, Norman Rockwell, Lamar Dodd, William Thon, and Robert Rauschenberg. Eight-foot montage of disparate space themes by Rauschenberg was largest lithograph ever made, according to Gallery’s Curator of Art H. Lester Cooke. (Constantine, W Star, 12/7/69, J8)
World’s largest passenger airliner, 629,000-lb Boeing 747, landed at Dulles Airport, Washington, D.C., en route from Paris Air Show. Pan American World Airways would take delivery of its first 747 in September and inaugurate passenger service shortly after first of year. (W Star, 6/8/69, A23)
XB—70 supersonic research aircraft was flown from Edwards AFB, Calif., to Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, to be placed on exhibit at Air Force Museum. Flight had been delayed until turbulent air conditions prevailed so testing could continue until end of aircraft’s service. During final flight, crew collected data on aircraft handling and structural response to air turbulence at subsonic flight, nasa had announced end of XB-70 flight research program Jan. 13. (nasa Proj Off; UPl, NYT, 2/5/69, 73; AP, W Star, 2/5/69, A19)
USAF released Air Force Review of the C—5A Program. Total cost of 120 Lockheed C—5A aircraft had increased from $3,369 billion at 1965 contract award to total $5,125 billion, overrun of $1,756 billion. At dod press conference Air Force Secretary Robert C. Seamans, Jr., criticized “ambiguities and deficiencies” in original contract and hinted remaining 39 aircraft in 120-plane package might not be purchased unless revisions were made in contract. (Text; Phillips, W Post, 7/29/69, Al)
Apollo 11 launch continued to draw wide editorial comment in foreign and national press. New York Times: “One could hardly watch the magnificent spectacle of the liftoff, let alone contemplate the feats of human ingenuity that made it possible, as well as the courage and skill of the flyers, without some reflection upon the meaning of this event. . . . The temptation is strong to fall back upon lyricism. The poetry of the thing has yet to find its expression in any of the earnest, proficient Americans who have ventured away from the Earth; yet, the stunning beauty of man’s most marvelous creation, as it rose in its majesty toward the unknown, toward the future, could be matched only by the profound sense of having been present at an end to something and therefore necessarily at a beginning.” (Wicker, NYT, 7/17/69) Chicago Tribune: “The Apollo 11 blastoff was as beautiful a one as we’ve seen. It displayed every hit of the precision and the careful planning which we have come to expect from NASA.” One of most “satisfying” things was that, “like our earlier launchings, it took place within the sight of anybody who wanted to go to the Florida coast to watch it, and was broadcast live to countless millions more in every corner of the world. People will not fail to contrast this with the secrecy of Russia’s unmanned Luna 15, which may reach the moon today on a mysterious mission of its own.” (C Trib, 7/17/69) Christian Science Monitor: “And although it is an American moon-craft, bearing American men . . . the venture is, in the best sense, a universal one. It is the result of American technology putting to use the knowledge, techniques and discoveries in which all nations and races have participated. ... all nations and peoples are taking part.” (CSM, 1/17/69) Seattle Times: “The space program has yielded immense new resources in . . . scientific and technological advances which . . . make the program worth while even beyond the explorations and discoveries —and national pride—offered by the ventures into outer space. It strikes us, therefore, that the time is at hand for these so-called byproducts of the space program, which hold such promise for utilization in behalf of mankind, to be put to work for that purpose.” (S Times, 7/17/69) Bulgarian Telegraph Agency report carried in Bulgarian newspapers Rabotnichesko Delo, Narodna Mladezh, Trud, and Kooperativno Celo commented: “In the coming days all humanity will follow this flight with interest and tension. And surely there is no one on our old planet who will not ask himself this question: ‘Will it succeed?”’ (Am Embassy, Sofia)
Future space program was described by Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Reusable nuclear vehicle to serve as space shuttle between space station in earth orbit and space station in lunar orbit would be “fined link that would permit us to reduce the cost of operation to something like $200 for moving a pound of material from the earth’s surface to the lunar surface and return as compared to something like $100 thousand a pound using today’s techniques. Similar reductions in the cost of transportation to the earth orbital station will permit us for the first time to consider processing materials in space, to use space for the kind of laboratory work that ^ we now associate with ground-based laboratories.” By end of 1970s “we would find so many uses for operations in synchronous orbit both for observing the universe and for observing the earth that we would have established a space station in synchronous orbit which would be regularly supplied by a nuclear shuttle system and which would provide us with direct television broadcasting and direct radio broadcasting to the homes of all people in the world, as well as providing us with great stellar observatories and a viewing platform for air traffic control, navigation and for a permanent weather watch. “. . . this approach to using space is one that is readily extended, once the shuttle capability has been developed, to a corresponding approach for planetary exploration and . . . the same nuclear shuttle system together with the space station modules need only to be supplemented by a Mars landing module to permit us to carry out the first manned planetary expedition to Mars.” (Text)
11 Mattino del Lunedi, Asmara, Ethiopia, said of Apollo 11 mission’s completion: “, . . today we not only admire, but exult. Because this ‘almost superhuman’ exploit has been accomplished by a society which is free and pluralistic, by a society which has no close and oppressive traditions, by a society which has founded its political and constitutional structure not on a totalitarian ideology but on the democratic philosophy of the Declaration of Independence. It has been accomplished by a nation, the American nation, whose characteristic ... is the fusion of the spirit of precision and discipline . . . with the spirit of freedom. . . . This is the reason why we today exult. Because we know that the conquest of Apollo—11 is in the service of man and not to oppress him.” (Am Consul, Asmara)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced 10-mo extension, to Oct. 25, 1970, of faa rule setting hourly flight quotas at five high-density airports serving New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. Decision was based “on operational experience . . . which clearly establishes that the traveling public has benefited substantially from this measure.” (faa Release 69—137)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched 997-ft-tall, 34-miIIion-cu-ft helium balloon—largest ever built—from Holloman AFB, N. Mex. Balloon, part of NASA’s cosmic ray ionization program (crisp), was to have provided high-altitude platform for 13,800-lb payload to measure cosmic radiation in upper atmosphere. It had been scheduled to drift eastward at 108,000-ft altitude for 24 hrs, but descended 3 hrs after launch because of leak, (msc Roundup, 11/14/69, 2; msc Release 69—70)
At annual AIAA dinner, in New York, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary-designate of the Air Force and former nasa Deputy Administrator, was installed as President of aiaa for 1969, succeeding Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, who continued as a director. In interview following dinner, Dr. Seamans said NASA should maintain its open space program and its freedom for international exchange of information. USAF, with current MOL program, “has special problems which can be resolved by the Department of Defense.” Value of dual space program, he said, was that one element could learn from another. Of U.S.S.R. space program, Dr. Seamans said, “They’re awfully good at doubling in brass . . . getting the most out of their program,” but “our program has more breadth and depth and if we’re imaginative about what we’re doing, we’re not going to take second place.” aiaa presented its Goddard Award to Dr. Stanley Hooker, Technical Director of Bristol-Siddeley Engine Div. of Rolls-Royce, Ltd., and Perry W. Pratt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of United Aircraft Corp., for work on turbine engines. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, Chief of Space Sciences Div. at arc, received annual Space Science Award of $500 for “his personal contribution as a planner, leader, and individual experimenter in major space science vehicle programs which have contributed to the field of space physics.” LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright and Charles W. Harper, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, Aeronautics, oart, were elected aiaa directors. (Lannan, W Star, 1/22/69, A13; NYT, 1/22/69, 33; aia Releases)
Use of space technology in “complete and systematic rehabilitation” of Washington, D.C., was proposed by RCA president Robert W. Sarnoff in speech before Fourth Annual Computer Age Conference of National Industrial Conference Board in New York City. “A comprehensive systems effort to revitalize the city and its environs should invoke a nationwide response ... as broad and enthusiastic as that inspired by the Apollo moon landing.” (Text)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin, technical adviser for aviation and space science and technology in Office of Science and Technology, died of heart attack in Washington, D.C., at age 57. He had been deputy Associate Administrator of NASA in 1960. After returning to private industry for a year, he had rejoined NASA as director of Large Launch Vehicle Planning Group. Before coming to NASA he had been Chief Scientist at White Sands Missile Range for DOD and then Director of Technical Operations Div. of arpa. (W Post, 4/30/69, B14; W Star, 4/30/69, B6)
North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1,100,000 and $270,000 under nasa contracts for Apollo command and service modules and 2nd stage (S—II) for Saturn V launch vehicle, nasa announced. Awards were determined by Performance Evaluation Board on basis of NAR’s achievement of management objectives specified in contracts from Sept. 1, 1967, through Dec. 31, 1968, which encompassed S—II contract activities from Aug. 4, 1968, through Dec. 28, 1968—first of three time increments extending through completion of Apollo program, (nasa Release 69—38)
nsf published American Science Manpower, 1968, report of National Register of Scientific and Technical Personnel: Almost 298,000 scientists—nine percent of whom were women—reported to National Register in 1968. Of these, three-fifths were in physical and mathematical sciences, one-fifth in life sciences, remainder in behavioral and social sciences. Registration was up 23% over 242,800 in 1966. Industry employed 32% of 1968 registrants, down from 34% in 1966. Scientists employed in educational institutions increased from 36% to 40%. Those in Federal Government remained at 10% both years. Federal Government provided funds for at least some of work of 127,400 scientists, or 43% of total registrants. (Text)
Gen. James Ferguson (usaf), AFSC Commander, said in keynote address before Air Force Fatigue and Fracture Conference at Miami Beach, Fla.: “Our potential adversaries are pushing on all frontiers of technology. We cannot safely do less, and yet we must achieve our technological goals with less in the way of money, manpower, and facilities.” Each aircraft “will have to be better, more capable, stronger, more durable, and preferably less costly.” (Text)
At closed session of Senate Armed Services Committee Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said development of new intercontinental supersonic bomber was “perhaps our most urgent requirement.” Aircraft, with proposed asm system, would “provide insurance against unexpected Soviet developments.” {Homan, W Post, 4-/17/69, A9)
American Airlines began showing NASA color film of Apollo 11 and distributing free copies of CBS News recording “Man on the Moon” and free cut-out lunar modules for children on “Americana” flights between East Coast and California through Sept. 23. (NYT, 8/18/69, 23)
In international reaction to Apollo 12 moon walk Moscow Radio announced landing eight minutes after touchdown, followed with brief progress bulletins, and broadcast seven-minute film on event seven hours after lm landed on moon. Foreigners in Moscow said BBC broadcast was jammed by two stronger stations just before lunar touchdown. Pope Paul VI at Vatican watched astronauts on TV, then knelt for short prayer. He sent message to President Nixon: “Many, many congratulations to you and the American nation on yet another magnificent step for the human race.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, saluted “precision and accuracy” of Apollo 12 lunar landing. He said, “Until the Russians achieve a rocket with the thrust of the order of Saturn 5, or greater, it is unlikely they will be able to stage any manned flight comparable with Apollo.” London’s morning newspapers put Apollo 12 story well down on front pages in contrast to Apollo 11 banner headlines. In Helsinki, Finland, Soviet diplomats attending strategic arms limitation talks toasted Apollo 12 crew. Tokyo TV dealers expressed unhappiness because repeat of run on color sets after Apollo 11 landing failed to materialize. West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel said Apollo 12 was an invitation to Europe to organize its own space potential. Egyptian newspapers gave Apollo 12 second billing to continuing conflict with Israel. In Poland millions watched lunar landing by direct TV transmission. In Sweden TV reception was poor and viewer interest lagged. Former Argentine President Arturo U. Illia, in Buenos Aires, called lunar landing “a victory for democracy.” Australians watched landing 10 secs before U.S. because of time lag. In France many viewers were unable to watch landing because of electric utility strikes. Moon walk was one of few programs shown on Italian TV during day of general strike. Shah of Iran sent congratulations to President Nixon and Apollo 12 crew for “untiring endeavor.” Landing was shown live on Iranian TV. West Germany’s Wickert Public Opinion Institute estimated 82% of German adults watched TV shots of lunar landing, 92% watched Apollo 11. It concluded Apollo 12 lacked suspense that attended first moon shot. (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 30; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
At opening day ceremonies of American Bible Week in New York, sponsors, Laymen’s Committee of American Bible Society and Catholic Biblical Assn, of America, awarded citation to crew of Apollo 8 for reading from Genesis as they orbited moon during Dec. 21—27, 1968, mission. (NYT, 11/22/69, 40)
New York Post published results of Louis Harris poll which showed American people favored manned lunar landing by 51% to 41%. In February poll public opinion had been opposed by 49% to 39%. Harris attributed change to feeling “if we have gone this far, we ought to finish the job.” He said 56% of 1,607 adults polled from June 16 to 22 were opposed to annual $4-billion ouday for space program, while 37% favored it—little change from 55% for to 34% against in February. Reaction to Apollo 10 flight had been generally favorable. (NYT, 7/15/69, 20)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 155.3-mi (249.9-km) apogee, 105.6-mi (169.9-km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 81.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 10, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 12/15/69; 1/15/70; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
American Embassy science attache in New Delhi reported completion of India-U.S. project to erect 48-in telescope at Hyderabad. Project was started in 1955 and completed just before U.S. lunar landing. (O’Neill, W Post, 8/31/69, D5)
Smithsonian Institution Curator of Meteorites, Dr. Kurt Fredriksson, arrived in Washington, D.C., carrying 10 gr of lunar material from lrl in nitrogen-filled plastic bag inside steel briefcase. One of six men in U.S. who had studied lunar samples, he later said Smithsonian scientist Dr. Bryan H. Mason would receive another 10-gr set. (Conroy, W News, 9/16/69, 5)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
Leningrad astronomer Nikolay A. Kozyrev called for lunar laboratories over, under, and on moon’s surface^ Soviet and American space exploration had made scientists “more confident that this is not a dead accumulation of rocks but a space body with a very interesting history whose life also continues today.” Lunar research goals were establishment of astronomical instruments on stable platforms in lunar orbit, permanent scientific laboratory on moon, spacecraft launching centers on moon for planetary exploration, and laboratory stations under lunar surface or in natural caves, “to give reliable protection from dangerous radiation and meteorite hits.” (upi, NYT, 8/13/69, 11)
New York Daily News editorial said: “For some years, the U.S. Air Force has had an entirely feasible project for orbiting by 1972 a 30,000-lb. space laboratory carrying two men, at a cost of around $3 billion. About $1.3 billion having been spent on the program, Deputy Defense Secretary David M. Packard announced Tuesday that it has been junked, scrapped, scrubbed, in order to save the taxpayers some money. We’re hot for government economy. But this looks to us like a most dubious move in that direction. You can bet that Soviet Russia, poverty-stricken though it is, is not skimping in its drive to make space serve the Kremlin militarily.” (NY News, 6/12/69)
Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and his first-grade school teacher, Mrs. Peggy Crowley, would receive 1969 Golden Key Awards from six national school organizations at annual convention of American Assn, of School Administrators, Atlantic City, N.J., Feb. 15, Parade reported. Awards had been founded to dramatize teacher’s role in U.S. life. (Parade, 2/9/69, 4)
msfc announced it would manage two recently awarded $300,000 sixmonth contracts, one to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and one to General Dynamics Corp., for conceptual study of low-cost, manned logistics (space shuttle) system. Similar study contracts awarded to North American Rockwell Corp. and to McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. would be managed fiy msc and LaRC. Integral Launch and Reentry Vehicle (ilrv) studies would investigate aspects of reusable transportation system for post-1974 use in support of proposed space stations. msfc also announced $3,288,914 modification to contract with Boeing Co. for continued configuration management support on Saturn V launch vehicle program, including processing of vehicle and ground support equipment configuration changes, configuration accounting, and change integration and tracking, (msfc Releases 69—34, 69—35)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 279.6-mi (449.9-km) apogee, 96.3-mi (155.0-km) perigee, 90.2-min period, and 92.0° inclination. Satellite reentered March 18. (gsfc SSR, 3/15/69; 3/31/69; SBD, 3/7/69, 30; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. First entered orbit with 157.2-mi (252.9-km) apogee, 110.0-mi (177-km) perigee 88.7-min, period, and 85.0° inclination and reentered Oct. 12. Second entered orbit with 308.2-mi (495.9-km) apogee, 305.1-mi (490.9-km) perigee, 94.4min period, and 85.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; 10/15/69; upi, W Post, 9/23/69, A20; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
More than 2,000 Americans had made reservations with Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines on first commercial trips to moon, said Joe McCarthy in This Week. Downpayments were not being accepted, but lunar reservations were being confirmed, acknowledged by letter, and placed in order on waiting list, paa spokesman had said, “It will undoubtedly be an expensive trip. When we finally start asking the passengers for money, a lot of them will probably drop off the list.” (This Week, 3/16/69, 9—10)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
President Nixon arrived at Guam International Airport after flight from carrier Hornet. He said, “As I stand here and think of what happened today, the completion of that historic flight to the moon and the landing on the moon, I can say that I am sure all of us—all of the American citizens around the world—are proud today of what has happened_____” {PD, 8/4/69, 1033)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 156.6-mi (252.0-km) apogee, 102.5-mi (164.9-km) perigee, 86.6-min period, and 82.9° inclination and reentered March 24. Second entered orbit with 318.8mi (513.0-km) apogee, 312.8-mi (503.3-km) perigee, 94.7-min period, and 83.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Studies of shock and thermal metamorphism of olivine trachy-hasalt by nuclear explosion at Nevada Test Site for comparison studies of Apollo 11 lunar samples were described in Science. Preliminary examination of Apollo 11 lunar surface material suggested many samples would be mafic igneous rocks showing shock metamorphism produced by meteorite impact. (James, Science, 12/26/69, 1615—9) December 26—31: American Assn, for the Advancement of Science held 136th meeting in Boston, Mass. Panel discussion of future of U.S. space program was disrupted by some 50 student protesters who converged on panel chairman Dr. Charles Stark Draper, former director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory, and participants. Protesters said they objected to space program because funds could be better spent to solve social ills on earth. They littered podium with signs and papier-mache moon rock. Dr. Draper justified continuation of space program because of its technological and prestige contributions. “Space is a bargain.” Outgoing aaas president Dr. Walter Orr Roberts met continued objections in his attempt to justify space program on basis of applications and was almost shouted down when he suggested U.S.—u.s.s.R. cooperation in internationalized space stations. In presidential address Dr. Roberts, President of University Corp. for Atmospheric Research, said space technology had “vastly enlarged the arsenals of the United States and the U.S.S.R., bringing to reality hitherto fanciful modes of military surveillance, communications, and weaponry.” Time had come “for us to take a bold new step in space. I propose that this nation call upon the Soviet Union to join hands in space, with a jointly conducted, earth-oriented space program that will put the new-found Soviet and American skills in space to work for the direct benefit of man.” Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Northwestern Univ. astronomer and consultant to usaf Project Blue Book, expressed fear that usaf would destroy classified UFO records because of Dec. 17 termination of project. “I do not believe we are being visited by little green men. ... I do believe a phenomenon exists, and that it is worthy of scientific attention.” Dr. Lewis M. Branscomb, Director of National Bureau of Standards, and Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Vice Chancellor of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, called for hard, new look at manned space flight spending and urged moratorium on pressure for early manned missions to Mars. Dr. S. Fred Singer, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Interior, said, “If we downgrade the manned space program we may find we don’t have any space program.” Panel of young scientists from Harvard Univ. and mit, invited by aaas, attacked “misuse” of science in formal papers presented before meeting. Allen S. Weinraub, graduate student at Harvard, said science was controlled by Federal Government and large corporations that held pursestrings. Panel member Larry W. Beeferman of mit called NASA “the national aerospace subsidy administration.” At press conference following meeting, Presidential adviser on hunger Dr. Jean Mayer said, “We can feed everybody—and feed them very well—and go to the moon as well.” Dr. Frank J. Low, Univ. of Arizona scientist, reported discovery of “Irtrons”—cells of creation—at centers of 12 galaxies so far, including Milky Way. He believed both matter and antimatter were created in each and then annihilated each other, continuously spraying out debris to fill universe, making stars, planets, and new worlds. Theory had originally been proposed by British astronomer Sir James Jeans early in century. (Lannan, W Star, 12/28/69, A7; W Post, 12/27/69, B6; 12/29/69, Al, A7; 12/30/69, A2; Science, 1/2/70, 11-6)
usaf promoted Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to full colonel. In congratulatory message Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said Apollo 11 mission was “indeed a momentous achievement” and promotion was “token of appreciation for the part you played.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 28)	<
Plans for launch of first of two Jupiter probes from ksc between Feb. 26 and March 15, 1972, were outlined by Charles F. Hall, manager of Pioneer F and G projects at arc, during meeting of scientists, engineers, and contractors at Mountain View, Calif. Launched by Atlas-Centaur booster, Pioneer F would take 610—770 days to reach Jupiter on voyage through planet’s heavy radiation belt to within 90,000 mi of Jupiter surface. It would carry 60 lbs of instruments and photographic equipment to conduct 13 experiments to measure solar wind and space dust and analyze Jupiter’s radiation and atmosphere. Probe would be first to travel to asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and eventually would leave solar system. Pioneer G Jupiter probe would be launched in early 1973. (upi, P Bull, 11/5/69)
National Aviation Club’s highest honor, Award for Achievement, was presented at Washington, D.C., ceremony to m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), Director of Supersonic Transport Development for faa, for “laboring so magnificently and conscientiously in the public and national service.” (faa Release T 69—25)
fa A, Air Transport Assn., and manufacturers McDonnell Douglas Corp., Bendix Corp., and Wilcox-Sierra Div. of American Standard, Inc., successfully flight-tested three separate but compatible devices composing aircraft collision avoidance system (cas) capable of issuing microsecond warning. Tests were held at Martin-Marietta Airport, Baltimore. cas included cesium atomic clock so precise that watch of similar construction would lose only one second in 67 yrs. System operated like balloon around aircraft which, when penetrated by similarly equipped plane, provided pilots with command to make evasive maneuver. All aircraft would need system for it to be effective. Product of $12-million, 13-yr r&d, system could be operational by 1971. (Yarborough, W Star, 9/24/69, A7)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
At dedication ceremony in Houston for Apollo 8 stamp, Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said: “The fact that this is the fifth stamp the Post Office Department has issued commemorating accomplishments of the space program signifies the extent to which space exploration has captured the imagination of the American people. . . . The nation’s concerted effort to reach the moon and outer space reflects two traditional aspects of our national character. One is scientific: the search for truth, knowledge, discovery. The other is psychological: the strong urge for adventure—an urge kindled by the unknown. We are all explorers at heart. The space program has made an entire nation explorers in fact. The flight of Apollo 8 around the moon and back was perhaps the greatest technological achievement of man to date. Certainly it was the most dramatic.” (Text)
Bright red lights, believed by observers to be meteors, flashed across California, Nevada, and Arizona at 8:50 pm pdt. North American Air Defense Command (norad) later identified lights as parts of Soviet booster burning during reentry. Booster had launched Cosmos CCXCIV Aug. 19. (AP, W Star, 8/27/69, A5; later ed, A13)
NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, and Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop presented paper “Planning Space Technology for the 1970’s” to National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C. Technology readiness for manned missions beyond the moon depended “very heavily upon (1) carrying the technology through proof-of-concept or prototype phase in order to assure long-life, reliable flight equipment and operations, and (2) precursor missions, particularly an Earth orbiting laboratory and lunar exploration that provide an opportunity to obtain the needed technology.” Technology needed for manned Mars exploration “represents capabilities that are very useful in many space missions and for some non-space applications as well, particularly with regard to long-life equipment and man’s performance under stress.” (Text)
Dr. Mose L. Harvey in Science and Public Affairs, bulletin of atomic scientists, discussed lunar landing and U.S.-Soviet equation: “The capability of the United States to continue in space, and otherwise keep pace with the scientific-technological revolution, depends entirely on continued public faith in the ‘military-industrial complex’ and the ‘scientific and technological elite,’ if one wishes to keep using these unfortunate terms. It was only because we were able effectively to organize and use a genuine and mutually rewarding partnership between industry, universities and government that we were able to effect the moon landing and to do the other near-miraculous things we have done in space and in other fields involving advanced science and advanced technology. It is precisely on this partnership that the superiority of the American way over the Soviet way has so far rested.” IScience and Public Affairs, 9/69, 28—35)
Apollo 11 preparations were proceeding well toward launch to moon at 9:32 am edt July 16, Apollo Mission Director George H. Hage told Washington, D.C., press conference. Hypergolic propellant loading would begin June 18, wet phase of countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin July 1, and crew participation in cddt without propellants would begin July 2. After landing on moon astronauts would descend ladder to lunar surface. When Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong reached second rung of ladder, he would pull D-ring to activate camera for TV coverage of descent to lunar surface. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., would descend about 15 min after Armstrong. Entire 21/£-hr period during which astronauts explored lunar surface, set up experiments, and collected lunar samples within 100 ft of landing site would be telecast live to TV viewers on earth. (Transcript)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
AFSC Neuisrevieui editorial commented on Apollo 11: “If, like the early Vikings or Columbus at the shores of the New World, Amundsen at Antarctica, Hillary at the peak of Mt. Everest—our astronauts stood alone with their thoughts on unknown soil, they were not alone. With them was the invisible presence of the most extensive, highly trained, professionally competent, and thoroughly dedicated task force we have known. We in the Air Force Systems Command salute the astronauts on their accomplishment. We are proud that we have been able to contribute to their magnificent achievement.” (afsc Newsreview, 8/69, 2)
Astronaut R. Walter Cunningham was named a director of American Systems Inc., Los Angeles electronics firm. Cunningham, lm pilot on Oct. 11—22 Apollo 7 mission, would continue duties as astronaut. (Reuters, W Post, 4/10/69)
aiaa announced former arc director H. Julian Allen had been named to receive 1969 Daniel Guggenheim Medal. Medal—presented annually by aiaa, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers for achievement in advancement of aeronautics —would be awarded Oct. 21 during aiaa Sixth Annual Meeting and Technical Display in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
There was “growing conviction that Soviet authorities have taken administrative measures to punish the noted physicist Andrey R. Sakharov,” said Bryce Nelson in Science. Washington, D.C., sources had said Sakharov was summoned for verbal criticism after July 11, 1968, publication in New York Times of his essay “Progress, Coexistence, and Intellectual Freedom.” Discipline was thought to have been performed in early 1969. Fragmentary accounts in Western publications indicated he had been deprived of work as consultant to ministry, removed from position as chief consultant at State Committee for Atomic Energy and from work in restricted physics institute at Chernogolovka, barred from research institute at Dubna, and possibly expelled from Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Science, 5/30/69, 1043-4.)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—7) was successfully captive fired for full flight duration, 369 secs, by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel at Mississippi Test Facility. Stage developed thrust equivalent to 1 million lbs at operating altitude, (msfc Release 69—25)
Man’s knowledge of Venus, Mars, and moon had been enormously enhanced by unmanned Mariner missions, New York Times editorial said. They were relatively inexpensive and did not risk human lives. “Nevertheless, American political leadership has been so obsessed with sending a man to the moon that unmanned probes of the planets became the stepchildren of the national space program. There were times when even the continued existence of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—the center for these unmanned flights—seemed in doubt. Now, in the new phase of American space exploration begun in the wake of Apollo IPs historic achievement, the major cost-benefit advantages of Mariner type unmanned flights need to he more fully appreciated by Washington policy makers, and even more intensively exploited than in the past, even as the manned exploration of the moon continues.” (NYT, 7/31/69, 32) During July: NASA-appointed Astronomy Missions Board recommended long-range program in space astronomy to NASA. Board of 19 leading U.S. astronomers chaired by Dr. Leo Goldberg, Harvard College Observatory Director, had been appointed in 1967 to propose programs for 1970s. NASA published Board’s report in November [see Nov. 9]. (Text; NASA Release 69—149; NASA ossa)
New tempest was brewing in national scientific community over whether defense establishment absorbed exorbitant portion of U.S. scientific and technological energies, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. In New York, younger physicists had called for political activism at annual meeting of American Physical Society Feb. 3. mit group, Union of Concerned Scientists, had scheduled day-long “research stoppage” March 4 and initiated letter campaign to spread its views to other institutions. Union’s proposals included “a critical and continuing examination of government policy in areas where science and technology are of actual or potential significance”; redirection of research from defense-oriented to environment-oriented projects; opposition to antiballistic missile system; and organization of scientists into effective and vocal political action group. (W Star, 2/5/69, A7; Sullivan, NYT, 2/9/69, E7)
Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser, said at nas dinner in Washington, D.C.: “The relations between science, technology, government and the various elements of our society are enormously complex. Science and technology are no longer separable from political and social problems. . . . Whether we like it or not, science is in politics and politics is in science. . . . The fact is that today science is too important to our nation to stay out of politics. Clearly we all— politicians and scientists—must find ways of adapting ourselves to a new era—an era which began . . . really on Hiroshima day in 1945.” (Text) April 29—May 1: msfc held workshop on optical telescope technology to exchange technical information on design of future space telescopes and identify research and technology efforts needed to support future missions. (msfc Release 69—117)
In Philadelphia Evening Bulletin, J. F. Ter Horst commented on designation of Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, as Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration Cabinet: “It’s highly unlikely that the Nixon Administration will merge civilian and military space programs—they were back in 1958 when he was Vice President. But if it becomes easier to sell Congress a space budget with a military label than with a civilian one, Mr. Nixon undoubtedly will move in that direction. If he does, he has an uncommonly qualified administrator in Seamans.” (P Bull, 1/11/69, 14)	_
At American Chemical Society meeting in Minneapolis, Univ. of California at Berkeley nuclear scientist Albert Ghiorso reported discovery of element 104 isotopes 104-257 and 104-259 and possibly 104-258. Discoveries, made by bombarding target in heavy ion linear accelerator (hilac), were announced by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, operated at Univ. of California for aec. (aec Release M—87)
Former NASA Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), received Distinguished Service Medal from Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in Pentagon ceremonies. Award was for achievements with NASA from December 1964 to August 1969. Gen. Phillips had left NASA to become commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) in Los Angeles. (AFJ, 9/27/69, 8)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried Princeton Univ. observatory payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to study uv radiation of hot stars in constellation Scorpius with 1 A and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but camera and stabilization were completely demolished because of fall after parachute failed, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Dethronement” of Dr. Charles Stark Draper as head of mit Instrumentation Lab had resulted from campaign waged by “coterie of selfappointed zealots who insist that defense research is ‘war research’ and cannot be tolerated,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and Space Digest article. On campus these days, “genius is not enough to keep you on the job. Your work has to he politically, morally, and socially acceptable” to these zealots. [AF/SD, 12/69, 46—50)
Successful Apollo 11 mission was expected to spur reservations on first lunar passenger flight, Washington Evening Star said. Before launch Pan American World Airways held 30,000 reservations and Trans World Airlines, 5,000. Pan Am spokesman said rush began after film “2001: a Space Odyssey” was first shown in 1968. In letters acknowledging reservations, Pan Am was saying, “Starting date of service is not yet known. Equipment and route will, probably, be subject to government approvals.” twa was saying, “We will be in contact with you again, as soon as technological advances develop to the point where we can project departure date.” (W Star, 7/23/69, A7)
New York Times editorial said: “The Administration’s action in ordering production started on MIRV multiple warhead missiles before opening negotiations for a moratorium with Moscow touches the most sensitive point in the projected missile-curb talks. Equally grave is the manner in which the Air Force quietly awarded the $88-million contract to General Electric, on the day President Nixon spoke favorably of proposals for a Soviet-American moratorium on mirv flight testing to head off production and deployment of the weapon by either side. Given this situation, the country is entitled to an explanation from the President of his intentions in the Soviet-American missile-control talks, which he has personally held up for more than seven months.” (NYT, 6/29/69, 10) .
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony, X—15 No. 566670, one of three rocket-engine aircraft built to test flight environment in upper atmosphere, took its place near Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk Flyer and Charles A. Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis. Aircraft had been officially retired with completion of joint nasa—usaf X—15 program in December and flown from Edwards afb, Calif., as cargo to be refurbished by Smithsonian. First X—15 built, it made first captive flight March 10, 1959,	and flew first glide and power flights June 8, 1959, and Jan. 23, 1960.	It completed last flight in test program Oct. 24, 1968, to total 81 free flights and 142 flights with B—52 mothership. Of three X—15s built by North American Rockwell Corp. and Thio-kol Chemical Corp., No. 3 had been destroyed in Nov. 15, 1967, crash which killed pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; No. 2 was being displayed at Air Force Museum, Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. X—15 program had cost $300 million and established records for 354,200-ft altitude and for 4,520 mph (mach 6.7) speed. At ceremony Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said it was difficult to believe designer’s dream of 15 yrs ago had already found its way into museum. (Program; NASA Release 69—56; dod Release 327-69; NYT, 6/15/69, 70)
In Aviation Week Robert Hotz wrote: “There need be no tears shed over the passing of the U.S. Air Force manned orbiting laboratory (mol).” Program “has been so stretched out by funding cuts and low keyed management that its technology has become obsolete and its costs astronomical. It is a classic example of what happens to a major technical development program that is not permitted to pursue its goals at the maximum pace possible. In contrast, the icbm development and Apollo lunar landing programs have proved what can be achieved in a relatively short period at relatively economical funding.” (Av Wk, 6/30/69) During June: nasa’s plans for two three-planet Grand Tours—8- to 11-yr missions to outer planets—were described by Jpl scientist James E. Long in Astronautics and Aeronautics. Envisioning 1,200-lb spacecraft launched by Titan-Centaur, Long described missions that had been identified and analyzed: four-planet missions, including Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, from 1976 to 1979 (earth-launch dates), with 1977 and 1978 giving best combination of closest-approach altitude, flight time, and launch energy; three-planet missions to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto from 1976 to 1979, with 1977 and 1978 preferred; and three-planet missions to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune from 1977 to 1980. Long said, “The fortuitous concurrence of mission technology and experience suitable for the challenges of missions to the outer planets, with a unique outer-planet alignment in the 1976—80 period, should make exploration of these planets, as a class, a high-priority candidate for program support.” {A&A, 6/69, 32—47; nasa Release 69-84)
President Nixon met with National Science Board members and nas council and promised to nominate NSF director without regard to his ABM position. He asked for names for possible nominee and promised to consider only scientific qualifications. President disclosed he had asked Cornell Univ.’s Dr. Franklin A. Long to consider having his name resubmitted to Senate after original decision not to nominate Dr. Long [see April 17] but Dr. Long had declined. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 4/29/69, Al) Cal Tech scientist Kip S. Thoren suggested pulsars were subject to quakes which accelerated their pulsation. At press interview during annual meeting, he said pulsars’ insides were probably superfluids— more liquid than liquid—and were gradually cooling, with crust crystallization requiring adjustments. Adjustments, he said, would cause “pulsequakes” and could result in sudden speedups in pulsar periodicity. Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold said observations of pulsars indicated they slowed down as they aged, with oldest finally slowing billionths of seconds per year until they reached periods up to almost four seconds. He suggested pulsar radiation might account for luminosity of whole galaxies and even produce all cosmic rays detected throughout universe, including earth. Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake, former director of Cornell’s Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, said space clocks were emerging as practical scientific tools, especially in testing Einstein’s theories. Dr. F. Graham Smith of Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories, Manchester, England, said space clocks were being used to investigate interstellar medium—gas clouds between earth and other parts of solar system. (Lannan, W Star, 5/1/69, A6; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/69, Al)
Willy Ley, space author and rocket expert, died at age 62, apparently from a heart attack. Ley—also planning consultant to NASA—had been one of founders of German Rocket Society, fellow of British Interplanetary Society, and member of American Institute of Aeronautical Science. Among his last published hooks were Rockets, Missiles and Men in Space and Watchers of the Skies. (AP, W Stair, 6/25/69, B5; NYT, 6/25/69, 41)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman and family flew from New York for nine-day tour of U.S.S.R. Institute for Soviet-American Relations in Moscow had extended invitation through Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. Itinerary included Moscow, Leningrad, Novosibirsk, and Crimea. {W Post, 7/1/69, A15; AP, W Star, 7/1/69, A4)
In Washington Evening Star William Hines said: “. . . Space Administrator Thomas 0. Paine was dead right when he acclaimed Project Apollo as ‘a triumph of the squares.’ ” While word “square” was in disrepute, “you will find no umbrage taken by the clean-cut stars of this week’s cosmic drama if you called them squares. They are, and probably proud of it. There was no fight from Neil Armstrong when Congress told him to plant an American flag on the surface of the moon. , . , The Apollo program is not only run by squares, but for squares, as well; its thrills and glories appeal to the vast majority of Americans who, at the bottom, are just as square as any Armstrong on Earth—Jack or Neil or any other.” (W Star, 7/13/69, D2)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 136.1 mi. (219 km); perigee, 110.6 mi (178 km); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 74.9°. Satellite reentered Aug. 23. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; 8/31/69; InteraviaAir-Letter, 7/25/69, 5; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
FRC announced retirement of NASA’s two X—15 rocket research aircraft, designed for manned hypersonic flight research at speeds up to 4,000 mph and altitudes of 50 mi. X—15 No. 1, which had made first flight June 8,1959, would he displayed at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. No. 2 would he displayed at Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. No. 3 had been destroyed in accident Nov. 15, 1967. During $300-million NASA—USAF—USN program X—15 had set two unofficial world records, reaching 354,200-ft altitude and 4,520 mph (mach 6.7). Aircraft served as reusable manned platforms for wide range of experiments that helped advance development of vital spaceflight systems. Final flight, 199th, had been Oct. 24, 1968, and NASA had announced completion of program Dec. 20. (frc Release 9—69)
Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean held press conference at msc. Code names for Apollo 12 LM and cm had been selected, they said, from entries submitted by North American Rockwell Corp. and Grumman Aerospace Corp. employees. CM would be called “Yankee Clipper” and lm, “Intrepid.” Major differences from Apollo 11 mission would be increase in geology and photography. Detailed documented sample collection would be team effort. Description would tell geologist about rock’s location, including how it was related to other rocks, whether it was partially covered, and why it attracted attention. Astronauts would carry bags and tongs at all times during eva to collect rocks when sighted instead of being limited to collecting during specific period of EVA. Photographic activities, described by Conrad as “the world’s greatest zero-G juggling act,” would include multispectral photography of lunar surface, using four Hasselblad cameras in hatch window. Three cameras would have black-and-white film with filters; fourth would have infrared film. Purpose of camera setup, Gordon explained, was to “photograph the illuminated side of the moon from one minute after sunrise to one minute prior to sunset in a stiff manner.” Every 20 secs “cameras would be activated, to give complete strip photography across the surface of the moon. . . . The big step photography I think is probably one of the most important things we’re doing on this flight. . . .” (Transcript; msc Release 69—68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan IIIB—Agena booster into orbit with 395.8-mi (636.8-km) apogee, 78.3-mi (125.9-km) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 108.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 8. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
In American Aviation, Eric Bramley called 1969 year of “cautious optimism” for air transport industry. Deliveries of new aircraft to U.S. carriers would drop from 478 in 1968 to 309. Trunk traffic was expected to grow at same 14% rate as 1968, with available seat-mile increase of 17%. CAB-approved fare increases would add $194 million to revenues with profit level and rate of return expected to improve. (Amer Av, 5/12/69, 40-1) nas—nrc submitted United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1968. “Although the principal concern of the space science program in the United States continues to be with the Earth, its environment, the Sun, interactions of solar and terrestrial phenomena, the Moon and planets, and the biological effects of weightlessness and radiation, there is a trend toward increasing emphasis on the use of space vehicles for stellar and galactic astronomy, especially in areas of the electromagnetic spectrum for which the atmosphere is essentially opaque. The successful operation of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory satellite and the rapid development of improved instruments and techniques for ultraviolet and x-ray astronomy . . . are examples of this trend.” In interview with press, nas-nrc Space Science Board member Dr. Richard W. Porter said U.S. would probably have to review its expensive prophylactic measures in planned Mars landings if U.S.S.R. landed there first with same techniques and precautions used in Venus shots. Outgoing contamination of planets might well be bigger problem than contamination of incoming spacecraft. There was little likelihood of spacecraft landing on Mars and Venus and returning for at least 10 yrs, Dr. Porter said, and risk from lunar bacteriological contamination was infinitesimal. But contamination of planets was serious problem because it could spoil man’s first chances to make a pure investigation of biological evolution elsewhere in the solar system. (Text; W Post, 5/23/69, A15)
National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena challenged USAF’s Condon Report on UFOs [Jan. 8]. At Washington, D.C., press conference Maj. Donald E. Keyhoe (usmc, Ret.), head of private committee, said investigation examined only “about 1%” of “reliable, unexplained” ufo sightings supplied to it. He said his files contained 11,000 reports of sightings, of which 3,000 were unexplained, (upi, W Star, 1/11/69, 1)	■
X-ray, one of science’s foremost photographic tools, was being supplemented by revolutionary process of neutron radiography called “neu-trography,” said New York Times. It had been used to check safety of components in Apollo 10 spacecraft and was subject of Government-supported research in U.K., France, West Germany, and Japan. In U.S., commercially oriented studies were being pursued by General Electric Co., Aerojet-General Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. Process—in which object to be radiographed was placed in large, high-density beam of neutrons that passed through object and registered data concerning its internal structure on film—had applications in inspection of pyrotechnic devices and nuclear reactor fuel and detection of excessive moisture or minute cracks. Critical welds, guidance components, and “honeycomb” bonding used in NASA program could also be inspected—as well as home TV sets, telephones, radios, missiles, and sst. (NYT, 6/2/69, 39)
aiaa announced election of Honorary Fellows: Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Dr. Seamans, former NASA Deputy Administrator, was honored for “organizing the research, development and operational base which produced the Apollo program.” Honors would be presented at Oct. 23 banquet in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
Lunar rock sample weighing 34.1 gm left Lisbon, Portugal, for Washington, D.C., after eight-day exhibit that attracted some 60,000 persons, including 400 leaders of Portuguese scientific, military, and educational world. Rock, shown on Portuguese TV to estimated 9 million viewers, would be sent to Prague. {NYT, 12/21/69, 22)
msfc announced $8,391,052 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for support services to J—2 rocket-engine program from June 1, 1969, through April 30, 1970. (msfc Release 69—104)
NASA had assured Post Office Dept, that master die for 10-cent moon landing commemorative stamp [see July 9] had gone all the way to lunar surface as planned. It had returned to earth in cm and been rushed to Washington, D.C., July 31 after decontamination at msc. However, moon letter envelope with die proof of moon landing stamp had not been postmarked on lunar surface. Because of tight schedule for lunar eva, letter had heen left with Astronaut Michael Collins in cm Columbia while Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Al-drin, Jr., worked on moon. “Moon Landing” postmark had been applied during return voyage. Letter had been decontaminated at msc and returned to Postmaster General Winton M. Blount Aug. 5. (Fairies, W Star, 8/10/69, Hll)
Dr. Harry H. Hess, Chairman of NAS—NRc Space Science Board and member of NASA’s Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight since 1963, died of heart attack suffered while attending Board meeting at Woods Hole, Mass. Dr. Hess, Blair professor of geology at Princeton Univ., was one of scientists who had analyzed Apollo 11 lunar samples. In 1960 he had advanced theory that volcanic activity on ocean floor caused continental drift. He had been past president of Mineralogical Society of America and of Geological Society of America, chairman of site-selection committee for NSF’s Project Mohole, and adviser to numerous other Federal agencies. (upi, W Post, 8/27/69, A10; Science, 8/29/69, 882)
President Nixon signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty in Washington, D.C. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ratified treaty simultaneously in Moscow, with President Nikolay V. Podgorny signing document. U.S. and U.S.S.R. were 23rd and 24th nations to ratify treaty, which would become effective after ratification by 43 countries. (PD, 12/1/69, 1658; NYT, 11/25/69, 1)
l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director, became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) . Gen. Phillips had been Director of Minuteman program before assignment to NASA in January 1964 as Deputy Director of Apollo program. He was succeeded by Rocco A. Petrone [see Aug. 22]. (nasa Ann, 7/31/69)
Senate unanimously adopted S.R. 224, introduced by Sen. Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) for himself and Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.), expressing gratitude on behalf of Senate and of all American people for “dedication, devotion, courage and effort of all associated with the Apollo program and with the Apollo 11 mission.” (CR, 7/25/69, S8575)	...	.
Washington■ Post columnist Franklin R. Bruns, Jr., said 10 days after issuance of moon landing airmail stamp in Washington, D.C., “an already tired city post office crew had just passed the two-million first day cover mark.” Post Office had gone “all out” to cooperate with those of other countries in returning covers and with Voice of America, NASA, and regular servicers. There was little doubt that “new first day cover record is in the making.” {W Post, 9/28/69, F9)
NASA announced appointment of Daniel J. Harnett as Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Oct. 1. He would be responsible for all NASA relationships with industry. Before his appointment he had held executive positions with Northrop Corp. (nasa Release 69—139) September SO: usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 303.2-mi (487.9-km) apogee, 299.5-mi (481.9-km) perigee, 93.8-min period, and 69.6° inclination. Second entered orbit with 586.0-mi (942.9-km) apogee, 574.8-mi (924.9-km) perigee, 103.7-min period, and 70.7° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; SBD, 10/7/69, 162; Pres Rpt 70 [69])	...
First public display of 21.1-gm Apollo 11 moon rock at American Museum of Natural History in New York attracted largest crowd in museum’s history—42,195 persons. Display would run for 2% mos as highlight of museum’s centennial celebration. (NYT, 11/16/69, 66; AP, W Star, 11/17/69, Al)
Rise of costs of Mark II electronic equipment for F—111 aircraft of more than 100% above original contract with Autonetics Div. of North American Rockwell Corp. were described by Bernard D. Nossiter in Washington Post article based largely on memo from dod official. Memo had warned, “If it fails to enforce the contract, the Air Force and the entire Department of Defense can count on many more years of misleading promises from contractors and failures to meet contractual requirements.” (W Post, 5/11/69, Al)
At state banquet in Bangkok, Thai King Bhumibol Adulyadej toasted President Nixon: “Last week’s breathtaking achievement of Apollo 11 and its brave American crew cannot be measured solely in scientific terms, for it also indicates man’s ability to look beyond his earthbound problems and to set his sights on new horizons in quest of wider knowledge and deeper understanding of himself and his environment.” {PD, 8/4/69, 1049-50)
Planned U.S. participation in 1971 Paris Air Show was announced in Washington, D.C., by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans, dot would coordinate exhibition of U.S. aircraft on flight line, (dot Release 26669)
msfc announced it had signed agreement with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for extension of J—2 engine production through April 30, 1970, at reduced rate of one engine per month instead of three. Engines would not be used as rapidly as originally planned because of overall extension of launch vehicle production schedule. Modifications amounted to $8,423,454. (msfc Release 69-70)
usaf launched an Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F Booster. (AP, C Trib 1/17/69)
Cancellation of mol program had left usaf with $1 billion in space hardware and 14 highly trained astronauts, Ralph Dighton of Associated Press wrote. Most of $1 billion already spent on program had been for undisclosed number of Titan HIM boosters and satellites built or on order, usaf had said launch facilities would be finished on schedule in September because they would have to be paid for anyway. They could be used for unmanned spacecraft. The $1.3-million mol administration building at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and $1.6-million medical and training structure could be adapted for office space, mol astronauts had been offered to NASA but no decision had yet been reached. Aerospace workers in seven firms had been hit by mol cancellation, with McDonnell Douglas Corp. most affected. It had 7,200 employees on project. (AP, W Star, 6/21/69, A5)
Merger of military and civilian man-in-space programs was major decision facing Nixon Administration, said Howard Benedict of Associated Press. Many observers felt it necessary because, under separate courses being taken by NASA and dod, costs of competing hardware systems “might explode out of proportion.” Congressmen had charged there was costly duplication in NASA’s orbiting workshop and DOD’s mol, both planned for 1971 launch, but with work on both so far advanced there was no turning back. Air Force Secretary, Dr. Robert Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, had said any attempt to combine two programs “would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. . . . These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing.” nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said classified study to determine mol’s capabilities to accomplish NASA’s long-duration earth orbit objectives had shown extended mol “too limited to provide a significant, cost-effective step toward achieving NASA’s long duration objective.” Many observers believed technology and information for building national space station housing military and civilian personnel might emerge from the two programs. Another possibility was use by both agencies of similar rocket and spacecraft on separate scientific and military missions with equipment standardization providing “considerable saving.” (Huntsville Times, 4/8/69)
Norrlandska Social-Demokraten, Boden, Sweden, editorial commented that Russian press was surprisingly generous with praise of men behind Apollo 11 and American space research in general during mission, but now press seemed to fear landing might have increased respect for U.S. around the world. “It is surely disturbing for Pravda and the Russian Party leaders that the American conquest of the moon . . . witnessed by the greater part of the Communist world, crushed the myth of the Communist system’s superiority.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
National Transportation Safety Board opened hearings in Washington, D.C., on midair collisions. In last 31 yrs of recorded aviation history there had been only 12 midair collisions with passenger fatalities, Clifton F. von Kann, Vice President for Operations and Engineering of Air Transport Assn., testified. “Even with the explosive growth of airline service during the last ten years, there have been just four collisions with airline passenger fatalities.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/5/69, A9)
In his last State of the Union message, President Johnson told Joint Session of Congress:	. . if the Nation’s problems are continuing, so are this Nation’s assets. Our economy, the democratic system, our sense of exploration, symbolized most recently by the wonderful flight of the Apollo 8, in which all Americans took great pride, the good common sense and sound judgment of the American people, and their essential love of justice.” Quest for durable peace “has absorbed every Administration since the end of World War II. It has required us to seek a limitation of arms races not only among the superpowers, but among the smaller nations as well. We have joined in the test ban treaty of 1963, the outer space treaty of 1967, and the treaty against the spread of nuclear weapons in 1968.” {PD, 1/20/69, 60—8)
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced at press conference that Stanley R. Resor would remain as Secretary of the Army, Rhode Island Gov. John H. Chafee would be nominated Secretary of the Navy, and former NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would be nominated Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration. (Wilson, W Post, 1/7/69, 1) usn saw post-Vietnam war need for modernization, with emphasis on nuclear-powered escort ships; usaf wanted new fighter, manned bomber, deployment of interim bomber, and revamping of U.S. air defense force. Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said: “The Soviets have four characteristics of special concern to the r&d community. They are technically advanced, they are strong economically, they have an aggressive military posture—and they work behind a veil of secrecy. The one that makes competition difficult is secrecy. To counter it, the United States must have technological superiority. We must have been there, technically, before them.” (W Star, 1/6—8/69)
Reaction to Apollo 12 lunar landing was “almost a ho-hum,” Associated Press reported. “It seemed to indicate they are now taking moon voyages for granted.” At White House, President and Mrs. Nixon arose before dawn to watch moon walk on TV. President had commented it was “first time anybody has sung from the moon,” as Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., hummed while conducting lunar tasks. In Philadelphia’s Franklin Institute, where thousands had gathered in July to watch Apollo 11 lunar landing, only 45 persons showed up to watch Apollo 12, Of 12 New Yorkers interviewed by New York Times, only Bernard Granite of the Bronx had watched lunar landing. He said, “The first one was more exciting. This one was anticlimaetic, but I still think they are justified in spending the money.” Portland, Ore., secretary Jeanne Paulson said, “I’m at the point where I think the money should go to the poverty program. There are too many starving people in the slum ghettos.” Des Moines, Iowa, secretary Eileen Brown said, “The biggest concern seemed to be that they couldn’t make the TV work rather than whether they could perform their assignments. What do we think they are up there for, anyway, to put a show on for us?” Police in Los Angeles, Calif., attributed sharp drop in reported crime to Apollo 12 moon landing and walk. In Washington, D.C., McKinley High School teacher said, “This doesn’t concern us at all. There are far more important things going on here.” Question for his pupils was “whether we will survive to the year 2000.” (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 31; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
NASA announced it would negotiate with North American Rockwell Corp. for modifications to four Apollo spacecraft for Apollo Applications program. Combined value of spacecraft and modifications was estimated at $340 million, (nasa Release 69—34)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
U.K. radioastronomer Sir Bernard Lovell told press at U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station that Apollo 11 and Luna XV increased hopes for U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation because “this is the first time the United States has been demonstratively superior in a vital part of the space program. American approaches for collaboration may be received with sympathy in the Soviet Union as they can no longer regard themselves as masters.” (AP, B Sun, 7/23/69, A4)
Die proof of 1.05- by 1.80-in 10-cent airmail stamp commemorating “First Man on the Moon,” attached to envelope, would be carried by Apollo 11 and canceled on Moon by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount announced. On return to earth, die would be used to produce commemorative stamps for August issue. Hand-canceled “Moon Letter” would undergo 21-day decontamination period at lrl and be returned to Post Office Dept, for display in Washington, D.C., and later throughout U.S. and abroad. Stamp was designed by Paul Calle, modeled by Robert J. Jones, and engraved by Edward R. Felver and Albert Saavedra. It depicted astronaut stepping from spacecraft onto lunar surface. (PO Dept Releases 107, P—37; W Post, 7/10/69, A13)
msfc announced award of two contracts. Eight-month, $400,000 contract had been given to General Dynamics Corp. to study experiment modules for proposed manned space station. Study, which would complement space station investigations being conducted by McDonnell Douglas Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp., would examine variety of experiments suitable for manned space station, analyze scientific and engineering community’s need for experiment modules, and develop concepts for least number of modules needed to meet these requirements. Martin Marietta Corp. had been awarded $1,170,000 contract to fabricate, test, and deliver 15 Saturn V workshop rate gyro processors and 1 module test set and to retrofit 22 Apollo Telescope Mount rategyro processors for Apollo Applications program. Work, expected to take 18 mos, would be done in Orlando, Fla. (msfc Releases 69—172, 69-173)
Soviet youth newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda praised NASA’s Apollo 9 mission: “A thorough check of the entire equipment necessary for a lunar landing has been attained, thanks to the courage and gallantry of the three American astronauts. At the same time the Apollo 9 flight showed that it is impossible in terrestrial conditions to envisage all difficulties astronauts are encountering in real flight.” Soviet Academician Prof. Anatoly Blagonravov complimented NASA’s planning for lunar landing: “The fact that the Americans earlier made a flight around the moon and now conducted the Apollo 9 experiment, in my opinion, is evidence of a rather complete solution of the problem of dependability,” though some risk always remained, (upi, W Star, 3/14/69, A6)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
At lunar landing celebration dinner in Huntsville, Ala., Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said: “We worked together and together we accomplished our part of the mission. The moon is now accessible. And someday, because of the beginning that we have made here, the planets and the stars may belong to mankind. This reach toward the heavens, toward the stars, can eventually loose the human race from the confines of this earth and maybe even this solar system and give it immortality in the immense and never-ending reaches of space.” For first time, “life has left its planetary cradle and the ultimate destiny of mankind is no longer confined. When the Mayflower landed on American shores the pilgrims did not envision the nation that would eventually evolve. Neither can we truly say what will eventually spring from the footprints around Tranquility Base.” (Text)
Dr, Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, resigned as president of aiaa. Letter of resignation said, “It is not in the best interest of either the Air Force or the aiaa for me to continue with aiaa responsibility.” aiaa board of directors elected Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., to replace Dr. Seamans, (aiaa Release)
usaf had awarded three-year, $20-million contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. to design new rocket engine to power payloads in space, Business Week said. United Aircraft’s Pratt & Whitney Div. was also working on concept, magazine believed. (Bus Wk, 10/4/69)
Dr. Harold Brown, former Secretary of the Air Force, was inaugurated as president of Cal Tech during day-long ceremonies on campus. He succeeded Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who had become Presidential Science Adviser. (LA Times, 9/4/69)
Total $21.35-billion investment “in the development and demonstration of a national manned lunar landing capability” was detailed by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. “At the time of its establishment, the national goal of a manned lunar landing and return in this decade represented the most difficult technological endeavor ever to challenge the American nation. During this period, senior NASA officials in testimony before the Congress estimated the cost ... at between $20 and $40 billion.” Estimate was refined to approximately $19.5 billion in March 1964, with assumption “there would be a timely initiation of a follow-on program which would bear a portion of the relatively fixed cost required to develop and sustain this national capability.” Estimates then and annual reassessments had reflected total program cost, including cost of initial lunar landing. Lunar objective “was not simply an end in itself but, rather, provided the focus for the effort to attain space supremacy for whatever the national interest required.” In March 1966 NASA had furnished estimate of $22,718 billion based on assumption that there would not be timely initiation of follow-on program. In April 1969 NASA furnished estimate of $23,877 billion, which would still be valid if negative assumption had materialized. “But with the success of Apollo 11, we have the opportunity to utilize this demonstrated capability in a more meaningful way. By improving payloads and modifying spacecraft to increase lunar surface systems, we can enhance significantly the return of scientific data from both lunar orbit and the lunar surface.” NASA had met national commitment “at a cost nearer the lower end of the range of estimates” despite “unpredictable substantial inflationary conditions.” Actual cost accrued through July 31, 1969, was $21.35 billion, of which $2 billion was value of flight hardware available for future flights. Capital assets included were approximately $2.8 billion and were “of continuing national value.” Apollo was “triumph in management as well as in technology and engineering which united government, industry and universities in a common peaceful undertaking. At least one-half million people worked on the manned lunar landing program . . . during the eight years from its announcement to its initial success.” (Text)
