FAA and Eastern Air Lines demonstrated “smokeless jet” at National Airport in Washington, D.C. Boeing 727 with JT8d engines modified to reduce carbon particulates by 75% took off with thin trail of smoke. Pratt & Whitney engineer Gerald R. Daly, who designed pollution-fighting equipment, explained that modified engines reduced smoke but did not eliminate it. (Latham, WPost, 9/10/70, A27)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 872.3-km (542-mi) apogee, 764.4-km (475-mi) perigee, 101.2-min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 9/30/70)
Test flights of Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde had gone well and protests against its sonic boom had been “less than expected,” AP article reported. Big hurdle would come in spring when U.K. and France .would decide whether to go into full production. Decision would depend on number of aircraft ordered by then. To date, 16 airlines had taken options on 74 Concordes, with first batch going to Pan American World Airways, Air France, and British Overseas Airways Corp. None had made firm commitment to buy and U.K. and France had assured foreign airlines they could revoke their options if Air France and boac backed out. AP said major airlines doubted Concorde would be profitable. It would carry 130 passengers, against Boeing 747’s 490, and require more fuel than conventional jets. At possibly $52.8 million, its cost would be about five times that of conventional airliner. Concorde’s only selling point was speed. It would halve flying time across Atlantic to IVi hrs. (Pinder, WPost, 12/5/70, A13)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) introduced H.R. 15695, $3.333-billion FY 1971 NASA authorization bill. (Text) Design baselines at start of Phase B studies of shuttle included 1.6 million kg (3.5 million lbs) at liftoff and payload compartment volume of 4.6-m (15-ft) dia by 18.3 m (60 ft) long. Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby said NASA reusable space shuttle was logical step toward ship for commercial travel to orbit and back and for point-to-point earth transportation. (Mathews Text; upi, W Star, 2/6/70, A10)
New York City Mayor John V. Lindsay addressed more than 300 mayors at National League of Cities Conference in Atlanta, Ga.: “The human potential of technology is boundless. We have only scratched the surface. For the sake of our cities and for the sake of the men and women in out aerospace, industry, we must learn more.” Mayor Lindsay said aiaa and city of New York would sponsor first annual Urban Technology Conference in May 1971. Conference would focus on application of space techniques and talent to urban crisis. “From it we hope to learn how to convert the creativity that put a man on the Moon into an ally in the struggle to help men live in our cities.” (A&A, 1/71,9)
Status of C-5 Galaxy aircraft program funding was described by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, before Senate Armed Services Committee during hearings on usaf FY 1971 budget request: In 1969 it had appeared “that the 120 aircraft program would cost about $4,831 million, including initial spares. As we interpreted the contract, the contractor would lose some $285 million on 120 aircraft, and any smaller buy the contractor’s loss would be higher. The contractor disagreed. By his interpretation. . .he expected to make a small profit on the total program. As a consequence of budget restraints, rising costs, and an overall reappraisal of defense requirements, we have now limited the program to 81 aircraft. The program’s final cost to the Government, however, depends on resolution of the issues between the Air Force and contractor over the contract. We are still trying to work these out with Lockheed but.. .litigation may be required. If the Air Force wins all the arguments, the 81 aircraft program will cost about $4 billion. If the contractor wins all his points, the cost will be. . .on the order of $500 million more.” It might be “several years before we know the exact outcome of this program.” (Testimony)
usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was described in Christian Science Monitor article: “Oldest and largest military aviation museum in the world, the display.. .portrays the history of the United States Air Force in such away as to interest all ages. Nearly half of the aircraft and missiles have to be exhibited outdoors, so construction is under way on a new $6 million facility. . .to contain the collection of 8,000 planes and other items.” (CSM, 8/4/70)
World’s first female aquanaut team received special awards from Walter J. Hickel, Secretary of the Interior, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. Later Richard H. Sprince of NASA, who was project manager for team, said test of women’s ability to function in hostile environment was one reason NASA had joined Tektite program. Asked if NASA would consider bringing women into astronaut program, Sprince said, “We’ve got to start looking in that direction.” (AP, B Sun, 7/28/70, A3)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., Apollo 13 commander, received insignia of Chevalier of French Legion of Honor from French Ambassador Charles Lucet during ceremonies at French Embassy in Washington, D.C. (CR, 7/31/70, S12536-7; Dixon, W Star, 7/30/70, Cl)
X-15 rocket research aircraft, holder of 7274-km per hr (4520-mph) speed record for manned aircraft, went on display at Alabama Space and Rocket Center near msfc. Once piloted by Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and one of three manufactured for NASA, the 22 700-kg (50 000-lb) $50-million X-15 was on loan from Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Second X-15 was on display at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Third had been destroyed in 1967 crash. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/28/70)
Progress report on plans for National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., was published in Astronautics and Aeronautics. During hearings on H.R. 6125, signed by President Johnson in July 1966, Smithsonian Institution had been enjoined from asking Congress for construction funding until after settlement of Vietnam War. Assistant Secretary for Science Sidney R. Galler was requesting FY 1971 funds of $2 million to reappraise architectural plans for museum and “listening for a ‘signal from Congress’ ” before asking for construction funds. In interim, small air and space display was housed in Smithsonian’s Arts and Industries Building and in small, temporary Air and Space Building. “The bulk of the 200 plus airframes and the 300-400 engines is stored at the Silver Hill (Maryland) Navy facility. About 80% of the stored collection is either in sheds or crates.” Museum plans were reviewed periodically to reflect latest in design. Until 747 aircraft and Apollo spacecraft, Smithsonian could house aerospace history displays. “The total Smithsonian annual budget runs about $30 million. The Air and Space portion amounted to $538 000 in 1969 or about 2% of the total. . . . S. Paul Johnston retired in September as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Galler is still looking for a replacement.” (A&A, 2/70, 16-7)
American Institute of Physics held meeting at Rockefeller Univ. in New York. Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of Rockefeller Univ., received Karl Taylor Compton Award for distinguished statesmanship in science. During interview following meeting Dr. William D. McElroy, NSF Director, said NSF had begun testing use of large teams of scientists from different disciplines under Federal funding as new approach to basic scientific research. -NSF had allocated $70 million in 1970 for studies of pressing national and social matters. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, MIT Provost and science adviser to President Kennedy, said priorities had been misplaced. He advocated a national science policy. “If I invented a new military system to stop tanks, I could get $100 million at the snap of my fingers. But if I say we want to develop a new method of medical care, I don’t know if I could raise $ 10 million. ” Dr. Harvey Brooks, Harvard Univ. Dean of Engineering, said: “The central problem is how science can be reasonably responsive to social problems without destroying itself as science. The health of science depends on its capacity to develop its own intellectual laws. If it attempts to become too responsive, it loses its integrity, and I see a danger of that happening now.” (Reinhold, NYT, 10/6/ 70,1)
Assistant Under Secretary of State for Public Affairs and former astronaut Michael Collins addressed meeting of Foreign Service Wives Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “By the year 2000 or 2100, people will look back on the 1970s and find it incredible that cancellation of the space program was proposed______It is inevitable there will be colonization of other planets, despite the risks.” Collins told group he hadn’t been sure oi success of first manned lunar landing until he and colleagues were safely enroute home; “that was the first time I felt any certainty about it. ’ (W Star, 4/28/70, B7)
Washington Post editorial on Luna XVI: “. . .the flight of Luna 16 is a major achievement for the Soviet Union. Its scientists have concentrated in recent years on a system of landing and retrieving unmanned spacecraft, an activity that the United States had not emphasized, and Luna 16 shows that the system works.” In long-term space exploitation “it seems to us that the manned approach will be most useful. Men will be out there some day, following the trail marked by the Apollo craft, and in the meantime the American effort can properly be devoted to finding a way to get them out of the earth’s atmosphere more cheaply and to making the best possible uses of earth-orbiting space stations and laboratories.” (WPost, 9/29/70, A18)
Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman appeared as host on ABC TV program “Mission Possible—They Care for a City.” Program outlined attempts to improve environment of San Francisco. (W Star, 3/17/ 70)
Point-to-point second-generation space shuttle was possibility and could be “transportation system of the future as opposed to the hypersonic aircraft,” Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Aero Club in Washington, D.C. (Text)
AFSC announced award by SAMSO of $9 228 319 contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for space experiments support program (SESP) launch scheduled for late 1971 from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Contract called for integration of several satellites onto spacecraft that would be orbited by Thor-Agena booster. Largest experiment was 113-kg (250-lb) flexible solar array designed to test deployment of flexible panels in zero-genvironment and verify long-term power-generation characteristics of new solar cell. (AFSC Release 132.70)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, had told closed session of House Armed Services Committee that USAF planned “continued rapid retrenchment” to lowest expenditure level since Korean War buildup, Washington Daily News reported. Planned purchase of 390 aircraft was “smallest number. . .procured in any one year” in usaf history (as a separate service). (W News, 3/19/70, 20) Apogee motor was fired March 23 and spacecraft entered circular orbit with 36 619.2-km (22759.0-mi) apogee, 34 421.3-km (21 393.0mi) perigee, 23.5-hr period, 0.3° inclination, and 5.7°-per-day eastward orbital drift. Spacecraft would arrive on station over Atlantic at 18° west longitude June 10. All systems had operated normally since March 25 turn-on. Nato I was first of two NATO military comsats scheduled to be launched into orbit over Atlantic under dod-nato agreement, usaf managed project for dod and would reimburse NASA for launch services. NATO would reimburse USAF. Spacecraft weighed 242.7 kg (535 lbs) and consisted of two concentric cylinders containing redundant X-band communication systems. Initial operation of spacecraft telemetry and command functions were performed from usaf satellite control facility. Control of orbital operations would be transferred to NATO after spacecraft reached station. (NASA Proj Off; SBD, 3/24/70,111)
Boom ‘‘was busted” at Cape Kennedy, New York Times article said. Engineers and technicians ‘‘who helped put American astronauts on the moon” had moved away by thousands, leaving “a sagging economy and perhaps the best house buys in the United States.” Employment in Cape Kennedy area had dropped from 26 000 to 18 900, and was still falling. Business in Brevard County had dropped 15%; total bank deposits were down by $1.7 million from $241 million on Dec. 31, 1968; and unemployment rate had risen to almost 4%. Motel business was off estimated $400 000 per month, with half of county’s 1500 units vacant most of time. In December 1969 county had become eligible for Federal food commodities and 1327 families had qualified. Real estate was only business booming, with local residents buying homes sold by engineers at low prices and interest rates. (Waldron, NYT, 2/8/70,80)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, spoke during 10-day “Emphasis Space” program at Nebraska Wesleyan Univ. on “very basic question” of why U.S. should be spending “all of this money out in space when we have so many problems here on earth.” He said answer was “indeed that human values have the highest priority. I would submit that the American space program is indeed a program that has tremendous human values. ... we in the space agency who are effecting technical change feel that history shows that the interaction between technical change and social change is extremely close. We believe that the activities that we are carrying out will have a tremendous impact on the way our children and our children’s children will live. We are in the business of creating new wealth and new power that can be used by all men.” Apollo 12 Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said that lunar flights were “enhancing man’s knowledge of the environment in which he lives. .. .space has proven to date that it is something that man can use that is of benefit to man. . . . The question is do you want it used.” Space program was at point “where it is up to the people to decide through the government what uses we will put space to.” (Neb Wes Univ’s New Dimensions, 9/70; AP, San Diego Union, 5/3/70)
Completion of “Compass Link” reconnaissance photo-relay system and its turnover to Air Force Communications Service was announced by AFSC. System, developed by afsc Electronic System Div., used three ground stations and two satellites. Laser beam scanned picture for light variations and converted image to electronic signals for transmission through satellite to ground station. Laser beam also was used for reconstruction of picture at destination. (afsc Release 98.70)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Aerobee 170 carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 175.2-km (108.9-mi) altitude to collect data from cosmic x-ray sources to determine location of sources and flux levels in range 0.2-1 kev. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL; SR list)
First total solar eclipse seen over heavily populated areas of U.S. since 1925 was greeted by millions of viewers who crowded beaches, towns, and islands where viewing was most favorable. Eclipse was total along path 137-161 km (85-100 mi) wide through Mexico, Florida, Georgia, the Carolinas, Virginia, and Nantucket Island, Mass. It was 96% total in New York City and 95% in Washington, D.C. (Wilford, NYT, 3/8/70,1)
NASA announced it would initiate studies and analyses of satellite and other data on Gulf Coast area in FY 1971 at mtf. In Washington, D.C., Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said activities would use data from Earth Resources Technology Satellites A and B, Apollo manned flights, and aircraft operations. Study would be supported by mtf laboratory and Slidell, La., computer facility in line with earlier NASA invitation to other Government agencies to collocate study and analysis activities at mtf. (NASA Release 70-98)
Mrs. Richard M. Nixon christened Clipper Young America, Pan American World Airways’ first operational Boeing 747, in Dulles International Airport ceremony. Aircraft was parked alongside Boeing 707 and 40-yr old Ford Trimotor, first aircraft flown by Pan Am. (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, 14)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 236.6-km (147-mi) apogee, 178.6-km (111-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 83° inclination and reentered June 17. Second entered orbit with 503.7-km (313-mi) apogee, 489.2-km (304-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 83.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 5/31/70; 6/30/70)
The Economist commented on resignation of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, “just at a time when the governments of western Europe are considering whether to throw what passes for their space.programmes, in with Nasa’s.” European governments “scare easily and do not co-operate easily with each other, let alone with the Americans, whom they subconsciously suspect of always having the technical emasculation of Europe in mind. Dr. Paine, placid, patient and unusually sensitive—for a Washington man—to other people’s susceptibilities, handled them as gently as nervous horses. A successor who is less imaginative, or more inclined to wear his emotions on his sleeve, will undo much of this work. This will not do much harm to the American space programme, but for Europe to miss this chance would be tragic.” (Economist, 8/1/70, 43-4)
Many Turkish peasants were convinced that flu that had been ravaging Turkey came from germs brought to earth by Apollo astronauts, San Francisco Chronicle said. Peasants thought astronauts had been imprisoned in room for bringing microbes back from the moon and that wind had carried microbes from space capsule to Europe and Turkey. Charges were appearing in Turkish press. (Arnow, SF Chron, 1/20/70)
World’s largest tuna fishing boat was launched in San Diego, Calif. It was insulated with polyurethane foam which had been developed for use as insulation in Saturn V 2nd-stage fuel tank. North American Rockwell Corp. had used foam in 61-m (200-ft) clipper, (msfc Release 70-23)
Discovery by radar astronomers at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station of several nearly continent-sized rough areas on Mercury’s surface was reported by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein, head of jpl Communications Research Section, at meeting of U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union in Washington, D.C. Areas were similar to ones observed on Venus but “larger relative to the size of the disk,” and had much less contrast to the surrounding areas, (jplRelease 550)
Nuclear nonproliferation treaty went into effect. President Nixon in Washington, D.C., and Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin in Moscow presided in ceremonies at which last of 47 nations deposited instruments of ratification. (Finney, NYT, 3/6/70, 1)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., on behalf of Apollo 12 crew, received special Emmy Award from National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in New York for TV photography during Apollo 12 lunar landing. (AP, W Star, 6/8/70, B9) Reusability requirement might be most difficult of all. “One can speculate that if we can do it in aircraft engines, why not rocket engines? But we are talking about heat fluxes and turbomachinery characteristics in the shuttle engine that extend well beyond those experienced in the engines of the [Boeing] 707, 747, or even the military high performance aircraft. It is yet to be shown if we can fly 100 missions (or even 10 or 20) with this high performance engine, and achieve the confidence and maintainability which the airline operations have in hand. .. .reusability adds a new dimension to rocket engine development.” (Text) Prof. Yu. K. Khodarev, Deputy Director of Institute for Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Valery Yevdokimov, head of Academy’s data processing dept., called for studies of what U.S. and U.S.S.R. could do to establish and operate scientific base on moon. Prof. Khodarev said: “We would like to see concrete lists from American scientists of instruments that we could place on the moon for research. Then we can explore further avenues for cooperation in space. We can’t decide how to transport things there until we first decide what we want to take.” There was general acceptance of U.S.S.R. space efforts among Soviet people “but people are looking for a direct payoff—they want something for their money.” Khodarev said U.S. and U.S.S.R. could “cooperate in a Martian program as well as in intense investigations on the moon.” He suggested area for primary investigation from lunar station would have to be decided. “Do we want to look at the moon, or do we want to look into the cosmos from the surface?” During panel discussion Robert L. Lohman of NASA’s Space Station Task Force invited Prof. Khodarev to attend NASA meeting on advanced space programs at ARC later in year. Dr. Takao Ueda of Japan said Japan was working on comsats, TV satellites, and geosynchronous weather spacecraft. (AAS Paper No. 70-044; Bane, LA Her-Exam, 6/11/70; NASA Sci and Tech Info Div)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
N.Y. State Supreme Court Appellate Div. ruled unanimously that Cornell Univ. had right to sell Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to private, profit-making company, Edp Technology, Inc. Decision upset 1969 State Supreme Court ruling that laboratory had been created as public trust and therefore could not be sold to private company. Appellate Div. held that laboratory had been transferred to Cornell as gift without any restrictions. (AP, NYT, 11/6/70)
John Leyton, President of Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization, said in Washington, D.C., that addition of SSTto existing mix of aircraft would necessitate creation of entire new traffic control system in U.S. To enable SST to respond to traffic control instructions would require 320 km (200 mi) of maneuver space. (W Star, 9/25/70, A4)
Four-man crew successfully completed 159-day, 11 000-km (7000-mi) journey from Guayaquil, Ecuador, to Mooloolaba, Australia, in 7.9m (26-ft) raft to prove South American Indians could have sailed to Australia centuries ago. Expedition was headed by Prof. Vital Alzar of Spain, who was making second attempt to cross Pacific on raft. Others were Marco Modena of France, Norman Terenault of Canada, and Gabriel Salas of Chile, (upi, WPost, 11/6/70, A18)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., news conference he was limiting F-111 procurement to four wings. “In order to have four wings of the F-l 11, it would be necessary to purchase an additional 40 aircraft. The decision as to whether those 40 aircraft will be purchased or not is dependent upon the scientific review that we are making now and the Air Force has set up a special committee of outstanding scientists and technical advisors” to make review. (Transcript)
Consumer adviser and safety advocate Ralph Nader released report in Washington, D.C., to Government agencies and industry spokesmen. It charged that travel by light aircraft was most dangerous form of transportation in U.S. and that general-aviation industry had neglected simple remedies which could save hundreds of lives annually. (AP, W Star, 1/22/70, A4)
intelsat international planetary conference convened in Washington, D.C. U.S. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson welcomed 100 delegates to meeting, which was to work out definitive arrangements for establishment of single global commercial comsat system with control apportioned among members. (UPI, W Post, 2/17/70)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics published For the Benefit of All Mankind: A Survey of the Practical Returns from Space Investment (H. Rpt. 91-1446): Space Research “already has produced an extremely broad range of concrete benefits, not only to the American citizenry but to the people of many nations. The flow of ‘hard benefits’ has grown from a trickle to a stream, and it is widening to a river, as expanding technology uncovers more and more ways of improving man’s mode of existence.” Report cited tangible benefits in business, medicine, transportation, construction, new fabrics, and new materials. Future benefits “of even greater impact” included use of satellites for more efficient management of earth’s natural resources, use of satellites in crime detection, and possible development of hospitals in space “which would offer gravity-free treatment to patients with heart ailments.” Illustrations, based on existing or impending technology, were the “extra dividends which are a fallout of ingenious application of space experience by business, industry, commerce, Government, the medical profession, and the academic community. Those dividends already paid, coupled with those in sight for the near-term future, affect practically every facet of human convenience and concern. They promise continuing and increasing return on the space investment for the benefit of mankind on earth today.” (Text)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
L/G John W. O’Neill, AFSC Vice Commander, delivered keynote address at afsc Air Force Materials Symposium in Miami Beach, Fla.: usaf was finding it “essential to push harder against the material and structural limits” of knowledge than at any time in its history. “We are forced to look over and beyond the horizon for new materials; new combinations; new structural concepts; and new methods of fabricating, testing, inspecting—and predicting.” New aircraft had to “fly higher and faster than ever before—in some cases at the fringes of space—and still be large enough to carry an effective combat payload over extended ranges.” Missiles had to “do incredible things under even worse conditions, with the added proviso that no humans will be aboard to make in-flight corrections. . . . With our spacecraft. . .we simply combine the harshest requirements imposed on both aircraft and missiles. And the difficulties will be compounded as the Air Force and NASA jointly develop reusable boosters, shuttles and tugs for the space transportation system.” (Text)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted Silver Quill Award of American Business Press on NASA’s behalf at dinner in Wahington, D.C. Award was given for “greatest exploration expedition in the history of mankind,” abp Board Chairman Donald V. Buttenheim said. It also recognized “tremendous feat of organization of human and material resources” and translation of discoveries and development of manned space flight into “down to earth benefits of the new technology for the good of industry, America, and all mankind.” (abp Release, 1/1/70; abp Off)
NASA FY 1971 interim operating plan news conference was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said principal decision was “how best to carry out the Apollo and other existing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future. ... In our discussions, it became clear that the vitality of our national space program depends on a determined and vigorous continuation of plans for a reusable space shuttle followed by a space station in the manned flight program”; early development of erts, ATS, and HE AO; Grand Tour unmanned flights to distant planets; unmanned Viking Mars landers; Pioneer flights to Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter; and ‘a healthy aeronautical research program.” “With all of these considerations in mind. . .actions have been taken that will effectively reduce NASA’s FY 1971 budget request of $3,333 billion to an interim operating plan of $3.2687 billion.. .and to minimize NASA’s budgetary requirements for future years.” Budget request for Apollo was being reduced by $42.1 million to $914.4 million by canceling Apollo 15 and 19 lunar missions and by phasing down manpower levels at major Apollo facilities more rapidly. Although Lunar and Planetary Missions Board and nas-nrc Space Science Board had strongly recommended, after special review, that NASA carry out all six remaining lunar landing missions, NASA had “most reluctantly concluded that a reduction. . .should be made.” Remaining Apollo missions would be redesignated 14 through 17 and would be flown before start of Skylab operations in November 1972. Schedule would allow additional flexibility by providing Apollo hardware for possible use in Skylab, space station, or other programs where manned operations or heavy boost capability would be required. Advanced mission studies would be reduced by $1 million. Tracking and data acquisition network operations would be reduced $8 million by reducing number of manned flights and by more rapid phasedown in operating levels. Construction of facilities would be reduced to $25 million by deferring Polymer Research Laboratory at arc, Calibration Laboratory at MSC, and Multispectral Photo Laboratory at msfc and by rehabilitation and modification effort and facility planning and design. Research and program management minimum operating budget would be established at $678.7 million, amount included in previous appropriations bill and $13.6 million below NASA’s FY 1971 request. Dr. Paine said NASA had concluded “that it is prudent and realistic. . .to make these decisions now.. .to avoid more drastic and disruptive actions which would result if the decisions were postponed until later in the fiscal year. We also no longer have the capability to prepare in parallel two Apollo spacecraft, as would be required to maintain an option to reach a later decision on the number of Apollo missions.” Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers explained Apollo schedule changes: Apollo 14 would be launched as planned Jan. 31, 1971, followed at six-month intervals by Apollo 16 (renamed Apollo 15) with advanced capability for greater exploitation of lunar exploration, Apollo 17 (renamed Apollo 16), and Apollo 18 (renamed 17), last launch in series. Beginning with Apollo 15 launch in July, eva would be increased from two periods to three and man-hours per mission, from 18 hrs to 40 hrs. Weight of landed scientific payload would be doubled, from 227 kg to 454 kg (500 lbs to 1000 lbs); SM experiment package would be added; and range and efficiency of surface operations would be increased by improved suit mobility, improved life support system, and addition of lunar roving vehicle. Crew for new Apollo 15 would be same as previously planned—Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin. Skylab core module would be launched by Saturn V in November 1972, as scheduled, and would be revisited by Saturn IBs and csms up through June 1973. Beyond that, activities would be “at a standstill as far as orbital operations are concerned until the shuttle comes on line, hopefully in the 1976-77 time period.” (Text; Transcript)
President Nixon commented on SST during Washington, D.C., press conference: “I have satisfied myself, after long deliberation. . .that the arguments with regard to the environment could be met, that this prototype should be built. What is involved here is not just 150,000 jobs which will be lost if we don’t build it, not just the fact that billions of dollars in foreign exchange will be lost if we do not build it; but what is lost here is the fact that the United States of America which has been first in the world in commercial aviation from the time of the Wright Brothers decides not just to be second but not even to show.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1652)
John H. Chaffee, Secretary of the Navy, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. to develop and produce high-performance, afterburning turbofan engines for USN F-14B and usaf F-15 fighter aircraft. Target price for first 90 engines was $448 162 600; first increment to be funded was $47 450 000. (dod Release 162-70)
nas panel headed by physicist Dr. Thomas F. Malone of Univ. of Connecticut warned that large-scale deployment of SST might increase incidence of skin cancer if exhaust from aircraft thinned protective layer that separated earth’s atmosphere from solar rays. Warning was issued during meeting with dot’s Office of SST Development in Washington, D.C. (Randal, W Star, 12/1/70, All)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 410.4-km (255-mi) apogee, 118.9-km (73.9-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 108.8° inclination and reentered July 6. (Pres Rpt 71; GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; 7/31/70)	.
North American Rockwell Corp. had begun testing world’s largest known rotational machine under NASA contract to evaluate human performance in rotating environment, New York Times reported. Four-man crew would live in machine for one week and perform mechanical chores and decision-reaction tests in LaRC study, to approximate conditions in space stations of late 1970s. Bulletshaped crew module 12 m (40 ft) long rotated at 4 rpm, which was best approximation of space station obtainable, according to NR Program Manager, Dr. James A. Green. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/70)
Our World in Space—Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow,” illustrated lecture by artist Robert McCall, was presented by Smithsonian Associates in Washington, D.C. (Program)
If Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde emerged from test series with reputation intact, it would “in its builders’ eyes confirm its image as the spearhead of European technology, and the last defense against American domination of the aviation industry,” Stephen V. Armstrong said in Washington Post. Public attention was focused on aircraft’s sonic boom. West Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, and Holland had said they were likely to ban supersonic flight over their territories because of boom. Instruments in Oban Cathedral in Scotland during recent Concorde 002 tests had shown boom produced between 10 300 and 20 700 newtons of pressure per sq m (1.5 and 3 psf)—equivalent of thunder, bac officials had predicted Concorde would produce no more noise than this in commercial service. Concorde opponents were concerned about U.S. reports that supersonic airliners could change weather patterns by condensing water vapor in atmosphere. Airlines had options on only 74 Concordes but bac was saying it could sell minimum of 200 by mid-1970s for $24 million each and was considering construction of larger model, which would hold 200 rather than 150 passengers. Concorde had already cost more than $1 billion and was expected to cost $650 million more by 1973. No one expected it to make enough to cover this expenditure. (WPost, 9/7/70, A13)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs met with West German Minister of Transport and of Postal Affairs and Communications George Leber in Washington, D.C. They agreed to give priority to continuing collaboration on r&d in transportation technology, (dot Release 2170)
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described planned eva and equipment for Apollo 14 mission at Washington, D.C., press briefing. After landing LM on moon’s Fra Mauro, Mitchell and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would leave LM and explore lunar surface with equipment stored on 9-kg (20-lb) mobile equipment transporter (met). On previous lunar landing missions astronauts had ended up with more equipment than they could carry, met would carry cameras, special sample containers, work table, lunar portable magnetometer, trenching tools, hand tool carrier, extension handles, tether, and other tools, thus freeing astronauts’ hands, met would be pulled over lunar surface by special handle that could be held with pressurized glove without being gripped. (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/17/70, A5)
Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy Was presented to Smithsonian Institution for permanent retention at National Space Club Christmas reception in Washington, D.C. Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director of Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, received award from donor, Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer. (NSC News Letter, 1/8/71)
U.S., U.K., Switzerland, and West Germany began efforts through International Red Cross toward release of passengers held hostage in Jordan after Sept. 6 multiple aircraft hijacking. U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers met in Washington, D.C., with representatives of 10 Arab countries. International Federation of Airline Pilots met in London on Israeli proposal of aviation boycott of Arab countries in reprisal. U.N. Secretary General U Thant urged international community “to adopt prompt and effective measures to put a stop to this return to the law of the jungle.” (FonF, 9/3-9/70, 638)
Achievements of U.S.S.R. Luna XVI mission were praised in Washington, D.C., by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator: “The Soviet Union’s reported success in obtaining lunar material, depositing it in a sealed container and launching it from the moon’s surface on a return trip to earth with the Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft is a major engineering and scientific achievement. We wish the Soviet Union and its scientists success in completing this exciting mission.” NASA would “look forward to sharing in the information which will be developed by an analysis of the samples.” (Schmeck, NYT, 9/22/70, 11)
NASA's thick supercritical test wmg was flight-tested on a USN T2-C aircraft for the first time, in flight from the North American plant in Columbus. Ohio. Joint NASA. USN program was testing the new airfoil that might save structural weight on moderate-speed aircraft. Thin version of the airfoil for maximum-speed performance, fitted to a modified F-S jet fighter (below), was delivered to the Flight Research Center Nov. _1 for test flights beginning in the spring of 1971. pieces of modern equipment, from computers to the Mariner vehicles themselves. And they were operating in the light of the theory itself. Einstein, drastically revising received thought, created the theory with a blackboard and a piece of chalk and a mind able to talk to Isaac Newton and correct him.” (W Star, 11/24/70)
International reaction to Apollo 13 spashdown: European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that TV audience at splashdown might well have been biggest TV audience of all time. In American Samoa, girls were limbering up for siva-siva dance to greet astronauts. Pilgrims prayed their thanks in India. Press item from Johannesburg, South Africa, said witch doctor named Mago-mezulu had tossed bones which told him Apollo 13 astronauts would return safely but that “these men have interfered with God and he has turned them back. This is a warning that the Americans should stop landing on the moon.” Thousands in Lima, Peru, received permission to take early lunch to watch final moments of splashdown. In Canada, Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau expressed “great relief.” Queen Elizabeth wired congratulations from England to President Nixon. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster John Cardinal Heenan said, “Thank God.” Telephone operator at U.S. Embassy in London was inundated with calls. She said, “People were sobbing with obvious relief and happiness. I just don’t know what to say to them” (Johnson, WPost, 4/18/70, Al; Arnold, NYT, 4/18/70, 1; Waldron, NYT, 4/18/70, 13)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Australian Minister for Defence Malcolm Fraser reached accord in Washington, D.C., on Australian purchase of F-111C aircraft. Delivery of aircraft would be delayed until technical difficulties were fully evaluated and corrected; Australia would be provided on lease or other reimburseable basis up to 24 F-4E Phantom aircraft in interim; alternative Australian actions to meet strike aircraft requirements remained as options. (dod Release 301-70)
International reaction to Apollo 13 emergency continued: Dr. Eugene Carson Blake, General Secretary of World Council of Churches, said in Geneva that people of world were praying for astronauts. In Santa Ninfa, Sicily, devasted by earthquake in January, Mayor Vito Bellafore said, “After the first Apollo success people did lose interest; it seemed that it was only a mechanical exercise. Now we see again the human drama, and all of our worry is for those three lonely men.” London Times said Apollo 13 would leave “scar on the American space program.” Best outcome of accident would be “greater sense of deliberation in the exploration of space.” (Lyons, NYT, 4/16/70, 1)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached tentative agreement to expand commercial airline service between New York and Moscow to permit s Pan Am and Aeroflot to land at Leningrad and Washington, D.C., AP reported. Agreement also would increase flights from two to six weekly. Diplomatic sources had reported U.S. rejection of Soviet bid to permit transcontinental flights over both nations. {NYT, 8/11/ 70,55)	.
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4024 to Observe Dec. 17 as Wright Brothers Day: “The names of Orville and Wilbur Wright symbolize American ingenuity and courage.” Their Dec. 17, 1903, flight was “forerunner of the aviation and space technology which today strengthens America’s defense and contributes to better understanding throughout the world by promoting commerce and encouraging travel.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1649)
Edgar M. Cortright, LaRC Director, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on NASA’s time for decision: “We in NASA recognize that our program no longer enjoys the number one priority but is now but one of a number of priority areas competing for scarce funds. But we also recognize that our program, in addition to its intrinsic value, sets the pace for much of the technological development of this country and promises to do so for the foreseeable future. ... We do not believe that we could long survive and prosper without this preeminent technological position. Therefore, we have to stand and fight off the stampede by other groups to acquire funds now being channeled into our national technology through NASA and the Department of Defense. It is a veritable ‘run on the bank.’ The withdrawal slips carry such catch terms as relevancy, poverty, pollution, and housing, and are designed to shame us into sacrificing our space program and national technology in the name of ‘humanity.’ I would reverse the logic and say—in the name of humanity we should maintain our national technology.” Cortright also described nasa-dot-dod experimental program to introduce v/stol aircraft into commercial use: “We have chosen the externally blown flap and augmentor wing jet stol airplanes for initial attention. Jet vtol aircraft will come later. . . . We envision a combination of v/stol and high-speed ground transportation as offering the best hope for continued mobility as the megalopolis continues to spread. We are also preparing a program to develop an Advanced Technology Experimental Transport using Whitcomb’s [Dr. Richar.d T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of LaRC’s 8-Foot Tunnels Branch] supercritical aerodynamic concepts to explore the problems of efficient cruise at Mach numbers approaching one.” (Text)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to conduct solar x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of Boeing Co. as prime contractor for Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs). Boeing was issued $16 500 000 initial increment of $169 982 522 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for Phase I, which required modification of Boeing 707 aircraft to accommodate 30-ft-wide, mushroom-shaped radome on top of fuselage aft of wings, (dod Release 564-70)
Discovery of 2500-yr-old solar observatory at ancient ceremonial center of Monte Alto near Escuintla, Guatemala, was reported in London Times dispatch printed in New York Times. Harvard Univ. anthropologist Edward M. Shook had dated observatory provisionally to 500 B.C. (NYT, 9/21/70) During seminar on threat to U.S. security, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said U-S.S.R. had “more than 300 large SS-9 icbms operational or under construction.” . Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech that usaf must modernize its strategic offensive and defensive forces to remain creditable deterrent to aggression. He was concerned over increased numbers and total payload of Soviet ICBMs and Soviet deployment of initial ABM systems and extensive abm research. Apollo 11 Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received H. H. Arnold Trophy, Air Force Assn.’s highest award, on behalf of Apollo team “responsible for achieving man’s first landing on the moon—the flight crew, industry and government.” L/G Samuel C. Phillips, SAMSO Commander and former Apollo Program Director, accepted award on behalf of Federal Government and J. L. Atwood, former NR president and chief executive officer, accepted on behalf of industry. (SBD, 9/11/70, 52;W Star, 9/9/70, A2; Getler, W Post, 9/24/70, A27; PInq, 9/24/70,2) September 22:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXIV from Plesetsk into orbit with 294-km (182.7-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; SBD, 9/28/70,118)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 407.2km (253-mi) apogee, 125.5-km (78-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 109.9° inclination and reentered Feb. 1. (Pres Rpt 71: gsfc SSR, 1/15/70:2/15/70) •
SoyuzlXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, on 10-day U.S. visit, toured Washington, D.C., and placed wreaths on graves of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Roger B. Chaffee in Arlington National Cemetry. At NASA Hq. press conference they said U.S.S.R. did not plan to put man on moon and had disbanded training program for female cosmonauts. (Valentine, W Post, 10/20/70, A2)
President Nixon signed E.O. 11523 establishing National Industrial Pollution Control Council to advise on industry programs on environmental quality. He announced appointments of Bert S. Cross, board chairman of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co., and Willard F. Rockwell, board chairman of North American Rockwell Corp., as Chairman and Vice Chairman and appointments of 53 members to Council. Council would submit, through Secretary of Commerce, specific recommendations for further action on industrial environmental pollution and consider “role it can play in helping to implement the Nation’s environmental protection program." (PD, 4/13/70, 502-4) *	Senate, by vote of 72 to 6, adopted S.R. 211, which sought agreement with U.S.S.R. on limiting offensive and defensive strategic weapons and suspension of test flights of reentry vehicles. (CP, 4/9/70, S5479-508)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc Director, welcomed 59 science and engineering professors from universities and colleges in 26 states who would participate in Summer Faculty Fellowship programs sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education. Research program from June 15 to Aug. 21 would be followed by 11-wk design program, both conducted by Auburn Univ. and Univ. of Alabama. Participants would perform individual research in msc laboratories. Work would be documented for NASA use. (msfc Release 70-115)
Stewart Alsop said in Newsweek: “The story of the failure of the Russian moon-exploration project... is interesting and rather puzzling. The first test of the Soviet space vehicle comparable to Apollo was operationally successful in March 1967. The most recent SL-12 mission—an unmanned, nonrecoverable lunar probe—aborted in February, the eleventh to do so. “The Soviet Government and the Soviet press had not a word to say about this string of failures.... But in the American intelligence community there is no doubt at all about the failures, and no doubt either that the Soviet space-exploration program has been a thoroughly miserable performance.” (Newsweek, 4/27/70)
Time magazine named “the Middle Americans” its Men and Women of the Year: “They sent Richard Nixon to the White House and two teams of astronauts to the moon. They were both exalted and afraid. The mysteries of space were nothing. . .compared with the menacing confusions of their own society.” Middle Americans admired “men like Neil Armstrong and, to some extent, Spiro Agnew.” Apollo 11 and 12 were “a quintessential adventure of American technology and daring.” Astronauts were “paragons of Middle American aspiration. Redolent of charcoal cookouts, their vocabularies an engaging mix of space jargon and ‘gee whiz,’ the space explorers gave back to Middle America a victory of its own values. It was little noted, except in Middle America where such things still matter, that among Neil Armstrong’s extraterrestrial baggage was a special badge of his college fraternity, Phi Delta Theta. He used it symbolically to establish Moon Alpha Chapter.” Some liberals had “grumbled that the Apollo program’s $26 billion would have been better spent on curing hunger or the urban malaise.” Yet Middle Americans “reveled in the lunar landings precisely because they were victories purely accomplished; in Vietnam, in the carious slums, in the polluted environment, no clear victories seemed possible any longer.” (Time, 1/5/70, 10-2)
Article by Dr. Ralph E. Lapp in New Republic criticized space transportation system and NASA participation in Feb. 4-6 classified conference at Patrick afb at which system was discussed. System, although NASA budget item, was “Air Force finesse to pave the way fora space-bomber or interceptor,” and “could rival the Safeguard abm as a waste of money,” Lapp declared. (New Republic, 2/21/70)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of William M. Huey, special consultant to faa Administrator and Deputy Administrator, to fill new position of faa Deputy Assistant Administrator for General Aviation Affairs, (faa Release 70-89) Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, said in speech at meeting: “nasa and the aerospace industry are not uniquely qualified to solve our domestic problems. The domestic problems, including those of the physical environment, are largely social, economical, and political. The need for new technology, for research and development, does exist in some areas, but certainly is not the driving force in obtaining solutions.” Solutions “must come from sociologists, economists, and politicians—not engineers and scientists. We in aerospace should. . .assist wherever and whenever we can: We have developed techniques of management that may apply; there are technological problems that we are qualified to tackle; and there are areas where space technology, and the applications of space technology, apply directly. We should assist, but we should not think or encourage others to believe that we can solve all of our domestic problems.” Space program had “one major deficiency—a gap in manned space flight after Skylab, a hiatus of four years or more when no American will be in earth orbit, or anywhere in space.” Gap had to be accepted because of lack of funding. Decision to cancel Viking or delay space shuttle would be wrong. “Viking is the major scientific experiment of the decade, and a delay in starting the shuttle would only delay the hiatus, not eliminate it.” If shuttle development was advancing when gap occurred, Dr. Low believed gap would not be “unacceptable.” NASA was building “the next generation of space vehicles, a generation that will far surpass existing capabilities to explore space, to use space, to live and work in space.” (Text) Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) told meeting: “Our space program is being viewed with increasing skepticism. Future historians will smile at the irony of our situation. Immediately following the fantastic feat of sending men to the surface of the Moon and back in safety, our national resolve in expanding this effort faced a mounting wave of domestic criticism. The irony of homo sapiens for the first time standing upright on his planet and not availing himself of his full ability to explore and experiment in the universe. The irony of not moving forward as aggressively as possible from a new beginning almost as fundamental as the beginning of life itself.” (SBD, 10/23/70, 23) Work of dot Transportation Systems Center, formerly NASA erc, was described by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe: Center was “already working on harbor advisory radars for the Coast Guard, phased array radars for the faa, crash sensors for the Federal Highway Administration, and alcohol detectors for the National Highway Safety Bureau. In communications we are studying wayside systems for tracked air-cushion vehicles and data links from ground controllers to cockpit displays. Computer systems are being adapted to automated scanning of highway traffic films and simulation of ground and air traffic patterns controllers must learn. The architecture of large, real-time computers for air traffic control systems is also under study.” (Text) JPL engineers Ronald F. Draper and Thomas R. Gavin* said technology for long-lived, unmanned spacecraft for Grand Tour flybys and separate orbiting missions to Jupiter and outer planets was well advanced for 1977 and 1979 missions. Thermoelectric outer planet spacecraft (tops) under development at jpl would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators, with nuclear energy supplying power beyond range where solar panels and batteries were effective. Scientific experiments and spacecraft control problems would be handled by self-test and repair (star) computer with sufficient backup units for 10 to 15 yrs operation, (jpl Release 564) Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director for Biomedical Engineering, announced that final two Apollo missions would land at Descartes, upland valley surrounded by craters, and Marius Hills, near Imbrium Basin. Sites had been selected because material there would furnish new data on age and origin of moon. (AP, W Star, 10/ 20/70, A4) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director, received $5000 aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for “outstanding management and leadership in directing the planning and operational control of all United States manned space flight missions from the first Mercury suborbital mission through the first Apollo lunar landing.” Dr. Maxime A. Faget, MSC Director of Engineering and Development, received $500 Spacecraft Design award for ‘‘outstanding leadership and technical ability which resulted in the conception and design of this nation’s first manned spacecraft, the Mercury capsule system.” Glynn S. Lunney, Chief of msc Flight Director’s Office, received $500 Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding performance as a flight director during the Gemini and Apollo manned space flight missions; for exceptional leadership, professional skill and personal dedication which contributed to the success of this Nation’s first manned lunar mission, and particularly during the flight of Apollo 13.” Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div. of NASA oart, received John Jefferies Award of $500 and certificate for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aerospace medical research.” Von Karman Lecture award of $1000 and travel allowance of $1500 was awarded to Dr. Erik L. Mollo-Christensen, mit meteorologist, (aiaa Release; msc Roundup, 9/25/70, 1) NASA and dot sponsored session on national aeronautical programs, with Charles J. Donlan of NASA omsf as theme chairman. Exhibit was prepared by LaRC, LeRC, and arc. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, chaired panel discussion on problems facing aeronautics in U.S., including vehicles, airport systems, and airway systems. Historical session, “American Advancement into Space,” was chaired by Royal D. Frey of usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb and Dr. Loyd Swenson of Univ. of Houston. Organized by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, session heard description by Col. John A. MacReady (usaf. Ret.) and Sally MacReady Liston of early experiments to combat known and unknown hazards of first attempts to climb into space, narrative by l/g William E. Kempner (usaf, Ret.) of flight of Explorer I into stratosphere, description by Cdr. George W. Hoover (usn, Ret.) of usn developments leading to space, and story by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf, Ret.) of XB-70. (Program; NASA Hist Off) On Oct. 24 Tass announced that Zond VIII had circled within 1120 km (696 mi) of moon, studied space, photographed moon, and was returning to earth. Spacecraft splashed down in Indian Ocean Oct. 27 and was recovered by Soviet vessel Tama. Tass said spacecraft brought back “extremely important photographs needed for studies of the geological and morphological qualities of the moon.” Zond VIIIwas eighth spacecraft in Zond series and second spacecraft to land in water; first had been Zond V (Sept. 15-22, 1968). Zond VI(Nov. 10-17, 1968) and Zond VII(Aug. 8-14, 1969) had circled moon and returned to earth with data and photos, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; Gwertzman, NYT, 10/22/70, 1; SBD, 10/28/70, 249; 10/29/ 70, 256; B Sun, 10/28/70, A5; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
Staran IV system to reduce midair collisions—by computer performing more than 40 million mathematical operations per second to predict collision courses and determine evasive maneuvers—was introduced at Washington, D.C., press conference by developer, Goodyear Aerospace Corp. System could single out aircraft on collision course and show them to air traffic controllers on viewing screen as though they were only aircraft in air. faa was studying proposal for adoption of system. (Goodyear Aerospace Corp Release)
North American Rockwell Corp. would lay off 8000 employees between April 1 and Nov. 1, Wall Street Journal quoted NR Chairman Willard F. Rockwell as saying in interview. Most reductions would be in aerospace operations at Southern California facilities. About 30% of workers to be laid off were engineers and 10% were management employees. (James, WSJ, 3/23/70)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union Message before Joint Session of Congress: “The moment has arrived to harness the vast energies and abundance of this land to the creation of a new American experience. . .more truly a reflection of the goodness and grace of the human spirit. The seventies will be a time of new beginnings, a time of exploring both on the earth and in the heavens, a time of discovery.” gnp would increase by $500 billion in next 10 yrs—increase greater than entire growth of U.S. economy from 1790 to 1950. “Our purpose in this period should not be simply better management of the programs of the past. The time has come for a new quest—a quest not for a greater quantity of what we have had but for a new quality of life in America.” President proposed total reform of welfare system; assessment and reform of institutions of government at Federal, state, and local level; and “reforms which will expand the range of opportunities for all Americans.” Greatest question of seventies was “shall we surrender to our surroundings or shall we make our peace with nature and begin to make reparations for the damage we have done to our air, to our land, and to our water?” President would propose to Congress $10 billion nationwide clean waters program “to put modern municipal waste treatment plants in every place in America where they are needed to make our waters clean again.. .now.” He called for further advances in engine design and fuel composition for automobile, “our worst polluter of the air,” and new rural environment to reverse migration to urban centers. He also planned balanced FY 1971 budget to help stop rise of cost of living. . I see a new America as we celebrate our 200th anniversary 6 years from now. I see an America in which we have abolished hunger, provided the means for every family in the nation to obtain a minimum income, made enormous progress in providing better housing, faster transportation, improved health, and superior education. . . . I see an America in which we have made great strides in stopping pollution of our air, cleaning up our water, opening up our parks, continuing to explore in space. Most important, I see an America at peace with all the nations of the world. “This is not an impossible dream. The goals are within our reach. . . . Let it not be recorded that we were the first American generation that had the means but not the vision to make this dream come true.” (PD, 1/26/70,58-66)	.
U.S. observed national day of prayer in gratitude for safe return of Apollo 13 astronauts. In New York 150 persons attended sunset service at Temple Emanuel. Invocation of gratitude was added to Sunday mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral, expressing hope that space exploration would contribute to peace and welfare of mankind. Greek Orthodox Primate of North and South America, Archbishop Iakovos, delivered special message for faith’s Palm Sunday observances. He said he believed “God permitted the agony of these last four days” to aid men in “overcoming the temporal with the spiritual, the temporary with the eternal.” Church and interfaith councils in St. Petersburg, Fla., made combined appeal for prayer in area churches and kept chapels open during day. In Marietta, Ohio, Jaycees completed petition containing 50 000 signatures, opposing efforts to ban prayers in broadcasts from space. Petition was later presented to space officials in Washington, D.C. Gov. Nelson D. Rockefeller proclaimed “day of prayer and thanksgiving” in New York State. Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.) said crisis refuted claims that space exploration dealt fatal blow to religion. “The manner in which great numbers of Americans attended special prayer services. . . has been inspirational.” J. F. Meredith, treasurer of Central State Conference of the Seventh Day Adventists, said in Kansas City, “We feel that this points up the fact that despite all of man’s knowledge and ingenuity there is still a supreme being in control of things, and that we have to trust him.” (NYT, 4/20/70,28; 4/19/70, 54)
President Nixon, in White House ceremony, presented Atomic Pioneers Award to Dr. Vannevar Bush for his ‘‘exceptional contributions to the national security as Director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development in marshalling the resources of American science for national defense during World War II and for his pioneering leadership as a Presidential advisor in fostering the establishment of new Federal agencies, including the National Science Foundation, and the Atomic Energy Commission, which have made possible the unprecedented growth of scientific research and development in the last two decades.” President also presented Award to Dr. James B. Conant for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Chairman of the National Defense Research Committee in overseeing the successful development of weapons systems, including the atomic bomb, during World War II and for his pioneering leadership in the nation’s atomic energy program after the war as Chairman of the Committee on Atomic Energy of the Joint Research and Development Board and as a member of General Advisory Committee to the Atomic Energy Commission.” President presented third Atomic Pioneers Award to l/g Leslie R. Groves (USA-Ret) for his “exceptional contributions to the national security as Commanding General of the Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army, in developing the world’s first nuclear weapons during World War II, and for his pioneering efforts in establishing administrative patterns adopted by the Atomic Energy Commission in effecting the use of atomic energy for military and peaceful purposes.” (PD, 3/2/70, 279-80)
Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, delivered graduation address before Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards afb, Calif.: “To the man in the street, we may have made it look too easy to prevent nuclear wars for more than 20 years, to deter or contain limited wars, and even to put men on the moon. The average American may well be bored by the third moon landing, but the Soviet planners—who know exactly what magnitude of effort is involved—do not get bored. They see us researching and developing new strategic and tactical weapons; they see us producing the largest airplane in the world and developing a new superiority fighter and advanced bomber; they see us committed to a larger and faster supersonic transport. And, knowing full well that they had a significant head start, they see us on the moon—in living color.” They “know in the Kremlin—far better than most of our own laymen know—the time, the effort, the skill and dedication, and the vast commitment of resources all this requires. To them, what we do does not look easy— and in any contest of endurance, it must by now have become obvious that our far greater productivity must inevitably prevail.” (Text)
USAF K-30, one of largest aerial reconnaissance cameras, had been retired to Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, AFSC announced. Camera, which had more than 20 yrs service, measured 0.9 by 1.4 by 1.5 m (3 by 414 by 5 ft), weighed 300 kg (665 lbs), and used 254-cm (100-in) focal-length optical system, (afsc Release 153.70)
Sixty-second anniversary of Wright brothers’ first successful flight. At ceremonies in Kitty Hawk, N.C.—sponsored by naa, Air Force Assn., and First Flight Society—portraits of aviation pioneers Igor I.	Sikorsky and Wiley Post were added to Kitty Hawk’s First Flight Shrine. Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio, honored Robert E. Gross, founder of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; l/G Ira C. Baker, Eighth Air Force Commander during World War II; Alexander P. de Seversky, military aviation expert; and Juan T. Trippe, founder of Pan American World Airways. At annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Aero Club of Washington, Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy was presented to C. R. Smith, former President of American Airlines and Secretary of Commerce under President Lyndon B. Johnson, (naa News, 1/71, 1; Varbor-ough, W Star, 12/16/70, A18; Flatley, W Star; 12/18/70, C5)
Authorization to proceed with B-l Advanced Strategic Bomber development programs was issued by Deputy Secretary of Defense David M. Packard in memo to Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. It would be “several years” before production decision would be made. “Factors to be considered . . . will include the progress and success of the engineering development program, the progress of the salt talks, and the relationship of the program to these talks.” Dr. Seamans announced selection of North American Rockwell Corp. and General Electric Co. as airframe and propulsion contractors for engineering development of bomber. Total estimated cost of airframe contract was $1 350 814 739 exclusive of avionics. Total estimated propulsion cost was $406 654000. (Text; dod Release 47970)
Air Line Pilots Assn, had asked U.S. District Court of Appeals for District of Columbia to stop simultaneous landings on intersecting runways at National Airport in Washington, D.C., Friendship Airport in Baltimore, and other airports around U.S., Washington Evening Star reported, alpa said procedures authorized by faa in April lowered safety standards. (Kadis, W Star, 8/5/70, F9)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, confirmed to press in Washington, D.C., that he had proposed George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for post of NASA Administrator being vacated by Dr. Thomas O. Paine on Sept. 15. Rep. Fulton said he had made recommendation in telegram to President Nixon July 31. (Lan-nan, W Star, 8/31/70, Al)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 503.7-km (313-mi) apogee, 484.4-km (301-mi) perigee, 94.4-min period, and 74.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt71;GSFCSSR, 8/31/70)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research, described Soviet Tu-144 as “striking” supersonic aircraft “every bit as attractive” as Anglo-French Concorde, during luncheon meeting of Aero Club of Washington and Aviation-Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C. Armstrong said visit to Tu-144 hangar had been highlight of Moscow visit. He said Tu-144’s four engines were similar to those on U.S. B-70 bomber and interior resembled McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Tu-144 pilots had told him aircraft had flown at twice speed of sound and handled well at all speeds. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/11/70, A3)
Lend-lease of quarters and equipment aboard U.S. earth-orbiting space station of 1970s to help foreign scientists study terrain of underdeveloped countries was advocated by Dr. Kraft A. Ehricke, Chief Scientific Adviser for Advanced Programs at North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., before press in Los Angeles. (Miles, LA Times. 2/19/70)
Permanent injunction to bar sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to EDP Technology, Inc., private research company, was issued by Justice Harold P. Kelly of New York State Supreme Court. He ruled Cornell should continue to operate laboratory and its work should be restricted to public research projects. (.NYT, 3/5/70, 40C)
F-14, “first completely new American fighter plane. . .since the XF4H1—prototype of the F4 Phantom,” would “skim down the runway” at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. before end of January 1971, Washington Sunday Star said, usn would attempt to buy 710 F-14s over next decade at $8 billion including r&d costs. Aircraft would have titanium wings. It was first time any manufacturer had used as much as 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of titanium in aircraft production. (Kelly, W Star, 4/26/70, A7)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vanden-berg afb on one Thor-Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 225.9-km (140.4-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 82.9° inclination and reentered Dec. 11. Second entered orbit with 511-km (317.5-mi) apogee, 486-km (302-mi) perigee, 94.5min period, and 83.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; 12/31/70; Baltimore News-American, 11/19/70)'
Exhibit of 23 paintings of space subjects by Chesley Bonestell opened at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York. (Am Mu-seum-Hayden Planetarium Release)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin sent message to President Nixon: “We follow with concern the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 13 in which failure developed. I want to inform you the Soviet government has given orders to all citizens and members of the armed forces to use all necessary means to render assistance in the rescue of the American astronauts.” Italian Defense Ministry ordered Italian armed forces to be ready to give immediate help as needed if Apollo 13 splashed down in Mediterranean. Reuters reported that U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson pledged help of Royal Navy ships for possible recovery work and that French President Georges J. Pompidou made similar offer of his navy, (upi, W Star, 4/15/70; Reuters, WPost, 4/16/70)
Uhuru (Explorer XL]I) Small Astronomy Satellite was (aimdied into an equatorial orbit by Italy Iron the San Marco launch platform off the coast of Kenya, East Africa, on Kenya’s Independence Day. “Lfhuru" was the Swahili word for “freedom." Boosted by a four-stage Scout vehicle to map x-ray sources both within and beyond the Milky Way Galaxy, the satellite was the first launched for the United States by another country. At left Mrs. Marjorie Townsend, project manager, discussed satellite performance with a colleague during p re flight tests at Goddard Space Flight Center. During first day of operation Uhuru was expected to collect more data than had been obtained with sounding rockets in past eight years. Satellite’s Jong observing time, rather than the few minutes for sounding rockets, would permit observation of x-ray sources from 30 to 50 times fainter than those observed thus far, probably increasing number of observed x-ray sources from 540 to several hundred. Uhuru was first in series of three explorers in Small Astronomy Satellite program to survey sky above earth’s atmosphere and identify x-ray, gamma-ray, UV, and infrared sources. It was first U.S. satellite launched by another country. Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team, trained at Wallops Station, conducted assembly, checkout, and launch services on cost-reimbursable basis, sasb would be launched in October 1971 and SAS-C in December 1972. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 70-203)
NASA sources quoted by New York Times said Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov—due in Washington, D.C., Oct. 18 for 10-day NASA tour—had not yet accepted NASA invitation to visit ksc. Acceptance would signify thaw in U.S.-U.S.S.R. space relations, since there was tacit understanding that U.S.S.R. would have to reciprocate with invitation to tour Soviet launch facilities. (NYT, 10/14/70)
Gen. George S. Brown—former Commander of Seventh Air Force and Deputy Commander for Air Operations, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (macv)—assumed command of afsc. He succeeded Gen. James Ferguson, who retired Aug. 31. (afsc Release 246.70)
Arthur S. Flemming Award was presented by Downtown Jaycees of Washington, D.C., to 10 young men for outstanding and meritorious service in Federal Government, including Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and Eugene F. Kranz, Chief of MSC’s Flight Control Div. (WPost, 2/16/70, B6)	.
Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., was sworn in as OST Director and Science Adviser to President Nixon in Washington, D.C., ceremony. President Nixon said, “This nation needs to strengthen its support of basic ,science so that the practical applications which will benefit us all can be forthcoming.” (PD, 7/21/70,1213-4)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman, addressed International Joint Conference of American Geographical Society and American Div. of World Academy of Art and Science in New York: “It is obvious that for some people science and technology are among the best scapegoats of the time. They are said to be the cause of most of our ills today. By conquering disease and extending life they have been responsible for an explosion of population. By increasing productivity and raising living standards they have been responsible for depleting resources and polluting nature. By expanding knowledge and emphasizing efficiency, they have been responsible for deflating myths and diminishing man. And by placing enormous power in the hands of man they have brought him to the brink of his own destruction.” Science had been “victim of its own single-minded success” in going “from the broad and general philosophy from which it origi
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Jr., one of seven original Mercury astronauts, was resigning effective July 31 to become President of National Exhibits, Inc., and member of Board and engineering consultant to Intersales, Inc., in Washington, D.C., NASA announced. Cooper had participated in Faith 7 mission launched May 15, 1963, and eight-day Gemini V mission launched Aug. 21, 1965. (NASA Release 70-103)
Washington Airways, Inc., had told CAB it was abandoning its application for helicopter route approval between downtown Washington, D.C:, and Washington’s three major airports, Washington Post reported. District zoning commission had refused to act on request by consortium of nine airlines to amend zoning law to permit rooftop helipads. (WPost,9/22/70, Cl)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Apollo 13 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., at National Press Club Luncheon in Washington, D.C., denied interest in running for office of Senator from Wisconsin: “I’m a public servant and I intend to be that way.” He hoped to devote “next two years at least” to helping develop strong, well-balanced space program. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/30/70)
AP interview of Dr. Charles H. Townes, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist and Nobel laureate, on possibility of life in outer space was published in Washington Evening Star: “It is clear that we already have found most of the molecules that biologists have postulated are necessary for the beginning of life.” Scientists were also finding particles of dust in “interstellar smog” that were similar to earth rocks. “.. .we can see in space many of the materials from which planets are made and which life needs to begin.” (W Star, 11/ 4/70, A2) political terms. Delegation would visit Washington, D.C., at undecided date for further talks. (Reuters, NYT, 11/6/70, C9)
Presidential Management Improvement Award was presented to Van A.Wente of NASA Information Systems and Development Branch for conception, planning, design, and implementation of NASA recon computer system for on-line retrieval of scientific, technical, and management information. Presentation was made at Presidential Awards Dinner in Washington, D.C. (NASA Org & Mgmt Off)
Enrique G. Regueiro, who broadcast Apollo missions in Latin America, estimated his audience at 100 million out of total population of 190 million. At Washington, D.C., dinner party he said he felt “people in Latin America are more excited about these moon flights than the people of the United States.” (McCardle, WPost, 4/3/70, B3)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
Aerobee 150MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM-20 booster, carried Princeton Univ. payload to 168.9-km (105.0-mi) altitude to obtain uv spectra of hot atmospheres of stars. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and unique uv photo of comet Tago-Sato-Kosaka was recorded. (NASA Rpt srl)
naa President Frederick B. Lee announced selection of C. R. Smith, former Secretary of Commerce and President of American Airlines, to receive Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Smith would be honored at annual memorial dinner Dec. 17 for outstanding contributions to aviation over four decades. (W Star, 9/16/70, A2)
Inter-Academy Exchange program of nas and Soviet Academy of Sciences, renewed and broadened for 1970 and 1971, was signed. Agreement, negotiated in Washington, D.C., was latest in series of two-year agreements begun in 1959. It was retroactive to Jan. 1, 1970. Pact provided for 180 man-months of study in U.S. by scientists designated by Soviet Academy and for 180 man-months of research in U.S.S.R. by scientists selected by nas. It also contained
Cornell Univ. team of scientists headed by Dr. Carl Sagan had sent shock waves through mixture of methane, ethane, ammonia, and water vapor—gases which simulated “air” on earth four billion years ago—Christian Science Monitor reported. Results, which showed amino acids in great abundance, indicated protein molecules (building blocks of organic life) might have been shocked into existence by thunder and impact of meteors in earth’s primitive atmosphere. Protein molecules evolved from amino acids. (CSM, • 4/4/70) April5: Countdown for NASA’s Apollo 13 manned lunar landing mission, scheduled for launch April 11, began at ksc despite serious problem in helium tank. NASA spokesman said super-cold helium was heating too rapidly, suggesting possibility of leak or contaminants in system. (Wilford, NYT, 4/6/70, 1; WPost, 4/6/70, A4)
Charles Scribner’s Sons published first two volumes of 13-volume Dictionary of Scientific Biography, first comprehensive biographical reference work covering science exclusively. Project was under auspices of American Council of Learned Societies and had nsf financial support. (Whitman, NYT, 7/11/70; Charles Scribner’s Sons)
Former Astronaut Michael Collins was sworn in as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in Washington, D.C. He would be responsible for State Dept, relations with U.S. public, particularly youth. (State Dept Release 3)
Dr. James F. Danielli, Univ. of Buffalo biologist, in Washington, D.C., press conference called for “watchdog agency” to steer scientists clear of experiments in germ warfare or genetic engineering that might change fundamental nature of man for the worst. Dr. Danielli was head of Buffalo Univ. team that synthesized single-celled organisms from component parts of other similar organisms [see Nov. 12]. (Randal, W Star, 12/9/70, A21)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, spoke on future of national space program before aiaa in Washington, D.C. He said he thought if U.S. “can still afford foreign travel, still afford Scotch whiskey, can still afford to buy our wives Italian shoes, it is mainly due to the space program.” Unprecedented growth in U.S. economy during first decade of space could have been accomplished only “by such programs as demanding as the landing of men on the Moon.” Endeavor focused science and technology “into a direction that raises the entire plateau of knowledge and the plateau of engineering to enable you to do better things.” (Program; SBD, 12/4/70,133)
Dr. Louis Morton, professor of history at Dartmouth College and Chairman of American History Assn. Committee on the Historian in Federal Government, had been named Chairman of NASA Historical Advisory Committee for 1970-71, NASA announced. Dr. Morton was formerly with U.S. Army Office of Military History. Other members of NASA Historical Advisory Committee were Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, Director, Museum of History and Technology, Smithsonian Institution; Prof. David Bushnell, Univ. of Florida; Prof. A. Hunter Dupree, Brown Univ.; Prof. Melvin Kranzberg, Case Western Reserve Univ.; Prof. Rodman W. Paul, Cal Tech; Robert L. Perry, rand Corp. Economics Div.; and Prof. John B. Rae, Harvey Mudd College. Executive Secretary of Committee was Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. (NASA Release 70-78)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was being awarded $1 098 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for operation, maintenance, and improvement of radar-target-scatter facility to obtain characteristic radar data of signal return from various aerospace vehicles. Work would be managed by Air Force Missile Development Center and would be conducted at wsmr. (dod Release 561-70)
Dr. James G. Allen, professor of history at Univ. of Colorado, authority on history of space, and NASA consultant, died of heart ailment at age 69. He had authored several books and articles on space history and had received special citation from American Astronautical Society for work on historical and philosophical background of space age. (Boulder Daily Camera, 9/19/70)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Canadian Minister of Transport Donald C. Jamieson agreed in Washington, D.C., to exchange information on problems of automobile and aviation safety and pollution common to both countries, (dot Release 2670)
usaf launched experimental reentry vehicle down afwtr from Vandenberg afb. Launch was part of Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) program, (upi, NYT, 6/10/70, 6)
Termination of manned space flight within three years was urged at Washington, D.C., press conference by four Senators and space scientists Dr. James A. Van Allen of Umv. of Iowa and Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said, “I want to shift spending from space extravaganzas to needy programs.” Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.) said, “The space shuttle. , .should not be allowed to go forward until the proper role of manned versus, unmanned exploration has received a fuller examination than it has to date.” Both Senators, with Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.) and Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), favored continuation of four remaining Apollo flights and three-mission Skylab program but called for ending manned flight on their completion. Dr. Van Allen advocated unmanned space program after Skylab that would devote two thirds of its funds to direct applications of space with remainder devoted to “scientific experiments to examine the solar system.” Dr. Gold said, “If we fritter away our limited resources on unwanted further demonstrations of manned flights [U.S.S.R.] may, with much smaller means, get way ahead in all the areas that really count.” He predicted that, if space station was built, it would be “focal point of anti-science and anti-intellectual-ism which is very much in predominance today.” (Lyons, NYT, 10/7/70,21)
Christian Science Monitor editorial discussed future TV projection from foreign countries by comsat: “Do people want such invasions? Suppose the Russians or the Chinese loft communications satellites overhead which could beam propagandist television programs directly into American receivers?” Direct foreign-initiated TV broadcasts “could allow the viewer to see many more of the world’s events directly as they are happening. The United States could participate in a worldwide agreement on the interchange of import programming via satellite. But this electronic proliferation has its complications, of which we should be early aware.” (CSM, 8/4/70)
Wristwatch calibrated on lunar time system developed by Kenneth L. Franklin, Assistant Chairman of American Museum-Hayden Planetarium, had been devised by Helbros Watches Div. of Elgin National Industries, Wall Street Journal reported. Watch used three hands of conventional earth watch plus “window” telling “lune” time, based on fact that time from sunrise to sunrise on moon was equal to 29.53 earth days. Franklin called this period “lunation” and divided it into 30 “lunes” each equal to about 24 earth hours. Each lune was devided into 24 “lunours” about an earth-hour long. (WSJ, 4/8/70)
Pan American World Airways’ Boeing 747 arrived at London Airport after first passenger transatlantic crossing. Aircraft, world’s largest passenger plane, carried 361 passengers—mostly staff—on 6-hr 30min flight from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. First regularly scheduled passenger flight had been set for Jan. 21. (NYT, 1/13/70,73)
Preliminary results of uncompleted proof-test program had shown “F111	fleet will be structurally sound, and that it will indeed perform its intended mission,” Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee. (Text)
USMC Sikorsky S-65 helicopter set record for intercity travel in 1-hr 17-min 11-sec flight between Wall Street heliport in New York and Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D. C. Flight was organized by Pan American World Airways and Sikorsky Aircraft Corp. to demonstrate feasibility of inter-inner-city helicopter transportation. (Cushing, WPost, 6/10/70, D10)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew completed 12-nation Asiatic goodwill tour which began Dec. 26, 1969. On return to Washington, D.C., he was accompanied by Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford and wife, who had joined tour at Bangkok, Thailand, Jan. 3. Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan and wife had accompanied Agnew party as far as Afghanistan and had returned to U.S. Jan. 9. During tour Vice President distributed chips from Apollo 11 moon rock to government representatives and passed out foreign flags that had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (Off of VP; Naughton, NYT, 1/13/70, C3)
In letter to Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, Elmer B. Staats, U.S. Comptroller General, recommended that award of ATS-f and ATS-G contract to General Electric Co. be reconsidered because of ambiguity in NASA’s instruction to competitors and one-week extension granted GE to submit its revised proposal. “It is our [gao’s] opinion that the established award selection procedures were not followed and that the procedures which were followed were defective.” Within two hours of receipt of GAO recommendation, Dr. Paine issued statement: “On April 9 I requested the GAO to conduct a review of the events leading to the selection of the General Electric Co. rather than the Fairchild Hiller Corp. to build two Applications Technology Satellites. “The General Accounting Office has reported to me that the Fairchild Hiller Corp. may not have been accorded an equal opportunity to submit a winning bid because of a one-week extension granted to General Electric who turned in the lower bid. “At the time the award was made, this time disparity was not known to the selecting officials. “NASA will therefore reopen the bidding to Fairchild Hiller and General Electric in strict accordance with our procurement regulations.” (CR, 7/9/70, SI0975-7; NASA Release 70-119; Text) Daniel J. Fink, Vice President and General Manager of General Electric Co. Space Div., issued statement in Washington, D.C., and Philadelphia, Pa. Conclusion of gao report “seems to rest on the single detail that Fairchild’s proposal was submitted one week earlier than ours. .. .both parties had the opportunity to inform NASA when they could submit their proposal and both parties responded accordingly. The Fairchild implication that this difference in time could have been used unfairly by General Electric by our learning our competitor’s price and changing ours is a shocking allegation. No such ‘leak’ occurred, and the gao report specifically states that there is no evidence to support that allegation.” Fink said facts were “that both parties competed hard for this important space program which has the potential of contributing greatly to our well being in this country and in several foreign countries where this communications satellite will be used.” (Text)
Local 9 of American Federation of Technical Engineers, afl-cio affiliate, had filed suit in District Court in Washington, D.C., against nasa to compel space agency to fire contract employees before it fired civil service employees, Washington Post reported. Union attorney William Peer had said NASA fired civil service employees and then hired other workers through private contractors. NASA had denied that it had added private contract employees to payroll following Aug. 17 notice of dismissal issued to 51 civil service employees. (Latham, WPost, 8/26/70)
U.S. space program was “in a kind of limbo, waiting, really, to be reborn and reconstituted,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and . Space Digest. As Apollo stretched out, “NASA space planners are already working toward the first launch in 1972 of Skylab, which is really the unheralded beginning of the long-awaited US manned space-station program.” (AF/SD, 7/70,60-4)
Aircraft arresting system of barrier net linked to energy absorbers to prevent transport aircraft from taxiing off runway was undergoing final tests at Edwards afb, Calif., AP reported. Net developed by Aerazur Constructions Aeronautique of Paris and energy absorbers developed by All American Engineering Co. could be available to airports in one year. Installation sufficient to stop aircraft of DC-8 size would cost $500 000 to $600 000; tandem system durable enough to stop Boeing 747 at end of runway would cost about $800 000. Major airports could require 10 such devices—one at each end of runway. (Huntsville News, 12/2/70)
U.S. District Court Judge John H. Pratt, in Washington, D.C., refused to order release of top-secret report prepared by team headed by physicist Richard L. Garwin at request of President Nixon and said to be critical of SST. Judge Pratt dismissed suit brought by Sierra Club, Friends of Earth, and cities of New York and Boston to compel release of report. (Ungar, WPost, 8/22/70, A3)
First inflight interception of ICBM by ABM was successfully conducted by dod, demonstrating use of Safeguard ABM system to defend U.S. offensive missile sites. Minuteman I test vehicle, launched from Vandenberg AFB, was detected by prototype missile site radar at Kwajalein Atoll in Pacific, which controlled launch of Spartan missile and flight of Spartan to intercept point outside atmosphere. Range instrumentation, which determined successful intercept, indicated Spartan’s final stage (which in operational situation would carry nuclear warhead) had flown close enough to nosecone to have caused its destruction. (DODPIO; NYT, 9/1/70,18)
North American Rockwell Corp. received applications from more than 1000 unemployed aerospace workers during week following June 5 announcement that NR had been awarded $1.35-billion USAF B-l bomber contract. (Wright, NYT, 6/10/70,63)
Agreement to ensure that space transportation system (STS) would be of maximum utility to both NASA and DOD was signed in Washington, D.C., by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. STS was to provide U.S. with “economical capability for delivering payloads of men, equipment, supplies, and other spacecraft to and from space by reducing operating costs an order of magnitude below those of present systems.” Program would include international participation and use. NASA would manage STS development, with project generally unclassified. STS would consist of “earth-to-orbit space shuttle.” Agreement established nasa-usaf sts Committee to conduct continuing review of STS program and recommend steps to achieve “system that meets DOD and NASA requirements.” Recommendations would include, but not be limited to, “development and operational aspects, technology status and needs, resource considerations, and interagency relationships.” (Text)
MSFC announced award of $4 435 275 contract modification to North American Rockwell Corp. for changes in seven Saturn V 2nd stages, S-II-9 through S-II-15. Work, which included testing and replacing components that caused corrosion, would be completed by March 31, 1973. (MSFC Release 70-79)
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory scientists Dr. John W. Gofman and Dr. Arthur Tamplin were engaged in “bitter, name-calling battle” with aec while nuclear power industry “watched uneasily,” Donald Rothberg said in Washington Post. Dr. Gofman and Dr. Tamplin claimed Federal standards allowed too much exposure to radiation and that if every American had maximum permissible dose of radiation, cancer deaths would increase by 32 000 per year, aec said claim was unfounded and incorrect. Watching debate was power industry, “with its 17 nuclear plants now generating electricity, 47 under construction and 48 more proposed.” (WPost, 7/23/70, Al)
SoyuzIXCosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Los Angeles with Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to tour Cal Tech and visit Disneyland. They would leave for San Francisco Oct. 26, after touring arc. (LA Times, 10/25/70; ARC Astro-gram, 10/22/70,1)
Sen. William B. Spong, Jr. (D-Va.), introduced S.J.R. 221, providing for construction of monument in Washington, D.C., commemorating Apollo 11 lunar landing. Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/16/70, SI 1535)
essa announced two-year program to complete U.S.-Canadian satellite triangulation program—highly accurate geodetic-survey network with stations 1000 to 1300 km (600 to 800 mi) apart linking Canada with Alaska and lower 48 states. Program had been initiated in 1964 with Echo I and II balloon satellites and suspended when June 23, 1966, launch of Pageos I signaled start of worldwide program in which simultaneous observations from 41 portable camera stations would be used to construct three-dimensional geodetic reference system. System would measure distance between two surface points on earth 4800 km (3000 mi) apart with 9.8-m (32-ft) accuracy. Pageos /would be photographed from U.S. and Canadian sites in new program to enable land surveyors and engineers to start their surveys from geodetic control points with greater accuracy. Completion of North American network could give measurements with accuracy of 1:1 000000, comparable to error of 305 mm (12 in) in approximately 322 km (200 mi). (ESSA Release 70-46)
At NAS annual meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institute geophysical laboratory and editor Of Science, said cutbacks in Government research funds during last five years had dealt devasting blow to U.S. colleges and reduced Nation’s total scientific research effort by at least 30%. If cutbacks continued, U.S. would become “second-class nation in science.” Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Harvey Brooks said surge of science funding in Japan, Western Europe, and U.S.S.R. had cost U.S. its research lead in astronomy, radioastronomy, biology, and physical and organic chemistry. It was doubtful U.S. would ever regain supremacy it once enjoyed in virtually every scientific field. (Kirkman, W News, 4/28/70,20)
NASA officials attended opening of art exhibit by Robert Rauschenberg at Fendrick Gallery in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included 25 lithographs from “Stoned Moon” series. Rauschenberg had been one of artists invited by NASA to witness Apollo 11 launch and convey impressions of first lunar landing mission. (Richard, W Post, 11/30/70, Dl ; Fendrick Gallery)
Chairman Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., was named Chief Executive Officer and Robert Anderson was elected President and Chief Operating Officer of North American Rockwell Corp. by board of directors at annual meeting. (NAR News, 2/20/70,1) Two neurophysiological experiments would evaluate central nervous system responses. First, human vestibular experiment would extend studies initiated during Gemini program to investigate effects of weightlessness and subgravity states on perception and organization of personal and extrapersonal space and establish integrity of vestibular apparatus during prolonged weightlessness. In second, electroencephalogram (eeg) would determine efFects of prolonged space flight on patterns of sleep and wakefulness and assess attention levels in task performance and work-rest cycles. Energy expenditure in space would be measured for first time by comparison of metabolic rate during rest, during calibrated exercise, and while performing operational tasks. (Testimony)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites on one Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb. One entered orbit with 226.9-km (141.0-mi) apogee, 224.7-km (139.7-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 88.4° inclination and reentered March 26. Second entered orbit with 506.9-km (315.0-mi) apogee, 439.4-km (273.0-mi) perigee, 94.0min period, and 88.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 4/31/70; Pres Rpt 71)
USAF science policy was outlined by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development: “Air Force will still support long-range, fundamental research, but in fewer areas than previously.” Research “in aerodynamics, aeropropulsion, and structures will always be directly related to the Air Force missions.” Research “in solid state physics and chemistry will be directly related to the Air Force mission as long as we need new electronic systems and lighter, higher temperature materials. But research in fields such as astrophysics (other than solar phenomena that do affect our operations) is probably permanently removed from the Air Force program.” (Testimony)
ata President Stuart G. Tipton testified on attitude of U.S. airlines toward SST development before Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation: “Airline support of the SST research program is bottomed on the belief that in the course of the prototype program, solutions to [SST’s] problems will be found. The airlines have supported this belief in American ingenuity with over $50 million in risk capital. . . .” Airlines “will insist that these problems be solved before they will be ready to operate sst’s.” (Testimony)
Last test model of usaf Minuteman III missile was launched from underground silo at etr toward South Atlantic target, ending 28-mo development program. Missile was 17th Minuteman III launched from etr since Aug. 16, 1968; 15 had been launched under simulated operational conditions at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Tests at Vanden-berg would continue, (upi, W Star, 12/14/70, A6) December 15:	U.S.S.R.’s Venus VII, launched Aug. 17, reached atmosphere of Venus. At 8:02 am Moscow time (12:02 am est) orbital module and descent package separated, Tass announced. After aerodynamic braking of descent package, parachute system was deployed, antennas unfolded, and transmission begun. Data was transmitted for 35 min during descent. Soviet scientists later reported surface of Venus had been calculated to have temperature of 773 K (500° C; 932°F) and pressure of 100 atmospheres. On Jan. 26, 1971, Tass announced Venus VII had landed and had continued transmitting data from surface fpr 23 min. Longest survival time of three previous Venus landing missions attempted by U.S.S.R. had been 94 min, recorded for Venus IVOct. 18, 1967. (Sov Rpt, 12/20/ 70; 2/2/71; SBD, 12/21/70; 204; O’Toole, WPost, 12/16/70, A25)
U.S. intention to begin deployment of mirv missiles in June was disclosed by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., at closed session of Senate Armed Services Committee, AP reported. (CTrib, 3/11/70,18)	_
Chicago Daily News said student antiwar demonstrations at Univ. of Illinois in Urbana might have caused dod to reevaluate decision to locate world’s largest computer—Illiac IV—on University campus. Sources in Washington, D.C., had said dod was reevaluating whether to locate computer center in Urbana. Computer, being funded by dod at cost of more than $24 million, would be used two thirds time for military work, such as plotting operations of U.S. missile defense systems under enemy attack. During remaining time, computer would be available for academic work by university scientists. Computer had been target of student and faculty protests at Urbana since Nov. 15, 1969, when university newspaper revealed it would be built on campus. (C Daily News, 5/14/70,5)
NASA announced appointment of Dale D. Myers, Vice President and General Manager of North American Rockwell Corp.’sJSpace Shuttle Program, as NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective Jan. 12. Myers would succeed Dr. George E. Mueller, who left NASA Dec. 10, 1969. (NASA Release 70-4)
European space accomplishments were reviewed in Science Journal: ESRO was evolving as center for scientific and applications satellites and was interested in developing satellites for meteorology, navigation, and air traffic control. Less successful had been European efforts to obtain independence in satellite launching through eldo. U.S. had introduced new element into European deliberations by inviting collaboration in post-Apollo program. “So far the U.S. State Department has ruled against the purchase of American launch vehicles for European commercial ventures, such as the regional communications satellite. This could be changed by cooperation in the post-Apollo programme. Europe could reserve the right to buy boosters for any non-military application.” Cost might be problem since “second league nations together spend approximately $300 million a year on space—an order of magnitude less than the United States and probably the Soviet Union.” (Gatland, Science Journal, 7/70,77-80)
dod announced usaf contract awards: $1 600 000 definitive contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for procurement of spare parts for Titan IIIC booster and $1 841 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for r&d on Air Force Satellite Control Facility, (dod Release 144-70)
Development of world’s most powerful continuous-beam laser, with energy output capable of driving sports car, was described by Dr. Edward T. Gerry of Avco Research Lab. during annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York. Laser could produce 30 kw of power in narrow beam and 60 kw in divergent beam. Values were triple those of most powerful continuous-beam lasers in operation. Avco laser resembled rocket engine. Nitrogen-carbon dioxide gas was heated to 1900 K (3000°F) in one chamber and shot through nozzle into second chamber at supersonic speed. Carbon dioxide molecules emitted photons which mirrors focused into beam of light emitted from chamber. At news conference following meeting, scientists denied lasers were being built for use as “death rays.” Wayne State Univ. scientist Dr. Alexander J. Glass said scientists in U.S., U.S.S.R., and France were developing increasingly larger lasers that produced 100 kw of light energy in few trillionths of second. (Lyons, NYT, 4/30/ 70,20)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Princeton Univ. experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Successful heating of portion of upper atmosphere with high-powered radio beam was reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco by Dr. William F. Utlaut, Deputy Director of noaa Institute of Telecommunication Sciences at Boulder, Colo. Two-million-watt beam had raised temperatures by 30% over 4300-km (2700-mi) area 298 km (185 mi) above earth. Heated zone had expanded and emitted more infrared light than usual and radio echoes became unusually fuzzy. Dr. Utlaut said understanding of these phenomena could have bearing on quality of commercial and defense communications, (upi, NYT, 12/10/70)
Coalition Against the SST—23 groups including Sierra Club, Friends of the Earth, and United Auto Workers Union—urged Federal law banning SST sonic booms over U.S. Coalition spokesman, Dr. Karl M. Ruppenthal of Stanford Univ., told Washington, D.C., news conference Government officials ‘‘state that no annoying overland flights are contemplated, but they refuse to cooperate when meaningful noise legislation is proposed.” (Cohn, WPost, 7/21/70, A2)
U.S.S.R. had made first tests of warheads on SS-11 icbm, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird reported at Washington, D.C., press conference. Laird also announced decision to establish all-service Blue Ribbon Action Commission to assist in implementing dod decisions in response to recommendations of Blue Ribbon Defense Panel [see July 1]. (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Michael Collins attended unveiling of painting “Crew of Apollo 11” by Ronald Anderson of Dallas, Tex., at National Portrait Galley in Washington, D.C. Oil painting would be presented to Smithsonian Institution. (AP, W Star, 7/27/70, B4)	.
Interview with Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering, was reported by Air Force and Space Digest. Dr. Foster believed U.S. held considerable lead over U.S.S.R. in basic space technology and application of that technology to military requirements. U.S. programs in communications, mapping, warning, surveillance, weather, and other activities related to military had been extremely rewarding. In manned military space operations, “we will come to realize that there are military needs in space that cannot be accomplished without placing much larger payloads in orbit.” {AF/SD, 7/70, 31-6)
faa-dot Certificate of Commendation was presented by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer to Col. A. B. McMullen (usaf, Ret.) for outstanding contribution to development of general-aviation airports throughout U.S. and for his lifelong dedication to advancement of airport facilities throughout the world. Certificate was presented during ceremonies at National Aviation Club in Washington, D.C. (faa Release 70-30)
President Nixon presented National Science Medals in White House ceremony. Recipients had been announced Dec. 31, 1969; Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, Jack S. C. Kilby of Texas Instruments Inc., and Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center. (PD, 2/23/70, 190-1; 1/5/70, 10-1)
Harry Schwartz commented in New York Times on Aug. 17 launch of Venus VJIby U.S.S.R.: “Some of the space age’s richest scientific dividends have been the surprising findings of Soviet and American instrument-carrying rockets sent to Venus in the past decade. The excitement generated by this new information explains the widespread approval from the world’s scientific community of the news last week that Moscow had launched still another unmanned spaceship toward Earth’s nearest planetary neighbor.” (NYT, 8/23/70, 4:5)
Situation at KSC and in area on first anniversary of Apollo 11 launch was described by John N. Wilford in New York Times. Since July 1969, employment at KSC had dropped from 23 500 to 16 500 with major Apollo contractors hardest hit. At least 750 workers would be laid off as result of $12.2-million cut in Patrick afb contract with Pan American World Airways, Inc., for operation of tracking stations. ‘‘For the entire Cape Kennedy area, it has been a year of economic woe, frustrated growth plans, for-sale signs and broken personal dreams. This is no ghost town, but the space-rush boom— which in a decade doubled the Brevard County population to 230 000— is definitely over.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, had said, “We are on a downward trend but this should reach a level as of September.” (NYT, 7/17/70, M27)
Samuel K. Hoffman, President of NR Rocketdyne Div., retired after leading company’s work in development of rocket engine technology for more than 20 yrs, including 10 yrs as Rocketdyne President. Hoffman received American Rocket Society’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award in 1959 for outstanding work in liquid-propellant rockets. (NR News, 5/1/70, 1; Aeronautics and Astronautics, 191560,176)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received Robert J. Collier Trophy for “their high courage and stunning success in accomplishing man’s highest adventure in recorded history—the first moon landing.” Award was presented at Washington, D.C., luncheon given by National Aeronautic Assn, and National Aviation Club, (naa Release; NR News, 5/15/70, 1)
Treasury Dept, graduated first class of 46 customs security officers to replace temporary sky marshals serving aboard U.S. international and domestic flights to combat skyjacking. Washington, D.C., ceremony marked transition of sky marshal program from multiagency to permanent single-agency status. Treasury Dept, would graduate about 50 officers a week until complement of 2100 was qualified for duty. (Av Wk, 1/4/71,22)
U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers discussed Sept. 6 aircraft hijackings with representatives of Israel, U.K., West Germany, and Switzerland in Washington, D.C., and met with President Nixon. (FonF, 9/3-9/70,638)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford attended dedication ceremony of Stafford Field, small airfield in Stafford’s hometown, Weatherford, Okla. Airfield was Weatherford’s memorial to Stafford who had piloted two Gemini missions. At dedication Vice President said: “While Stafford Field may not be equivalent in size to the giant airports of this country and the world, it. . .symbolizes the best of American traditions. . .harnessing that pioneering spirit of old.” (WPost, 4/27/70, A4; Text)
At meeting of American College of Cardiology in New Orleans, La., ARC-Stanford Univ. team of scientists reported successful use of sonar to provide data on heartbeat and blood circulation formerly unobtainable from cardiac patients without cardiac catherization, blood sampling, or x-rays. Stanford work—supported by arc, nih and American Heart Assn.—used commercially available machine which emitted and received high-frequency sound waves. As sonic impulses were bounced against walls of heart, they were recorded and converted into electrical signals which were displayed on TV screen. Sonar also was being used at Stanford to detect heart changes that led to early rejection in heart transplant patients. (NASA Release 70-32)
Meeting at msfc reviewed parallel studies of proposed chemical interorbital space shuttle by North American Rockwell Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Analyses of modifications required to adapt either 2nd or 3rd stage of Saturn V launch vehicle into interorbital shuttle between earth and lunar orbit were to lead to preliminary designs, determine orbital launch operations and procedures, and gather data on preliminary costs, logistics, and facilities. Discussions included results of analyses to date, definition of systems requirements, necessary system and subsystem trade-offs, and selection of preliminary configurations. (MSFC Release 70-262)
Ten msc employees had applied for joint patent on device and process for recovering water and its constitutent elements from lunar soil, NASA announced. Chemical process used hydrogen and solar energy to reduce iron oxides and produce water vapor, which could be electrolyzed to yield oxygen and hydrogen. Calculations showed process could produce 0.5 kg (1 lb) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar soil; if iron oxides were first concentrated magnetically, yield increased to nearly 6.4 kg (14 lbs) of water from 45.4 kg (100 lbs) of lunar material. (NASA Release 70-202) Washington Post editorial commented on Soviet Lunokhod I: “The appearance of this vehicle, as well as the landing on the moon and return to earth of Luna 16, makes it clear that the Russians hope to regain some of the prestige they lost in the race to land men on the moon.... In terms of the American space program, this new success of the Russians should have little impact other than to persuade the administration and Congress not to cut back its funds any further. There is no logical reason for NASA to go like gang-busters in an effort to match the Russians in unmanned space exploration since the decision has already been made to proceed with a scaled down and more rational space program. The first big trophy in space activities went to the Russians, the most recent big one to the Americans, and it is reasonable to suspect that future ones will be divided between the two nations.” (WPost, 11/20/70, A26)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer said in speech before Aviation/ Space Writers Assn, in New York that faa was not satisfied with Boeing 747 jumbo jet emergency evacuation system after Jan. 13 tests at Roswell, N. Mex. If problem of chute failure was not solved by Jan. 21, scheduled start of Pan American World Airways’ 747 service between New York and London might be delayed. (Lindsey, NYT, 1/15/70, 77)
Apollo 13 astronauts were taken in three helicopters from U.S.S. Iwo Jima to Tafunda Airport in American Samoa, to set foot on solid ground for first time since mission launch. They were greeted by Samoan Governor John M. Haydon. Governor presented IRS form 1040A to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., who had forgoten to file his income tax before departing on mission. Colorfully dressed crowd of more than 3000 cheered astronauts during half-hour reception before their departure in usaf C-141 jet aircraft for Hawaii to meet President Nixon. (Trumbull, NYT, 4/19/70,1)
LeRC and Northern Ohio section of American Nuclear Society held combined meeting at LeRC. Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Environmental Planning for Republic Steel Corp. and of Lake Erie International Jetport Project, discussed technology and society. Dr. Silverstein had retired as LeRC Director in 1969. (LeRC Release 70-69)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, addressed American Newspaper Publishers Assn, in New York: “Our mental concepts and life habits are Earth-oriented. The ability to go the Moon or Mars is regarded as something less than important, and this is only natural. But I am firmly convinced that the space program will prove to be one of the most important, creative, and beneficial to mankind ever undertaken by the United States. ... I think we must clearly establish in this new decade our goals and objectives as an agency first, and then define the hardware needed only after we know exactly where we are headed.” Hardware “on hand or that would be fine to develop” should not “tell us where we’re going.” (Text) U.S. detection in 1950s of Soviet radar three times size of football field was described before Association by Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering: “It was so big that when we first found out about it we were hesitant even to identify it as a radar. Much later we learned that it was far too powerful for most of the applications we could imagine. Assuming it was a radar, many argued that it made sense only as part of a detection, tracking and control network for satellites. The non-radar proponents even tried to make it into such things as a space communications system. The location of the first such radar argued that. . .this equipment probably would form part of an abm system.” (Text)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
Transition of World War II aircraft industry into 1970 aerospace industry was traced in Air Force magazine by Karl G. Harr, Jr., aia President. Increased performance had increased complexity. Average 1944 combat aircraft had carried 454 kg (Vi ton) of avionic gear; 1948-1950 counterpart needed three to five times as much. Weapon revolution did not signify end of manned aircraft era; it brought forth “new family of aircraft of substantially improved capability.” First operational “barely supersonic” 1954 fighter had been followed by succession of more advanced fighters. “The complexity curve took a sharp upward turn, taking the cost curve with it,” with corollary decline in numbers of aircraft produced. Fewer aircraft were needed because of individual aircraft’s superior performance. With advent of supersonic aircraft production, guided missile output became significant portion of industry workload. Big push had come in 1954 when missile procurement topped billion-dollar level for first time. “Undoubtedly, the space program was the dominant influence in history’s most explosive decade of technological advance. There were two primary contributing factors: breadth and acceleration.” Breadth of program required continual probing of new research frontiers across spectrum of almost every scientific and technological discipline. “The acceleration of effort imposed by the lunar-landing timetable necessitated a forcing of technology, compressing into one decade the normal advance of several.” (AF, 9/70, 84-8)
afsc announced senior staff changes: Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, would retire Sept. 1. Gen. George S. Brown, Deputy Commander, Seventh Air Force (pacaf), would succeed Gen. Ferguson. L/G James T. Stewart, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, had been reassigned as Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd), Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, effective June 1, replacing m/g Lee V. Gossick who assumed Gen. Stewart’s previous duties. m/g Clifford J. Kronauer, Jr., Commander, Space and Missile Test Center, would become afsc Chief of Staff on Aug. 1. m/g Louis L. Wilson, Jr., Vice Commander, Armament Development and Test Center, Eglin afb, Fla., would become Vice Commander, Ninth Air Force on Aug. 1. b/g Jack Bollerud, Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, had announced retirement effective July 31. (afsc Release 156.70)
William M. Magruder, Director of dot’s Supersonic Transport Program, told Washington, D.C., press conference that he was satisfied with sst design, which would produce aircraft profitable for airline operators and Nation. With sale of 500 SSTs, U.S. Government would recover entire cost of its share of development program. Magruder produced letter from NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders saying sst production was sound. (AP, W Star, 5/23/70, A2)
SoyuzIXCosmonautsi Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin 10-day goodwill tour in U.S. as NASA guests. (WPost, 10/19/70; NASA Release 70-170)
Anglo-West German agreement to develop combat aircraft for service in late 1970s was announced in House of Lords in London by U.K. Minister of Defence, Lord Carrington. Aircraft would replace U.S. F-104s of West German Air Force and U.S. Phantoms in service with raf. (Middleton, NYT, 7/23/70,13) Intelsat-III F-8, planned as spare for Pacific and Indian Ocean areas, was final launch in Intelsat III series. Of seven Intelsat III satellites launched from Sept. 18, 1968, to April 22, 1970, four were operational with 1200 voice circuits each. (ComSatCorp pio; gsfc SSR, 7/31/70; NASA Proj Off)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
MSC announced award to North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. of $250 000 contract for lunar orbit station study to define configuration, refine functions of station, detail feasible scientific investigations, and develop rescue capabilities. Station would operate in zero gravity but would be modifiable to artificial-gravity environment. (MSC Release 70-60)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster into orbit with 386.2-km (240-mi) apogee. 136.8-km (85-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered May 6. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; upi, NYT, 4/17/70, 48; Pres Rpt 71)
Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead in New York Times Magazine discussed prefigurative society in which young became mentors of elders. “A scientist friend of mine was having a conversation with his son and wasn’t getting anywhere until he realized that he was standing on the earth looking at the moon, and the boy was standing on the moon looking at tne earth.” (NYTMagazine, 4/26/70, 102) Dr. Reuven Ramaty of gsfc reported measurements of low-energy cosmic-ray positrons by Ogo II satellite (launched June 6, 1966) had indicated that relatively young and close cosmic-ray source—a supernova explosion—might have occured 100 000 yrs ago and 300 light years from earth. (Crab Nebula, closest known remnant of any supernova previously discovered, was 5000 light years from earth.) (Press Coni Summary; Text; AP, CSM, 5/2/70) During meeting, 32 APS members marched on dod to oppose Vietnam War, abm and mirv missile systems, and dod ties with American universities. (WPost, 4/30/70, A35)
vtol aircraft linking new Tokyo International Airport at Narita, Japan, with downtown Tokyo were scheduled for 1975 service and would make 59.6 km (37-mi) flight in 20 min, Air Force and Space Digest said. Aircraft, seating 150 passengers, would also link Tokyo’s old and new airports. Aeronautical and Space Technological Research Institute of Japanese Science and Technology Agency was testing to develop domestic vtol. Experimental aircraft was powered by two JR 100F lift-jet engines with 1243-kg (1.4-ton) thrust each. (Golden, AF/SD, 9/70, 31)
Science published letter on environment from John Caffrey of American Council on Education: “I date my own reawakening of interest in man’s environment to the Apollo 8 mission and to the first clear photographs of the earth from that mission. My theory is that the views of the earth from that expedition and from the subsequent Apollo flights have made many of us see the earth as a whole, in a curious way—as a single environment in which hundreds of millions of human beings have a stake. ... I suspect that the greatest lasting benefit of the Apollo missions may be. . .this sudden rush of inspiration to try to save this fragile environment—the whole one—if we still can.” (Science, 3/20/70,1561)
Initial plans for international docking system that would eliminate current “key-in-lock” approach of U.S. and Soviet space programs had been presented by NASA representatives at Oct. 26-27 U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation meetings in Moscow, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. U.S.S.R. had reciprocated with detailed plans of docking system similar to Apollo’s. “While the proposed American scheme is a long-term project,” NASA engineers believed “the Apollo system and the new Soviet one are enough alike to be modified for compatibility.” (NYT, 11/21/70)
Construction and launch of orbiting sun reflector with diameter of 914 m (3000 ft), to light entire metropolitan areas of large cities with five times the brightness of full moon was technologically feasible, NR Space Div. scientific adviser Dr. Krafft A. Er-icke said during NASA conference on space application technology at Mountain View, Calif. Reflector could be important crime deterrent. (AP, Glendale News-Press, 9/11/70)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by ThorBurner II booster. Satellite entered orbit with 872.3-km (542-mi) apogee, 772.5-km (480-mi) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 98.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 2/15/70)
One hundred twenty-fifth anniversary of ScientiGc American. Magazine had been founded in New York by Rufus Porter, New England electroplater, who had invested $100 in venture. It now had circulation of 450 000—90 000 of it overseas, including Italian language edition. Soviet Academy of Sciences distributed facsimile. Magazine had published works of 45 Nobel Prize winners, 25 of them before they became laureates. (Lipman, WPost, 8/30/70, C5)
Western Europe wanted full partnership in U.S. post-Apollo space program and access to any inventions that emerged from it, Theo Lefevre, President of European Space Conference, said at Brussels meeting. Conference of 13 nations asked Lefevre to visit Washington, D.C., in September to examine financial and political conditions of European participation. Conference agreed to establish new space agency to replace eldo, ESRO, and cets and develop program to give Western Europe operational systems of telecommunication satellites, 1978-1980; begin joint program with U.S. for air traffic control satellites; finance studies for weather satellites; and proceed with construction of Europa 1 and 2 rockets and development of Europa 3. (AP, NYT, 7/25/70)
Development of Airplane Stability and Control Technology,” 1970 von Karm&n Lecture by Courtland D. Perkins, Associate Dean of Princeton Univ. School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, was published by Journal of Aircraft: “As the airplane becomes larger, faster, and as a result, more complex, the balance between inherent aerodynamic stability and stability provided through automatic sys-terns must be made on an overall aircraft performance judgment. There is much yet to be done with the technology....” (JA, 7-8/70, 290-301)
At Washington Heart Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, received Spacemedic Award “for outstanding contributions to the study of hearts in space.” He also reported evidence from Apollo 12 mission that prolonged space flight might intensify action of some bacteria normally found on human skin. Astronauts Alan L. Bean and Charles Conrad, Jr., had sustained temporary post-flight infections from staphylococcus bacteria carried from earth, which had increased in virulence during flight. (AP, HPost, 2/3/70; W Post, 2/3/70)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial commented on President’s space goal message: “President Nixon’s ‘low profile’ space program represents a realistic appraisal of the American temper at this time. Without the Russians nipping at our heels, apparently, there is little public pressure to keep space exploration and development going at better than a jog. It’s worth noting, however, that although Mr. Nixon has accepted implicit funding limitations reflecting both his own anti-inflation drive and public opinion, he hasn’t really slammed any doors.” (P Bull, 3/14/70) The Economist commented: “Nasa’s future plans may not brighten the back of cereal boxes but they are solid, varied and balanced. The dangers from now-on are not likely to be financial but technical: the space shuttle will be hard to make.” (Economist. 3/14/70,53)
American and British space experts believe that the Soviet Union has built and successfully tested a satellite capable of intercepting and destroying other orbiting spacecraft,” Richard D. Lyons reported in New York Times. Tracking data and intelligence reports suggested that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos CCXLVIII(launched Oct. 19, 1968) had homed in on Cosmos CCXLIX (launched Oct. 20, 1968) and Cosmos CCLII (launched Nov. 1, 1968) and destroyed them. Air Force Aerospace Defense Command radar had monitored launches and orbits and later detected about 25 pieces of the two spacecraft, indicating explosions had occurred while they were near Cosmos CCXLVIII. usaf plans for orbital attack system code-named Saint (satellite inspection and interception satellite) prepared 11 yrs ago had been shelved, but were apparently being revived under new code name, Lyons said. (NYT, 2/6/70, 1)
At annual meeting of American Physical Society in Chicago, symposium on cosmic physics suggested stellar explosion could have precipitated condensation of dust and gas to form sun and planets. Analysis of meteorite discovered several years earlier at St. Sever-in, France, had led to suggestion by Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg that great stellar explosion had accompanied or immediately preceded formation of solar system, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Meteorite had contained calcium phosphate crystals in tiny tracks of particles ejected by radioactive atoms. Suspected source was plutonium 244—element manufactured in laboratory but not found in nature. Because plutonium 244’s mean lifetime was only 118 million yrs, any plutonium in earth rocks or meteorites, both more than 4.5 billion yrs old, would have decayed radioactively unless something occurred just before or during solar system’s formation that synthesized this substance. According to Wasserburg hypothesis, material was incorporated into meteorite where, during solar system’s infancy, it decayed possibly into neutron-rich forms, or isotopes, of xenon found in meteorite, leaving radiation tracks. (NYT, 1/30/70, 23)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 395.9-km (246-mi) apogee, 151.3-km (94-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 3. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 8/31/70; 9/30/ 70)
Washington Post editorial commented on July 13 death of Manhattan Project head, L/G Leslie R. Groves: “The ultimate appraisal of Leslie Groves’ contribution to his country and to mankind must await a future judgment—perhaps a Judgment Day. He was a superb soldier. The talents for organization and administration, the daring and imagination he brought to his mammoth assignment were peculiarly American, reflective in a sense of the genius of America. Their imprint on the world is, in any event, indelible.” (W Post, 7/16/70, A22)
USAF launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 404-km (251-mi) apogee, 118.9-km (73.9-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 59.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 19. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/70; 8/31/70; Pres Rpt 71)
MSC announced award of contract supplements: North American Rockwell Corp. received $92 449 970 for changes in Apollo CSM contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes to increase mission duration, add scientific instrument module (SIM), and provide experiment integration and brought total value of cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract since August 1963 to $3,724 billion. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $7 974 400 for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes previously authorized by NASA for modification to contractor’s maintenance and repair program. Modifications brought total value of cost-plus-incentive-fee contract since January 1963 to $1,681 billion, (msc Releases 70-83,70-84)
Three engine control assemblies were removed from XB-70 research aircraft on exhibition at Air Force Museum atWright-Patterson afb. Ohio, to be used for F-15 engine/inlet compatibility tests in 5-m (16-ft) wind tunnels at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn. Equipment would be on loan through June 1972. (afsc Release 333.70)
Structural failure of left wing stemming from “preexisting defect in the steel used in a pivot fitting where the wheel joins the fuselage” was cause of Dec. 22, 1969, crash of usaf F-lll, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced. USAF would inspect remaining F-llls for similar defects. (Wieghart, NYT, 1/13/ 70, 16)
Federation of American Scientists held Washington, D.C., news conference to protest extensive advertising campaign by American Security Council asserting U.S.S.R. had taken lead in strategic nuclear weaponry. Dr. Herbert Scoville, Jr., head of fas Strategic Weapons Committee presented chart showing U.S. had 1710 long-range missiles and 550 strategic bombers, for total of 2260 delivery vehicles. Soviet force had 1518 missiles and 150 bombers, or 1668 delivery vehicle total, and was building 390 additional vehicles. (Beecher, NYT, 10/27/70, 13) In exchange of basic information on docking systems NASA officials described Gemini and Apollo techniques, procedures, and docking adapters and Skylab project. Soviet team described plans for future system similar to Apollo’s, with tunnel between spacecraft to accommodate docking apparatus. Agreement was reached that 12 specific technical elements required further joint study, including guidance systems for rendezvous, docking hardware, coordinate systems, and reference markings. Teams agreed on November exchange by mail of supplementary technical information and subsequent meeting in March or April to organize three joint working groups, to meet alternately in U.S. and U.S.S.R. to develop compatible hardware and procedures. (Transcript, NASA background press briefing, 10/29/70)
nbc estimated Apollo 13 splashdown TV audience at more than 40 million viewing portions of coverage from Houston Control or pickups from sea off American Samoa. Since millions abroad Watched event, “global total that joined in the final moment of relief probably can never be measured,” Jack Gould said in New York Times. ABC, CBS and NBC had “acquitted themselves most handsomely” during day “that added emotion to emotion before the climax that left a viewer almost drained of the powers of response.” Apollo Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Charles Conrad, Jr., and Eugene A. Cernan had assisted network commentators in reporting technical aspects of mission. “For the first time on TV, the viewer could see for himself the fruits of the imaginative training program of NASA.” Washington Post said networks “deserved the criticism they got for slow reaction to the unexpected danger. . .on Monday night” but “deserve praise today for the crisp, professional reporting and for some unusual restraint.” (NYT, 4/18/70; Laurent, WPost, 4/18/70, A12)
President Nixon made brief appearance at banquet for Republican leaders in Washington, D.C., after learning of Apollo 13 astronauts’ safe return. He told group that when he called mission commander James A. Lovell, Jr., after splashdown, Astronaut Lovell had said he was sorry mission had not been completed. “My reply,” President said, “was: ‘Captain, you and your colleagues did complete the mission.’ ” President told group, “After what happened this tumultuous week, let’s not take American wealth and strength for granted. . .where machines failed, we had to turn to man, and man came through.” President said it had been “proudest day of my life and in the life of the country.” Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said “social levelers of the New Left” would seize on Apollo 13 neardisaster to demand space budget be “soaked down into the nearest slum.” It would be “shortsighted tragic blunder” to heed warnings of “fair weather friends” of space program who were “readying the life-boats for a quick exit.” (Hope, W Star, 4/18/70, A2)
Agreement to reduce jet aircraft air pollution by 1972 was reached in Washington, D.C., by Nixon Administration and representatives from 31 scheduled and charter U.S. airlines. Airlines agreed to install pollution control devices on 1000 Boeing 727 and 737 and DC-9 aircraft during regular maintenance overhauls. Devices, called burner cans, would eliminate 70%-80% of solid particles spewed into air by jets. (Curry, WPost, 1/21/70, A2)
Theory that helped to explain source of uncontrolled malignant growth and indicated short cuts to development of chemical countermeasures against cancer was described by LaRC biophysicist Clarence D. Cone, Jr., at 12th Annual Science Writers Seminar of American Cancer Society in San Antonio, Tex. Theory proposed that division of body cells was controlled precisely by pattern of ion concentrations on surface tissue of cells. Pattern was formed by electrical voltage that normally existed across cellular surfaces and varied from one part of body to another. Theory provided explanation of functional connection between two major pathological features of cancer—uncontrolled growth of cells and spread of disease in body—and implied that basic functional aberrancy producing both conditions lay in alteration of molecular structure of cell surface. Theory proposed central mechanism for control of body cell division, which, if proved valid, would provide new basis for research progress on key biomedical problems, such as human conception, birth defects, growth, aging, and cancer. (Text; NASA Release 70-43)
Air Force and Space Digest editorial by John L. Frisbee advocated “show and tell” method of alerting U.S. public to Soviet nuclear threat: “Today’s public skepticism about the realities of Soviet nuclear power, and its intended uses, is somewhat reminiscent of the skepticism that existed in the fall of 1962, concerning allegations of Soviet missile-site construction in Cuba. That earlier skepticism disappeared when photos of the Cuban missile sites, taken from high-flying U-2 aircraft, were made public.” One way to awaken U.S. public to current Soviet threat “might be to release some of the satellite photography on which US analysis of the threat is based.” (AF/SD, 8/70,8)
U.S.S.R. was spending two percent of gnp on space and U.S. one half of one percent, Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Div. of Library of Congress, said in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. U.S.S.R. gnp in 1969 was estimated at $420 billion; U.S. total was $931 billion. Successful Soviet launches had totaled 44 in 1966,74 in 1968,70 in 1969, and 40 thus far in 1970. Largest element in Soviet space program had been photo-reconnaissance. U.S.S.R.. had led U.S. in payload launch weight every year since launch of 83.5-kg (184-lb) Sputnik in 1957 except 1969. Total payload weight for U.S.S.R. was 2 million kg (4.5 million lbs); for U.S. total was 1.9 million kg (4.25 million lbs). (B Sun, 8/20/70. A3)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations, described medical phenomena encountered by Apollo 12 astronauts in keynote address at Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine seminar in San Antonio, Tex. Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and Alan L. Bean had observed brilliant flashes of light on closing eyes in darkened portions of spacecraft. They were believed to be caused by charged particles or rays from sun or from space. Astronauts also experienced sensitivity to lunar dust, body changes including face fullness, reddened eyes, and flushed faces during early part of flight, and increase in skin bacteria beyond amount normal on earth. Dr. Berry blamed body changes on pooling of fluids in head from lack of gravity. Behavior of bacteria might make doctors consider altering normal skin surface bacteria content by special baths for astronauts before flight. Dr. Berry also said that woman might share in planetary exploration but tests were needed to ensure “she doesn’t create more problems than she solves. I think it would definitely be more comfortable if we took women along.” (Huntsville Times, 2/10/70; Huntsville News, 2/10/70)
vtol Dynastat, helium-filled airship that could carry 100 passengers 300-800 km (200-500 mi) in 30- by 9-m (100- by 30-ft) car, was described at symposium of American Helium Society in Washington, D.C. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. scientists Dr. Robert S. Ross and Philip F. Myers said airship would be powered by four to six engines driving propellers with forward and vertical thrust. (Goodyear Profile, 5/70, 9-10; Huntsville Times, 3/29/70)
dod announced usaf contract awards: $1 800 000 supplemental agreement to mit for basic research on properties of matter in intense magnetic fields, managed by Office of Scientific Research; and $354 000 initial increment to $1 062 000 cost-reimbursement contract to Trustees of Princeton Univ. for basic research on hypersonic flow, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div. (dod Release 54-70)
afsc announced that afwtr at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and samsO’s aerospace test wings at Vandenberg and Patrick afb, Fla., would be combined to form Space and Missile Test Center (samtec) under SAM so command, (afsc Release 65.70)
dod Deputy Secretary for Public Affairs Jerry W. Friedheim said in Washington, D.C., that deployment of Minuteman III missiles had begun in North Dakota on April 18 but their MIRVs would not be installed until June. (Roberts, WPost, 5/27/70, 3)
Communist China was producing medium-range, twin-engine jet bomber that could carry nuclear weapons to targets 2400 km (1500 mi) beyond its borders, Washington Post reported U.S. sources had said. Aircraft was copy of Soviet Tu-16 Badger in service with Soviet air force since 1955. Production versions of first jet bomber manufactured inside mainland China had been spotted by high-flying U.S. reconnaissance craft, “either satellites or U2s.” (Getler, W Post, 9/18/70, Al)
Propeller-driven XC-142 v/stol aircraft on loan to NASA by USAF ended experiments in support of research into v/stol techniques at LaRC and was flown by NASA pilots to Air Force Museum at Dayton, Ohio. Built by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., four-engine tilt-wing aircraft had evolved from wind-tunnel models tested at LaRC and other NASA centers starting in 1956. (NASA Special Release)
Twenty-third anniversary of usaf. Official anniversary was established Sept. 18, 1947, with swearing-in of first secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington. Gen. Carl Spaatz was sworn in as first usaf Chief of Staff on Sept. 26, 1947). (Airman, 9/70, 15)
Discovery that blazing stars collided at rate of one every four months in heart of at least-one kind of galaxy was reported from evidence obtained by Stratoscope II balloon-borne optical telescope March 26-27. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Martin Schwarzchild said collisions might be source of brightness fluctuations in Seyfert galaxies —rare heavenly masses with small, dense nuclei that radiated light and radio energy and bright lines produced by hot gases in motion. Stratoscope II had observed Seyfert galaxy at range of 30 light years from earth. (Lannan, W Star, 6/2/70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, discussed further opportunities for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space with Soviet academician Dr. M. D. Millionshchikov during luncheon given by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., nominee for posts of ost Director and Science Adviser to President Nixon, at Cosmos Club in Washington, D.C. (NASA Off of Admin; Paine speech text, 9/14/70)
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Assessment of Space Communications Technology: NASA program of r&d in comsats and associated equipment during past decade had been “remarkably successful.” ComSatCorp also had made “significant strides.” As result, U.S. was “undisputed leader in this new technology.” State of the art was sufficiently advanced to “make important contributions to the improvement of the American domestic telecommunications system, particularly in Alaska. . .largest and most remote State of the Union.” Committee urged expansion of NASA space applications program. It should be “principle purpose of the U.S. Government.. .to bring to the American people the best, the most effective, the least expensive communications services. It is the clear responsibility of the Government to develop and implement public policies, and improve the effectiveness of its regulatory functions, so as to promote the improvement of the Nation’s telecommunications at a rate which reflects the progress of technology. To the extent that governmental indecision has delayed the efficient integration of innovation and invention, the Government must be considered to have failed in this responsibility.” (Text)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before House Ad Hoc Subcommittee on Aerospace Museum Study on H.R. 10771, introduced April 30, 1969, to authorize NASA study of advisability of establishing permanent NASA Aerospace Museum in western U.S.: “It is our view that a study for a Western Aerospace Museum should be the responsibility of the Smithsonian Institution, and not of NASA.” NASA would support study. Dr. Low submitted copy of 1967 NASA-Smithsonian agreement on custody and management of NASA historical artifacts. NASA felt arrangement was “working well” and believed construction of National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., “should proceed as expeditiously as possible when funding can be made available. NASA recommended existing museums, such as Goddard Rocket and Space Museum in New Mexico, be considered in study and that existing legislation for museum be taken into account so that legislation establishing second museum would provide for administration of both by Smithsonian. Study was expected to cost $50 000 to $75 000 and take slightly more than one year. (Testimony)
