Kansas City Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. James C. Fletcher as NASA Administrator: Dr. Fletcher had “earned respect at Utah as a master of administrative analysis and detail, a man able to wring the last measure of usefulness out of every available dollar and, at the same time, to command intense loyalty from those who work with him. No qualities are likely to prove of more service to a man responsible for leading the American space program out of its nadir of tight money and flagging morale.” (KC Times, 3/11/71)
Miss Baker—13-yr-old South American squirrel monkey launched and returned from 483-km (300-mi) altitude on usa Jupiter missile May 28, 1959—arrived at Alabama Space and Rocket Center, where she would reside permanently. Monkey was transferred from U.S. Naval Aerospace Medical Institute. (Huntsville Times, 6/29/71)
noaa said scientific team that studied 23 310 000-hectare (90 000-sq-mi) region east of Barbados in summer of 1969 had reached preliminary conclusion that dust blown off North African deserts into upper air ended in atmosphere over South Atlantic and influenced North American weather. Scientists, who had hoped to find atmosphere relatively free of particulate matter, had discovered instead African dust in Barbados air at levels to 5000 m (16 000 ft). (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/71, A15)
First two DC—10 jet transport aircraft were delivered by manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp. to American Airlines and United Airlines at Long Beach, Calif. (Bedingfield, NYT, 7/30/71, 54)
Australia’s decision to accept delivery of 24 U.S. F—111C aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, at USAF news briefing. Matter had “been under discussion” for some time, Seamans said. “I am very gratified that the decision has finally been made and we can put the aircraft in shape for them and get them over to Australia.” (Transcript) , indoor exhibits, (ksc Release 273-71)
Chinese-built version of Soviet Mic-19 fighter produced at Mukden, Manchuria, at rate of 200 per year had been “backbone” of Communist Chinese Air Force for number of years, New York Times said. So many had been produced from blueprints supplied by U.S.S.R. before Sino-Soviet split in early 1960s that Communist China had sold some to neighboring Pakistan. Western sources quoted by Times had recently reported that 2800 combat aircraft of Communist Chinese Air Force were being supplemented by new jet fighter of Chinese design being produced in China at rate of 10 per month. Aircraft, called F—9 in West, flew at twice speed of sound, had combat range of 480 to 800 km (300 to 500 mi) and could operate above 15 000 m (50 000 ft). (.NYT, 5/23/71)
National Religious Broadcasters, at annual convention in Washington, D.C., celebrated 50th anniversary of first religious broadcast on commercially licensed station by beaming their closing program around world in first international religious broadcast transmitted by satellite. (Janson, NYT, 1/28/71, 1)
Dish-shaped 305-m (1000-ft) radiotelescope at Cornell Univ.’s Arecibo Observatory near San Juan, Puerto Rico, was undergoing $7-million modification program that would increase telescope’s sensitivity 2000 times, Dr. Frank D. Drake, Cornell Univ. astronomer and former Arecibo Observatory Director, told San Juan meeting of American Astronomical Society. Modified telescope would search skies for unusual features and objects “we cannot even begin to predict” and organic molecules in intergalactic space that were clues to evolution of life and evidence of possible distant civilizations. “We expect to devote about 1 per cent of our time to just listening. If any civilization is advanced enough to communicate with other civilizations in the universe, we might get the message.” (Goodwin, W Post, 12/16/71, E9)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for “most complex and carefully planned scientific expedition in the history of exploration.” (nasa Release 71—242)
usaf launched Sesp 1971—2 Space Experiments Support Program satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: 801.5-km (498-mi) apogee, 774.1-km (481-mi) perigee, 100.5-min period, and 92.7° inclination. Objectives of mission were to test advanced development payloads—including celestial mapping ir scanner, 1500-w flexible roll-up solar cell array, secure command and control system, and energetic particles experiment. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 10/19/71,174)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew from San Francisco International Airport to Fairbanks, Alaska, in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft on first sector of 32 000-km (20 000-mi), month-long journey over North and South Poles and prime and 180th meridians at Equator—geographic crossroads of world. If successful, UPI said, Long would establish eight aviation records, including first flight around the world landing on all seven continents, first solo flight across Antarctica, and first solo from Antarctica to Australia. (W Star, 11/6/71, A2)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, chaired symposium and workshop series sponsored by nae in Washington, D.C. Program, “Application of Technology To Improve Productivity in the Service Sector of the National Economy,” explored methods of using technology to ease social, educational, and health care problems, (nae Release)
aaas held symposium in Boston on use of long-baseline interferometry— antennas thousands of miles apart, working together, to determine angular width and precise direction of distant radio sources. Three teams of astronomers who had worked independently reported observation in distant space of what appeared to be two objects flying apart at 10 times speed of light, but were unable to agree on plausible explanation for phenomenon that defied laws of physics that said such velocity was impossible. Discovery had been made originally by nine-man team of scientists from mit, gsfc, jpl, and Univ. of Maryland. Team, under direction of Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro of MIT, using MIT Haystack antenna and JPl’s Goldstone antenna, had observed two components of quasar 3C-279 accidentally during experiments conducted in October 1970 to observe passage of 3C—279 around sun. Discovery also was described by Dr. David L. Chauncey of Cornell Univ. and team from Cal Tech and National Radio Astronomy Observatory. Dr. Alan T. Moffet of Cal Tech reported on joint observations of phenomenon with Australian astronomers. • Following symposium, Rumford Premium, oldest scientific prize given in U.S., was presented to 21 scientists from U.S. and Canadian observatories who had pioneered in development of baseline interferometry. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/15/71, 33)
Special medallion to commemorate 1971 quadricentennial of Johannes Kepler was issued by American Museum-Hayden Planetarium. Kepler —born Dec. 16, 1571—had founded science of optics, was first to ascribe tides to moon, shaped much of comet theory, and came close to theory of gravity. His Somnium, highly technical “dream” of voyage to moon, had been first work of modern science fiction. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 8/13/71) Section on History of Aircraft, Rocket, and Space Science and Technology was held Aug. 19. Paper “The Historiography of Rocket Technology and Space Exploration” submitted by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was summarized at meeting by Dr. Lloyd S. Swensen, Jr., of Univ. of Houston. Paper covered features of evolution of rocket technology pertaining to beginning of space exploration and exploitation and discussed work of international pioneers like Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, Robert H. Goddard, and Hermann Oberth, who became interested in space exploration before deducing that liquid-propellant reactive thrust was the best technology. Dr. Swenson, coauthor of book This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury, presented his own paper “On the Mixture of Science and Technology in the Apollo 8 Circumlunar and the Apollo 11 Lunar Landing Missions.” Paper examined effect of internal pressures on overall posture and achievements of Apollo project as illustrated by Apollo 10 and 11. Anatoly A. Blagonravov and V. N. Sokolsky of Soviet Academy of Sciences submitted paper on “Main Lines of Research in the Field of the History of Aeronautics and Astronautics.” (Program; NASA Hist Off)
Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of faa Office of Air Transportation Security was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Murphy, former fbi special agent, had been serving on acting basis since May 1971. (faa Release 71-153) September 24^-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were honored by usaf Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received usaf Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
usaf launched unidentified satellite by Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg AFB into orbit with 244-mi (392.7-km) apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.2-min period, and 110.8° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 9. (Pres Rpt 72)
President Nixon addressed Nation by radio upon transmitting foreign policy report for 1970s to Congress: “Over the past two years in some fields the Soviet Union and the United States have moved ahead together. We have taken the first step toward cooperation in outer space. We have both ratified the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons. Just 2 weeks ago, we signed a treaty to prohibit nuclear weapons from the seabeds.” Most significant result of negotiations between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in past year “could be in the field of arms control.” salt had produced “most searching examination of the nature of strategic competition ever conducted between our nations.” If talks continued in cooperative vein there was “reason to hope that specific agreements will be reached to curb the arms race.” (PD, 3/1/71, 298-304) *	President Nixon transmitted to Congress second annual report on foreign policy, United, States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Building for Peace: Space was “clearest example of the necessity for international scientific cooperation and the benefits that accrue from it. The world community has already determined and agreed that space is open to all and can be made the special province of none. Space is the new frontier of man, both a physical and an intellectual frontier. ... As mutual help and cooperation were essential to life on the American frontier, so it is on the frontier of space. It is with that sense that we approach the sharing of both the burdens and the fruits of our space activity. . . . We have some 250 agreements with 74 countries covering space cooperation.” Space was “the only area of which it can be literally said that the potential for cooperation is infinite. . . . We have opened virtually all of our NASA space projects to international participation.” President said he would submit to Senate shortly ICAO treaty which “recognizes aircraft hijacking as a crime . . . and ensures that hijackers will be subject to prosecution or extradition if apprehended on the territory of contracting states.” U.S. intended “to exert every effort to ensure the widest possible international acceptance of this convention.” President’s report said it was “settled U.S. policy to encourage international cooperation in basic science.” Closely allied was national policy on technology exchange. U.S. preeminence in both fields posed question as to extent of its sharing scientific and technological knowledge. “There are obvious security implications in many technological developments, for example in the nuclear and space fields.” U.S. policy, however, “is to keep those areas as circumscribed as possible, and to take the leadership in encouraging the exchange of scientific and technological information.” (PD, 3/1/71, 305-77)
Soviet President Nikolay Podgorny sent message to President Nixon: “Please accept . . . our congratulations on the successful conclusion of the flight of the spacecraft Apollo 14 and on the safe return of the American astronauts.” Tass said he also asked President Nixon to forward best wishes to “courageous crew.” (Reuters, C Trib, 2/11/71)
NASA announced receipt of three proposals for design and fabrication of two experimental, transport, STOL research aircraft with propulsive lift—from McDonnell Douglas Corp., from Boeing Co. with Grumman Corp., and from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. with North American Rockwell Corp., Bell Aerospace Co. Div of Textron, Inc., and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc. Aircraft would provide data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet stol transport systems in joint nasa—dot—faa—usaf program to relieve noise and congestion at busy airports. (NASA Release 71—207)
First commercial flight of McDonnell Douglas DC—10 jet transport aircraft was flown by American Airlines between Los Angeles and Chicago. More than 80% of seats were occupied during 3 hr 18 min flight. (CR, 8/6/71, E9096-7; Yarborough, W Star, 8/18/71, DIO; aal pro)
President Nixon sent message to Nikolay V. Podgorny, Chairman of Presidium of Supreme Soviet, on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: “The American people join me in expressing to you and the Soviet people our deepest sympathy on the tragic death of the three Soviet cosmonauts. The whole world followed the exploits of these courageous explorers of the unknown and shares the anguish of their tragedy. But the achievement of cosmonauts Dobrovolsky, Volkov and Patsayev remains. It will, I am sure, prove to have contributed greatly to the future of space and thus to the widening of man’s horizons.” (PD, 7/5/71,1010)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, was formally presented with membership in Soviet Academy of Sciences by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F.	Dobrynin in ceremony at Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. (aec Release 0-120)
wttg—tv in Washington, D.C., carried one-hour special telecast “Giant Leap for Mankind.” Program reviewed Apollo program and described NASA future plans, (nasa Special Ann, 8/18/71; NASA pao)
Najeeb E. Halaby, Pan American World Airways President and Chairman, discussed space shuttle at Symposium of Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Los Angeles: “nasa has already shown that it appreciates the contributions airlines can make to the program, by having airlines participate with space contractors in the development of the space shuttle” to “make the eventual space shuttle work more like a standard airliner than a quarterly experiment.” Since it took less energy to orbit objects than to fly them across U.S., “there’s no reason why the cost of Space Shuttle operations should not become as low or lower than that of jets.” Pan Am’s “most glamorous vision” was “Space Shuttle as an air transport, carrying passengers from New York to Tokyo—or Peking—in 45 minutes, or from Los Angeles to Rome in 40.” “We can visualize a rocket-powered vehicle with 100 passengers . . . launched vertically in a suborbital trajectory at the precise azimuth for its intended destination, re-entering the atmosphere without excess g-forces, gliding unpowered to an altitude where its conventional jet engines will be started, then landing on a runway like a conventional airliner.” (Text)
arc would join California Statewide Air Pollution Research Center in smog research program to start in late June, NASA announced. Program would include 12 Cessna 401 aircraft flights over San Francisco Bay area yearly for three years, to trace photochemical production of pollutants and their dispersion in atmosphere. Aircraft would carry some 230 kg (500 lbs) of research equipment for tests at altitudes to 5200 m (17 000 ft). Data collected would be available to research collaborators and data users in Air Pollution Control Office of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, California State Air Resources Board, Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District, Assn, of Bay Area Governments, and other NASA centers. (NASA Release 71—108)
faa, American Airlines, and Aeronautical Radio, Inc., in October would begin three- to-six-month operational test and evaluation of automatic data link communications techniques, faa announced. American Airlines 747 aircraft equipped with data link system that would print out air traffic control clearances, terminal advisories, and other information in cockpit and automatically process pilot position and weather reports to ground would test whether techniques could reduce communications workload on pilots and controllers, (faa Release 71—152)
San Francisco Bay area was being surveyed and photographed by U—2 reconnaissance aircraft in U.S. .Geological Survey project to gather continuous information fast find accurately on urban development, UPI reported. Project also covered Phoenix-Tucson area in Arizona and Baltimore-Washington, D.C., area as basis for more thorough, nationwide study of 27 urban regions. In 1972 nasa erts satellite would provide constant check on urban growth patterns and development. (NYT, 10/7/71, 55)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 14 difficulties in docking CSM with LM [see Jan. 31-Feb. 9]. New York Times said that “as the world waited tensely for the outcome of the struggle to solve the problem, there was a deep sense of disappointment at the possibility that all the effort, training and planning that went into this mission have been imperiled.” (NYT, 2/1/71, 30) Washington Evening Star editorial called Apollo 14 “pressure mission.” It had “already qualified for several entries in the record book. It is the first Apollo mission to be crewed entirely by men who have never before flown in earth orbit and commanded by a veteran whose total previous time in space was 15 minutes. The mission is led by the oldest man to go into space, the first American to ride a rocket, the only astronaut to return to active duty after a medically enforced period of idleness. It is the first Apollo shot to be delayed because of weather. It is the first to run into a major problem on its first day out. It is a mission that, in the opinion of many in the top ranks of the space agency, will decide the future of manned space flight.” (W Star, 2/1/71) _	_
Chinese Communists were building missile tracking ship that could be used in Pacific for tracking and analyzing test-firing of icbms capable of application against European portion of U.S.S.R. and U.S., Christian Science Monitor reported. Monitor s sources in Washington, D.C., had said ship could be used to spy on U.S. and Soviet missile work and to expand Chinese satellite program into wider areas. (Ashworth, CSM, 12/23/71, 1)
faa announced award of $390 000 contract to Saphier, Lerner, Schindler —Environetics (Div. of Litton Industries) for proposed two-phased study of offshore jetport [see May 21] to serve metropolitan New York City, (faa Release 71-99)
President Nixon announced appointment of Coleman duPont Donaldson as member of Air Quality Advisory Board to succeed William O. Doub, who was appointed aec member Aug. 10. Donaldson, President of Aeronautical Research Assn, of Princeton, Inc., had been head of aerophysics section of naca Gas Dynamics Laboratory. He had worked recently on development of techniques for computing dispersal of chemically reacting pollutants in atmosphere and generation of turbulence. Work had been supported by NASA and Environmental Protection Agency. (PD, 10/25/71, 1426)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) died of heart attack in Washington, D.C. He had been ranking Republican member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics and member of House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In 1958 Rep. Fulton had volunteered at committee hearing to serve as astronaut. Washington Post obituary said he had fought hard for programs to keep U.S. from “dropping out of the space race.” (Weil, W Post, 10/8/71, B8)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, testified on aerospace unemployment before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 authorization hearings: From number of studies of unemployment of scientists and engineers, estimated 30 000 to 40 000 were out of work at end of 1970. “The majority of these came from aerospace-related industries. Projections indicate that this number could more than double by June 1972, which means that as many as 30 percent of the Nation’s aerospace scientists and engineers will be unemployed. The effect of this national trend—in terms of an individual scientist or engineer being reemployed—is magnified by the concentration of this unemployment, geographically and by training and experience. . . . This not only causes great personal hardship but . . . represents the loss of a tremendous national resource.” NASA-sponsored survey by Battelle Memorial Institute of persons laid off by group of nasa contractors from June 1968 to September 1970 had made preliminary findings: only 31% had found permanent jobs, 32% had found temporary jobs, 32% were still unemployed, and 5% had left work-force. Average person was unemployed 31 weeks. Of those who had found permanent jobs, only 18% returned to aerospace. Of those permanently employed outside of aerospace, only 12% reported having positions highly related to aerospace skills and 50% reported new positions unrelated to aerospace. Unemployment rate of those over 50 was 48%. Of those who had found permanent work outside, 31% said they would not return to aerospace if given opportunity; 16% said they would. Preliminary results of survey indicated “we are losing much of the aerospace capability that is an indispensable ingredient of our long term economic strength and national security.” In closing, Dr. Low made point that there was “no either/or choice between technological advances and social advances. Without technology, we cannot maintain the capability to deal effectively with any national problem.” Dr. Low was questioned on his testimony that U.S.S.R. was spending more on R&D than U.S. was spending in total science and technology area. He answered that Soviet space program, with apparent Soviet policy of steadily increasing r&d investment, would soon match and then surpass U.S. program in size and accomplishment. “For this comparison, I am dealing with the combined civil and military space programs of both nations; to try to differentiate between civil and military activities of the U.S.S.R. would be speculative at best. The most difficult comparison to try to make between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. economies or programs is in terms of absolute costs: each national economy is geared and motivated to produce a different, nonparallel mix of goods and services.” (CR, 7/31/71, E8611—2) Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed future of Apollo program: “We can now move with confidence to the final phase. ... In these last missions, we will expand the capability of the system very dramatically. Design changes in the spacecraft and supporting equipment will allow the two astronauts in the lunar module to remain on the moon up to 67 hours, as compared with 34 hours on Apollo 14. The scientific payload landed on the moon will be doubled to above 1200 lbs [544 kg]. Changes in the command and service modules will permit up to 10 days total flight time and major increases in orbital scientific activities. During the Apollo 15 and 16 missions small subsatellites will be placed in lunar orbit and will continue to make scientific measurements long after the astronauts return to earth.” In Skylab program, “three separate three-man Skylab flight crews will be selected during the coming year. Scientist astronauts will be included. . . . They plan to perform about 50 experiments in various disciplines. Twenty of these are in the life sciences, to determine how human beings adjust and perform under the conditions of prolonged space flight, up to 2 months’ duration. “They will also operate the Skylab Earth Resources Experiment Package in the second space flight phase of NASA’s earth resources program. These observations will be in conjunction with [and] complementary to those [of] the automated earth resources test technology erts, to be launched in 1972.” FY 1972 request for space shuttle of $100 million would provide for broad spectrum of studies, including analysis of new alloys and promising external materials for thermal protection; test demonstrations of design concepts for structures; wind-tunnel tests to define aerodynamic heating, launch aerodynamics, etc.; design of long-leadtime hardware, subsystems, and test devices; initiation of scaled model for flight tests; dynamics testing; electronic-data-bus-system demonstration testing; and integration of upgraded fuel-cell electrical power subsystem with other components for proof-of-concept testing. (Transcript) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, testified on dod applications of space transportation system and dod-nasa teamwork on space shuttle: “Present dod satellite communications program consists of two major systems: The long distance point to point or strategic system and the local-area multiple-user or tactical system. . . . We are pursuing a new system called Defense Satellite Communications System, Phase II, which can provide many voice channels to selected limited areas of the earth. These present and proposed systems give us the flexibility for voice and teletype communications from our forces overseas and allow rapid transmission of photographic images from operational theaters to the United States.” In conjunction with NASA studies, usaf was analyzing defense applications of space shuttle to provide better insight into utility of concept for dod. usaf was providing NASA with data to help ensure that configuration was of maximum utility to dod. nasa and usaf had worked jointly on engine development. Air Force “has supported advanced development efforts on liquid rocket engines in the past, and more recently concluded a hydrogen/oxygen high performance engine demonstration program.” Engine, XLR-129, had “provided the basis for selection of the reusable high pressure rocket engine concept for the shuttle. It also provided design data for a 250 000-pound [1100-kilonewton] thrust engine which supports the current shuttle engine design concepts.” In operational testing area, “usaf and NASA recently conducted unpowered approach and landing demonstrations with F—Ills and B-52s. . . . These demonstrations investigated terminal area energy management for maneuvering reentry vehicles and have a relationship to the Space Shuttle operational concepts.” (Transcript)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew over South Pole in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft to become first man to make solo flight over both North and South Poles during one journey. Long, who left San Francisco Nov. 5, had flown over North Pole to Stockholm, then to London, Africa, Brazil, and Chile before crossing South Pole. (W Post, 11/23/71, B3)
Preliminary results of experiment in which two clocks were flown around the world to test Einstein theory of relativity had indicated “clock paradox” of theory was correct, Dr. J. C. Hafele, Washington Univ. in St. Louis scientist, told meeting of American Assn, of Physics Teachers in Rolla, Mo. Clocks, carried in two separate aircraft, had not kept same time as master clock at Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C. Einstein theory said that as body approached speed of light, variables in time, size, and weight changed. (W Star, 10/24/71, A3)
President Nixon formally changed name of Presidential Boeing 707 aircraft from Air Force One to The Spirit of ’76. Change was made at request of David J. Mahoney, Chairman of American Revolution Bicentennial Commission. Air Force Two would retain its name. (AP, W Post, 7/31/71, A2)
U.S. Patent No. 3 631 294 was awarded to Steven R. Hofstein, President of Princeton Electronics, Inc., for Lithicon, first electronic storage tube to record on silicon and silicon dioxide. Tube, with target area consisting of more than 10 million silicon storage elements, had been used by JPL to record Mariner 9 Mars photos, by airlines and Federal agencies to inspect parcels that might contain bombs; by hospitals for brief x-ray and sonar exposures, and by libraries to retrieve microfilmed publications. (Jones, NYT, 1/1/72, 25)
U.K. government and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. agreed on terms for perpetuating Rolls-Royce engine developed for Lockheed’s L-1011 TriStar jet transport after two-day meetings in Washington, D.C. Terms would be submitted to airlines that had ordered aircraft and to banks financing sales. (Witkin, NYT, 3/31/71,1)
Newspapers commented on Apollo 15 mission, while astronauts were exploring lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor editorial praised Apollo 15: “Once again, a superbly synchronized lunar mission has proven man’s capacity to focus the knowledge of hundreds of specialists to achieve a singular goal. Apollo 15 is one more grand historic achievement. It testifies to the benefit that science and technology, properly harnessed, can reap for mankind.” (CSM, 8/2/71) French novelist and TV critic Jean Dutourd commented on Apollo 15 TV coverage in France Soir. It had made him walk away from TV set. “It must be confessed,” he wrote, “that these experiments are an unspeakable bore.” (Reuters, W Post, 8/3/71, All) New York Times editorial defended manned space flight: “After Apollos 16 and 17 next year, there are no known plans of any nation to send any more men to the moon. A vast and complex technology developed at the cost of many billions of dollars over the last decade is being abandoned even as its vast potentialities are being demonstrated. If American resources do not permit manned lunar exploration beyond the end of next year, the United Nations should take over the task, appealing to all governments for funds and soliciting contributions as well from private individuals and private business enterprises. The dusty planet that is the moon could become the planet of human cooperation, a new frontier of hope for all mankind.” {NYT, 8/2/71, 22)
New York State Court of Appeals approved sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to edp Technology, Inc., affirming lower court ruling that sale of research facility to private firm was legal. (W Post, 5/13/71, Kll)
William M. Allen, Boeing Co. Chairman, received 1970 Robert J. Collier Trophy during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Citation was to “the Boeing Company as leader of the Industry-Airline-Government team which successfully introduced the 747 into commercial service with particular recognition to Pratt & Whitney division of the United Aircraft Corporation and to Pan American World Airways.” (naa Release)
Appointment of Robert E. Bower, Director of Advanced Development for Grumman Aerospace Corp., as Director for Aeronautics at Lane had been announced by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Researcher reported. Bower succeeded Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., who had become Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for R&D [see July 1]. (Langley Researcher,	1)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen received National Transportation Award of silver bowl from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Award was for Boeing’s construction of 747 jumbo jet aircraft. (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71)
Comments on U.S. Mariner 9 and U.S.S.R. Mars 2 and 3 missions were made in New York Times editorial: Three spacecraft—“one American and two Soviet—now speeding toward Mars represent the best type of international competition. Their rivalry centers about the pursuit of knowledge, with the honors going to that nation whose instruments send back the most important data on the red planet that is one of the earth’s nearest space neighbors.” U.S. led Mars race to date, “because of the brilliant feats by Mariners 4, 6, and 7. In the 1960’s the pictures and other data acquired by these pioneering vehicles completely revolutionized scientists’ views of the Martian terrain and environment.” (NYT, 6/1/71)
msfc announced award of $325 000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for 12-month study of inspace propellant logistics and safety, (msfc Release 71—116)
USAF launched unidentified satellite into orbit from Vanden-berg afb by Thor-Bumer II booster. Satellite achieved 878.7-km (546-mi) apogee, 795.0-km (494-mi) perigee, 101.6-min period, and 98.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; SF, 4/72, 132)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
Senate by vote of 49 to 48 passed and cleared for President’s approval H.R. 8432, authorizing $250 million for emergency loan guarantees to major business enterprises. Legislation ended immediate threat of bankruptcy to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and assured Lockheed adequate funds to complete construction of L-1011 TriStar jet transport aircraft, Washington Post later said. President Nixon issued statement following Senate action: “The Senate’s decision to approve a government loan to the Lockheed Corporation is in the best interests of all the American people. I greet this vote—as I greeted the vote in the House of Representatives last week—with gratitude and deep satisfaction. This action will save tens of thousands of jobs that would otherwise have been eliminated. It will have a major impact on the economy of California, and will contribute greatly to the economic strength of the country as a whole. It will help ensure that the Nation’s largest defense contractor, and its largest airframe manufacturer, will continue serving the Nation’s needs. It will also help ensure that this country will continue to play a leading role in the development of aerospace technology.” {CR, 8/2/71, S12823-63; Samuelson, W Post, 8/3/71, Al; PD, 8/9/71, 116-7)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., press conference that Soviet buildup of land- and sea-based missiles was “far outdistancing” estimates he had offered to Congress seven months previously. He confirmed report that U.S.S.R. was expected to match U.S. strength by deploying 41 Polaris-class missile submarines by 1973. (Beecher, ATT, 10/14/71, 5)
Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Space Theater at American MuseumHayden Planetarium was dedicated at ceremonies in New York. (Invitation )
President Nixon honored Apollo 15 astronauts in address on economic program before Joint Session of Congress: “Later today, in this great chamber, the Congress will pay tribute to three splendid Americans back from the moon. Theirs was a magnificent achievement, a stunning testament to their personal skill and courage, and also to what American technology can achieve. “Let us find the means to ensure that in this decade of challenge, the remarkable technology that took these Americans to the moon can also be applied to reaching our goals here on earth.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1250-6)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, had been selected to receive 1971 James Watt International Medal from Institution of Mechanical Engineers in Lpndon, MSC Roundup announced. Dr. Gilruth had been nominated by American Society of Mechanical Engineers and was cited for his “distinguished services to Aeronautical and Space Research and for . . . engineering leadership which inspired and directed the Manned Space Flights and successful landings on the Moon.” (msc Roundup, 3/26/71, 1)
Lovell Lawrence, Jr., chief research engineer for Chrysler Corp. since 1964, died at age 55. Lawrence had been President of American Rocket Society, recipient of 1950 Goddard Memorial Lecture Award, President of Reaction Motors, Inc., and key figure in development of of USA Redstone ballistic missile. (NYT, 1/25/71, 39) Apogee kick motor was fired at 10:44 pm est, Jan. 26, about 11 hrs earlier than planned because of slight temperature fluctuations in apogee motor shaft. Intelsat-IV F—2 entered orbit with 36 410.4 km (22 624.4 mi) apogee, 35 740.0 km (22 207.8 mi) perigee, 1450-min period, and 0.59° inclination. Satellite would drift from position at 124° east longitude over Pacific to permanent station over Atlantic at 25.5° west longitude by about March 19. Intelsat-IV F—2 was first in Intelsat IV series of advanced comsats. Satellite—largest commercial comsat launched—was 5.4 m (17.6 ft) high with 237.5-cm (93.5-in) diameter and weighed 1397 kg (3080 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000-9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years— two years more than Intelsat III comsats and over five years more than Intelsat /. (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Release 71—4; Com-SatCorp pio)
Apollo 15 Awards Ceremony was held at msc. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for “accomplishments in the Apollo 15 mission” to Dr. Larry A. Haskin, Univ. of Wisconsin; Dr. Robert 0. Pepin, Univ. of Minnesota; Dr. Leon T. Silver, Cal Tech; Dr. M. Gene Simmons, mit; and Dr. Gordon A. Swann, U.S. Geological Survey. NASA Exceptional Service Medal was presented to 22 msc employees and NASA Public Service Award to representatives of contractors Boeing Co., Grumman Aerospace Corp., Delco Electronic Div. of General Motors Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. NASA Group Achievement Award was presented to msc Extravehicular Mobility Unit Team, msc Lunar Orbit Experiments Team, msfc and msc Lunar Roving Vehicle Team, msc Lunar Traverse Planning Team, noaa Space Flight Meteorology Group at ksc, and msc Television and Lunar Communications Relay Unit Team. Dr. Fletcher read telegram from President Nixon congratulating Apollo 15 Team which, President said, deserved “highest praise for their vital contributions to man’s scientific knowledge and our nation’s prominence in space.” (nasa Ann, 10/1/71; msc Roundup, 10/8/71, 1)
Apollo 15 lm Falcon’s liftoff from moon was described by Tom Wicker in New York Times: “The first televised liftoff of a manned spacecraft from the moon had none of the beauty and power of those moments when a huge Saturn rocket rises majestically into space from Cape Kennedy. The quick pop that sent off the Falcon in a shower of sparks looked more like something held over from the Fourth of July, and the part of the landing craft left on the moon was all too suggestive of an auto graveyard.” Two years after first moon-walk, “Americans do not . . . seem nearly so interested as they were in these prodigious feats of modem man. Even in living color and with that great American love object—an auto, of sorts—to liven up the scene, the latest moon show seemed to need something. Unfortunately the lem liftoff didn’t turn out to be it.” (NYT, 8/3/71, 27)
Newspaper editorials commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 missions: New York Times: “It must be recognized that Salyut and its successors raise important new problems for international law and international relations. Back in 1960, during the celebrated case of the American U—2 plane shot down over the Urals, Soviet leaders became very indignant about a manned American vehicle flying over their country. There have been no similar protests about the manned and unmanned satellites of the space era, but uneasiness must grow as political leaders in many countries contemplate the potential military uses of large semipermanent manned space stations such as Salyut.” (.NYT, 6/9/71) Baltimore Sun: “One point the achievement demonstrates is the intensity of Russian concentration on a definite program. As repeatedly defined, and demonstrated in practice, it is a program which sees orbital endeavor as the logical next step, with deeper explorations limited for the time to automatic systems.” (B Sun, 6/9/71)
Preparations for Apollo 15 mission were proceeding on schedule with liftoff planned for July 26, Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn, Ret.), Apollo Mission Director, told press in Washington, D.C. Astronauts would be able to remain on lunar surface for long EVA periods because of new spacesuit that would give astronauts greater mobility and facilitate experiments. New suit had neck and waist convolutes to permit bending at neck and waist, improved zipper for pressure control, improved thermal garment, more abrasive material protection, and increased water and oxygen supply. Suits also had pocket for fruit bar so astronauts could take bites during mission. (Transcript)
Recent Soviet launches “indicate continued progress toward a system for inspecting and possibly destroying American satellites,” George C. Wilson reported in the Washington Post. Cosmos 400, target satellite launched March 19, was hunted by Cosmos 404, launched April 4, which “went through a series of maneuvers under propulsion supplied by the giant SS-9 rocket. . . . The Soviet Union has conducted such space marksmanship tests before . . . But this time the test showed more sophistication ... as the hunter satellite stayed in phase with the target for a longer period of time than on previous shots.” (W Post, 4/30/71, Al)
After more than quarter century of dominating international aviation scene, U.S. was “well on its way to becoming, if not an also-ran, just another contender for the trophies of the world’s aviation markets,” John F. Loosbrock said in Air Force Magazine article. “For indicators, one only had to stroll the display line, watch the flying demonstrations, and eavesdrop at the chalets” at Paris Air Show. Bitterest pill was “lack of American presence in the supersonic-transport competition, while the Soviet TU—144. and the Anglo-French Concorde were impressing customers, the press, the public. . . .” Equally important was “dazzling array of commercial and military aviation products” displayed by European suppliers. For U.S. to forge ahead again in aviation and advanced technology generally it was going to require “new ways of looking at the problem, new ways of doing things. We are pricing ourselves out of the market, not only for what we hope to sell abroad, but even for what we would like to sell to ourselves.” (AF Mag, 7/7, 6)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
U.S.S.R. sent telegram to American Science and Engineering, Inc., designer of Apollo 15 x-ray detector, accepting invitation to cooperate with U.S. in studying x-ray sources during Apollo 15 mission. Soviet scientists would train 2591-mm (102-in) telescope on same region of sky that Apollo 15 crew would explore during return to earth and would compare notes on how strongest x-ray source in sky appeared through telescope and through x-ray detector. (McElheny, W Post, 7/21/71, A10)
Discovery of “first incontrovertible evidence” of existence of natural plutonium 244 by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley scientists was described by Dr. Calvin Alexander in Washington, D.C., press interview. Dr. Alexander and team had baked 15 mg of Pu 244—two thirds of world’s supply—in vacuum system at 2144.3 K (3400°F). Pu 244 had been made expressly for experiment by Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It survived experiment almost intact, having lost only “a hundred milliom atoms of mass” in form of rare gas, xenon. Those atoms had provided “fingerprint” for Pu 244 similar to fingerprint found in certain meteorites. Scientists had suspected meteorite fingerprint had been remnant of completely decayed Pu 244, but until Berkeley experiment they had had no “file” against which to check it. (Lannan, W Star, 4/15/71, A6)
Letter by Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ., responding to criticism of his book The Decision To Go to the Moon, was published in Science. Book had been reviewed by L. Vaughn Blankenship in Science July 23, Logsdon wrote: “Blankenship reports that I find the Apollo decision ‘a good one1 and ‘evidence of a political system operating at its best,’ I do no such thing. I do suggest . . . that ‘the decision to go to the moon was a representative American action,’ and was the product of a process ‘typical of the way many major decisions are reached.’ ” (Science, 9/17/71, 1079-80)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 402.3-km (250-mi) apogee, 133.6-km (83-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9° inclination and reentered Sept. 3. (Pres Rpt 72; SF, 2/72)
Shift in aec’s role from promoting atomic energy to protecting public interest in nuclear affairs was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Aec Chairman, at annual meeting of Atomic Industrial Forum and American Nuclear Society in Bal Harbour, Fla. It was aec’s responsibility to “develop new technical options and to bring those options to the point of commercial application,” not to “solve industry’s problems which may crop up in the course of commercial exploitation. That is industry’s responsibility, to be settled among industry, Congress, and the public.” aec’s role was “primarily to perform as a referee serving the public interest.” (Text)
Unidentified satellite launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb by ThorAgena booster exploded about 40 sec after liftoff, (upi, W Star, 2/18/71)	_	_
usaf launched unidentified satellite at 11:41 pdt from Vanden-berg afb on new Titan HID booster. Satellite entered orbit with 289.7km (180-mi) apogee, 178.6-km (111-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 96.3° inclination. Booster used five-segment, 3-m (10-ft) solid-fuel strap-on boosters and was reportedly capable of placing 6800 kg (15 000 lbs) in low earth orbit. Satellite reentered Aug. 6. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; 8/31/71; SBD, 6/18/71, 258; Pres Rpt 72)
Two prototype x-ray devices for detecting weapons and explosives in carry-on luggage of air passengers had been successfully tested at Dulles International Airport in Virginia, faa announced. Low radiation x-ray units—Flying Spot developed by American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Bendix Ray Inspectoscope developed by Bendix Aerospace Systems Div.—sent x-ray pulse through luggage to obtain shadowgraph, which was displayed on TV screen. Devices did not affect photographic film or recording tape, (faa Release 71-162)
Foreign sources interested in buying sst development package had contacted dot, William, M. Magruder, Director of dot’s sst pro- ' gram, told press in Washington, D.C. Inquiries had come from Japanese trading firm Ataka, from Middle East source, and from West German source. Magruder said congressional leaders “have made no attempt to discourage” plan to seek package to recoup termination costs of sst program, estimated at between $97 million and $157 million, depending on whether airlines got back sst purchase deposits. (AP, B Sun, 3/29/71, A3)
Apollo 15 anomalies were discussed by Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee during nsc luncheon and Apollo 15 film showing in Washington, D.C.: “I have been queried and have read comments that . . . we had more anomalies than we have seen in previous missions. In fact this is not so.” List of 40 anomalies had been compiled by nasa. “Twenty of these had to do with the experiments and the lrv, most of which were carried for the first time on this mission. This compares with 30 total anomalies on Apollo 14, 44 total anomalies on Apollo 12 and 43 on Apollo 10. Therefore I would conclude that we are not retrogressing in so far as the Apollo hardware performance is concerned.” Lee said lunar stay of 73 hrs was planned for Apollo 16. “The additional 6 hrs will not give us more eva time than we planned on Apollo 15, but will allow more time for eva preps, sleep, eating, etc.” (Text)
usaf launched nine satellites from Vandenberg afb by one Atlas booster at 5:11 pm pdt (8:11 pm edt). Ov 1—20 Orbiting Vehicle— carrying energetic proton analyzer, particle energy and flux thermal detector, and uv solar radiation experiment—entered orbit with 1932.8km (1201-mi) apogee, 136.8-km (85-mi) perigee, 105.9-min period, and 92° inclination and reentered Aug. 28. Ov 1-21■—carrying velocity mass spectrometer, atmospheric composition sensor, and ELf/vlf antenna effects transceiver—entered orbit with 917.3-km (570-mi) apogee, 788.6-km (490-mi) perigee, 101.9-min period, and 87.6° inclination. Cannonball 2 (OAR 901) carried accelerometers to model atmospheric densities into orbit with 1794.4-fcin (1115-mi) apogee, 130.4-kih (81mi) perigee, 104.2-min period, and 92° inclination. It reentered Jan. 31, 1972.	Musketball (OAR 907) carried instruments to measure density variations into orbit with 653.4-km (406-mi) apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 92.3-min period, and 87.6° inclination. It reentered Sept. 19. Five remaining satellites were ejected from Ov 1—21. RTD 701, which would serve as calibration target, entered orbit with 915.7-km 569-mi) apogee, 774.1-km (481-mi) perigee, 101.7-min period, and 87.6° inclination. Four AVL 802 satellites would gather aerodynamic data for use in design and development of orbiting vehicles. Orbital parameters: apogee, 917.3 km (570 mi); perigee, 762.8-791.8 km (474—482 mi); period 101.6-101.9 min; and inclination, 87.5°—87.8°. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 8/10/71, 187; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72)
Winners of 11th annual Federal Women’s Award were announced by Patricia R. Hitt, Assistant Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. They included Rita M. Rapp, Subsystems Manager of Apollo Food and Personal Hygiene Items and Head of Tests and Integration Activities for Skylab Food System at msc. Winners, selected from 119 upper-grade Federal career women nominated, would be honored at Feb. 25 dinner in Washington, D.C. (Federal Times, 2/17/71, 3; Dean, W Star, 2/4/71, C3)	_	_
William M. Magruder, Director of sst Development for dot, told press in Washington, D.C., that Ataka and Co. of Japan had suggested it could obtain financing of $500 million or more from major Japanese industrial concerns to resurrect SST program. In return Ataka would become 50% partner in enterprise. On May 23, however, Ataru Takizawa, Vice President of Ataka and Co., said in Tokyo there was no truth to report that his firm made exploratory proposal to revive U.S. sst program. (Aug, W Star, 5/22/11% AP, W Post, 5/23/71)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
President Nixon in Caneel Bay, Virgin Islands, issued statement following successful Apolio 14 launch: “Today, we take the most amazing things almost for granted. It is difficult to imagine, but some day the discovery of the New World will seem almost inconsequential alongside the explorations of our own time. In a way we are like the people who must have stood on the dock at Palos, Spain, and watched Columbus’ ships disappear, believing they were watching the end of a great event, when they were watching the beginning. But where they watched the world being opened, and did not know it, we are watching the heavens being opened and we do know it. While those men went under the patronage of individual monarchs, our men go for the American people and, in a larger sense, for all mankind." {PD, 2/8/71, 151-2)
usaf commanders believed usaf had entered “critical period in which American strategic and tactical air power is declining” while U.S.S.R.’s “is expanding,” New York Times reported. Chief elements of problem were that usaf’s basic weapon systems, B-52 bomber and F—4 fighter-bomber, were nearing obsolescence and needed to be replaced at “high cost” by B-l and F—15; satellite-gathered intelligence indicated U.S.S.R. had established lead over U.S. in land-based icbms, was building emplacements for larger missiles, and had deployed FOBS to bring missiles on target from any direction; and developments were taking place against “background of budgetary stringency” in U.S. (Middleton, NYT, 10/31/71, 95)
Vice President Spiro T, Agnew told workers at Ksc after Apollo 14 launch that days of declining space budget were past and “we’re going forward together not just to the moon but I’m certain that the American program will continue and press forward into the reaches of interplanetary space.” (AP, W Star, 2/11/71, A7)
Nomination of Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) for Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for outstanding service to aviation was announced by NAA. Citation was “for his continuing energetic advocacy of and lasting contribution to the development and use of aviation both as a viable national transportation system and as an essential element in maintaining a strong military posture.” Trophy would be presented in Washington, D.C., Dec. 17. (naa Release)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, as NASA Director for Life Sciences. Appointment would become effective when successor for Dr. Berry was found. Dr. Berry would succeed Dr. James W. Humphreys, Jr., who became Secretary-Treasurer of American Board of Surgery. (nasa Ann, 9/1/71; NASA Release 71—166; Am Bd of Surgery pio)
NASA, National Weather Service and Environmental Data Service spokesmen, questioned by Washington Post, said their agencies had received complaints from public that Apollo 15 mission had caused heavy rainfall over Washington, D.C., area. They denied that mission was responsible and that rains accompanying Apollo 13 and 14 missions had been anything more than coincidence. (Cohen, W Post, 8/5/71, Bl)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., said Anglo-French Concorde supersonic jet transport would be quiet enough to land at U.S. airports. Concorde would be used over North Atlantic and would not cause potentially destructive sonic booms over U.S. Shaffer predicted U.S. would build sst eventually. (Reuters, W Post 12/15/71, E10)
Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service Medals at dod ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee presented usn dsm to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented usaf dsm and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; dod Release 218-71; msc Hist Off)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by single Thorad-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 220.5-km (137-mi) apogee, 169-km (105-mi) perigee, 88.3-min period, and 74.9° inclination. It reentered Oct. 5. The other entered orbit with 506.9-km (315-mi) apogee, 487.6-km (303-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 75° inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 9/23/71, 64)
General Dynamics Corp. demonstrated CL-215 Air Tanker over Anacostia River in Washington, D.C. Amphibious aircraft scooped up 5.5 cu m (1440 gal) of water from river, took off, and released water from two 2.7-cu-m (720-gal) tanks to show what it could do to forest fire. General Dynamics was interested in selling three CL-215s at $1.4 million each to U.S. Forest Service, Washington Post reported. (Barnes, W Post, 5/12/71, Bl)
dod spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C., that cost increase for USN F-14 fighter aircraft was about $2 billion. If tentative plans to produce more than 700 aircraft materialized, cost would increase $2.8 million per aircraft, from $11.5 million to $14.3 million. Earlier, manufacturer Grumman Aerospace Corp. had blamed cost increase on inflation and other factors contributing to poor business conditions. (Witkin, NYT, 6/3/71, 15)
Soviet computer had calculated total weight of atmosphere at 5 quadrillion, 157 trillion tons, Tass reported. News agency said calculation was “essential for research in cosmonautics, space geodesy and gravimetry.” Computer had, for first time, taken into account “all the peculiarities of the earth’s relief and the distribution of temperatures on its surface,” Tass said, (upi, San Francisco Examiner, 11/5/71)
Newspaper editorials commented on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: Chicago Tribune: “Any one of a million things could have gone wrong, because there are a million things that have had to go right for each Soviet and American success in space. It is no discredit to Russian scientists that something went wrong at the last moment. It is testimony to the good fortune and skill and care of the United States space program that something of this kind hasn’t happened yet to us.” (C Trib, 7/1/71) Christian Science Monitor:	. . those men who fly such missions are taking the risk for the aspirations of mankind to break the limitations of earth’s gravitational and atmospheric fields. They depend on the accumulating technological knowledge of mankind to protect them. As a result, the Soyuz 11 event argues the more determinedly that nations—for the moment chiefly the United States and the Soviet Union—should share their space research efforts.” (CSM, 7/1/71) Washington Post: “The special sorrow that must be felt at this event does not proceed from their numbers—three deaths next to, say, thousands among the world’s more recently savaged refugees. Nor does it proceed alone from their conspicuous bravery, their willingness to take the ultimate risk in pursuit of a national mission: daily, men in combat make the same commitment and do so minus the glory and unambiguous sense of purpose that cosmonauts and astronauts share. So it is more than the death of three men on a high risk venture that must move the earthbound to a special sorrow: it is the death of these men in pursuit of the ultimate adventure, exploration of the outer limits of human knowledge and endurance—and beyond.” (W Post, 7/1/71) New York Times: “. . . it should be apparent that the staggering dangers of space can be met most effectively by mobilizing all the knowledge and talent available irrespective of nationality. It is time to abandon the wasteful irrationality of prestige-motivated competition. The real lesson of this tragedy is . . . that space exploration ought to be a cooperative endeavor of all nations.” (NYT, 7/1/71) Baltimore Sun: “The three cosmonauts lived in space for almost 23 days, and by all indications the station’s operation came up to its designers’ hopes. Only in the final brief stage, a stage often successful before, did disaster intervene. It is tragedy, but it is not defeat.” (B Sun, 7/1/71)
Spokesman for Army Corps of Engineers announced personnel at KSC District Office would be cut from 30 to 15, effective June 30. Change was “result of a greatly diminished workload for NASA and the Air Force in the Cape Kennedy area.” (Cocoa, Fla, Today, 5/5/71, Bl)
Fiftieth anniversary of first transatlantic transmissions by American amateur radio “hams” on 200-m frequency. Rouncing radio transmissions off ionosphere over long distances was later to prove seminal in evolution of concepts for passive reflector satellites. (QST, 12/71, 54r-7)
Federal Government had filed $3 690 290 suit against Bechtel Corp. in Federal District Court in San Francisco, Wall Street Journal reported. Suit charged that Bechtel’s designs for space environment simulation chamber for Msc were “inadequate, improper and unsuited for the purpose intended.” Chamber had failed in 1964 NASA test, Government said. (WSJ, 11/2/71)
At Apollo 15 press briefing in Washington, D.C., Astronaut Alfred M. Worden, CM pilot, described planned activities in lunar orbit, including first “working walk” in space. At 320 000 km (200 000 mi) from earth on return journey from moon, he would move outside cm, hand-walk on 7.6-m (25-ft) tether along rail, and open bay in SM to retrieve two canisters of film used to photograph moon while spacecraft was in lunar orbit. It was necessary to retrieve film before SM was jettisoned 160 km (100 mi) from earth before cm’s reentry. Worden said one hour had been allotted to space walk but underwater practice had indicated retrievals could be completed in 20 min. Two roundtrips from cm to SM were necessary because only one canister could be carried at a time. First canister would weigh 36.3 kg (80 lbs) and hold 2000 m (6700 ft) of film, including more than 1600 exposures of lunar surface taken from 113-km (70-mi) lunar orbit. Photos would be enlarged on earth to compose blowup 15.2 m (50 ft) wide and 160 km (100 mi) long showing details on lunar surface as small as 1.5 m (5 ft) in diameter, nasa hoped these would include photo of UEtv. Second canister would weight 3.6 kg (8 lbs) and hold 1100 m (3600 ft) of film used in mapping camera. While Worden retrieved cannisters, cm’s hatch would be opened. Astronaut James B. Irwin would guide Worden along tether and Astronaut David R. Scott would stow canisters when Worden passed them through hatch. Worden told press, “We’re going to be doing something out there, not just testing out an engineering concept or working out a procedure to do something.” (Transcript)
Eyewitness to Space by H. Lester Cooke with James H. Dean, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., was reviewed by Frank Getlein in Washington Evening Star. Book contained more than 250 paintings and drawings by artists in nasa artist program. “What they have Created is an extraordinary record . . . because it records more than the eye, even the trained eye, can see. The sketches and many of the paintings do indeed record what any eye can see, but the seeing is special. Beyond that, artist after artist at some point found himself pushed by the material itself into taking an abstract, symbolic view of the space flights themselves, painting a vision, not a view.” nasa artists program, “one of the most remarkable ventures in art-government relations,” had brought hundreds of artists to NASA facilities to paint or draw what they saw and they were to see whatever they wanted and depict it in whatever manner suited their perceptions.” Only requirement was that all work was to be turned over to NASA, which had given it to National Gallery. Coauthor Cooke was National Gallery Curator of Painting. It was “hard to think of anything in art history that quite compares with the nasa program.” Getlein recalled Italian TV coverage of first moon walk. “One big response to the event was to convene gatherings of famous Italians—non-scientists all—in studios . . . and have them talk about the moon. But at many points in the protracted coverage, against a background of Beethoven, a beautiful Tuscan voice read Dante.” Qualities evoked by this “odd response, but an oddly perfect one,” were “precisely those that have eluded American television coverage of the space program. They are qualities that this book reaches for constantly and often attains.” (W Star, 10/17/71, B5)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, addressed annual meeting of National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “I am impressed with the soundness of this new space program for the Seventies and I urge you to support it. I also believe very much that our country needs it.” Among program’s strengths were: it had congressional backing; it was well planned and well balanced to meet basic national needs, including national security; it stressed earth orbit as “new realm of prime importance and great opportunity, where America’s capacity for world leadership will be tested not only in this decade but in the decades to follow.” Program promoted economic progress based on new technology, was essential to President Nixon’s peace policies based on international cooperation, and was “already part of America’s destiny, as all of you can testify who watched the Apollo 15 operations on international television.” nasa had been “impressed and encouraged” by President’s call for new programs to ensure maximum enlistment of technology in meeting challenge of peace and by President’s promises to present those programs in next session of Congress. “Technology, in my judgment, has made this country great and will keep it great. It is certainly true that we need adequate political controls and, if possible, social controls to keep technology the servant of man, and not his master. But nevertheless new technology we absolutely need to assure jobs and a better life for all Americans in the decades ahead.” Dr. Fletcher felt recent shuttle studies had “reinforced the general belief that America’s future in space in the remainder of the 20th Century depends in large measure on our skill and our determination in defining and developing the shuttle.” (Edited text) Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said in speech that U.S.S.R.’s Foxbat fighter aircraft was “now operational in Egypt and cannot be matched in performance by anything we have in operation.” (Text)
Author Norman Mailer said in San Francisco that Americans were as interested in Apollo 14 as they would be in “border war in Bolivia.” He criticized images of astronauts projected by NASA. They were “tough men—daredevils” but nasa presented them as “priests.” NASA was “asking this country to love saints and Americans are not noted for that.” (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A24)
Discovery of rarest nuclear particle anti-omega-minus baryon in photo of nuclear interaction was reported by physicist Dr. Gerson Goldhaber of Univ. of California at Berkeley at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Particle’s track had been found in search of more than 500 000 photos and further confirmed that baryon particles had antiparticles. Photos of particle collisions were taken in heavy-hydrogen-filled bubble chamber of particle accelerator at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (AP, NYT, 2/2/71, 19)
Soviet pilots in Egypt were testing “superjets,” probably MiG—23s, according to diplomatic sources quoted by upi in Boston Globe. Aircraft were understood to he capable of reaching altitudes to 24 000 m (80 000 ft) and speeds up to three times speed of sound. They outmatched U.S. F—4 Phantoms used by Israeli air force. (B Globe, 5/5/71, 6)
First transatlantic picture telephone call was made successfully between U.S. and Sweden via Intelsat-IV F—2 orbiting over Atlantic. One-hour transmission was part of ceremonies in Sweden and at ComSatCorp headquarters in Washington, D.C., formally inaugurating new Nordic earth station at Tanum, Sweden, jointly owned by Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. (ComSatCorp Release 71-67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIR-Agena booster into orbit with 392.7-km (244-mi) apogee, 133.6-km (83-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 17, 1971. (Pres Rpt 72; SF, 4/72, 132)
Management plans for omsf space shuttle program were announced by NASA: OMSF Hq. in Washington, D.C., would be responsible for overall management, including assignment of responsibilities, basic performance requirements, control of major milestones, and funding allocations to nasa centers. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, had assigned responsibility for program control, overall systems engineering and systems integration, and overall responsibility for definition of elements of total system that interacted with other elements to MSC, which also would be responsible for shuttle’s orbiter stage. MSFC would be responsible for booster stage and shuttle’s main engines. ICSC would be responsible for design of launch and recovery facilities. All three centers would station personnel at MSC for systems engineering and integration activity, (nasa Release 71—104)
Findings that linked light flashes experienced by astronauts in periods of otherwise total darkness to high-speed cosmic rays passing through eye retina were reported at nasa and American Nuclear Society Conference in Las Vegas, Nev. Findings were from studies by scientists of Univ. of Washington at Seattle and Univ. of California at Berkeley. Dr. Cornelius A. Tobias and Dr. Thomas F. Budinger of Univ. of California at Berkeley had twice exposed themselves to low doses of cyclotron-accelerated cosmic rays aimed at their eyes in effort to reproduce flashes described by Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Apollo 14 Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell. Scientists said they saw flashes that differed from visual phenomena associated with x-rays or electrical and magnetic exposures. They concluded that flashes came from ionization and excitation of atoms in retina as it was bombarded by cosmic rays. Evidence indicated flashes were detected by retinal rods, structures in eyes that allowed night vision. Radiations were not believed to be hazardous to astronauts on short flights, but long-duration effects had not yet been evaluated. (Wilford, NYT, 3/4/71, 18)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1970 was presented to b/g Robert A. Duffy (usaf), Vice Commander of samso, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for efforts bringing “dramatic improvements in the effectiveness and maneuverability of advanced re-entry systems, and in both the effectiveness and variety of penetration aids designed to compound the difficulties of an enemy in intercepting reentry systems.” (W Star, 6/29/71, A4)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 400.7-km (249-mi) apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered May 13. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; 5/31/71; Pres Rpt 72)
Daniel Guggenheim Medal was presented to Dr. Archibald E. Russell, Chief Designer for Bristol Aircraft Corp., during Washington, D.C., ceremonies marking first William Littlewood Memorial Lecture sponsored by nac and Washington sections of aiaa and sae. Award was for “personal devotion to aircraft engineering and design and particularly for his leadership of the Bristol team in development of the Concorde SST.” Peter G. Masefield, Chairman of British Airports Authority, delivered first Littlewood lecture, “Aviation and the Environment.” nac Man of Distinction Award was given posthumously to William Littlewood, former American Airlines Vice President and aviation engineering consultant, (nac Release)
Boris Sergievsky, World War I aviator with Imperial Russian Air Force and later leading test pilot in U.S., died in New York at age 83. He had set seaplane records with Pan American World Airways’ Brazilian Clipper, flown Sikorsky amphibian aircraft to Chile in 1931, and been vice president of Helicopter Corp. of America. (NYT, 11/26/71, 38)
Library of Congress published United States and Soviet Progress in Space: Some New Contrasts, report by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Congressional Research Service Science Policy Research Div. Report summarized “how far these two major space powers have come in the last 13 years,” gave “answers to frequently raised questions about the comparative aspects of the two programs,” and looked at possible future developments. Since U.S.S.R. did not disclose information on its space budget and manpower, exact comparison with U.S. could not be made. Dr. Sheldon speculated, however, that Soviet budget was about 2% of gnp—more than twice as much as U.S. percentage—and that Soviet space work force was close to 600 000 persons. Greatest number of successful launches from a single site to earth orbit and beyond between 1957 and 1970 had been 311 from Vandenberg afb, Calif. U.S.S.R.’s Bay-konur was second with 282, followed by ksc with 189 and Plesetsk, U.S.S.R., with 147. There seemed to be little difference between U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in general purpose and direction. Both were broadly based with elements of scientific exploration, technology development, national image building, practical applications, and military support services. Although military missions made up about two thirds of launches by both countries, number of presumptively specialized U.S. military missions had declined from 34 missions in 1966 to 16 in 1970, while U.S.S.R. total had increased from 28 missions in 1966 to 57 in 1970. Although U.S. and U.S.S.R. were competing in space they were also cooperating. Cooperation already under way included exchange of information at scientific meetings, negotiation of treaties, trading of space-collected weather pictures, joint efforts to write textbook on space biology, coordination of efforts on geomagnetism, and negotiation on possible common designs for docking attachments to facilitate space rescue or joint projects. (Text)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Dr. James C. Fletcher to be nasa Administrator succeeding Dr. Thomas O. Paine, whose resignation was effective Sept. 15, 1970. Dr. Fletcher had been President of Univ. of Utah and College of Eastern Utah since 1964. He had organized Space General Corp., subsidiary of Aerojet-General Corp. in 1960 and served as President 1960-1962 and Chairman of Board 1962-1964. From 1960 to 1962 he was President of Space Electronics Corp., which he founded. Dr. Fletcher had been Associate Director of guided missile laboratory at Ramo-Woolridge Corp. He was member of Air Force Science Advisory Board and Naval Warfare Panel. Nomination was submitted to Senate March 1. (PD, 3/1/71, 383— 3/8/71, 437)
Tass reported arrival in Moscow of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, and group of NASA experts “in connection with the forthcoming technical conference of Soviet and American experts in ensuring compatibility of means of approach and docking of spaceships and stations.” Conference would take place Nov. 29 to Dec. 7. (fbis-Sov-71-230, 11/30/71, LI)
The short and uneventful flight of Soyuz 10 suggested . . . that the Soviet Union ran into technical difficulties in its first attempt at establishing a manned workshop in earth orbit,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. “Just what the difficulties might have been is unclear, but the landing of Soyuz 10 after only two days in space, the brief time Soyuz spent docked with the Salute workshop and the apparent failure to transfer crew members ... all added up in American minds to a bungled mission.” (W Post, 4/26/71, A21)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
National Civil Service League announced selection of 10 Federal officials to receive annual Career Service Awards. Recipients included NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley, cited for “his administrative expertise which enables him to help design major policy directions at NASA and interpret them to the Congress and the public.” Honorees would receive $1000, watches, and citations at banquet April 23 in Washington, D.C. (W Star, 3/2/71, A2)
Magellanic Premium of American Philosophical Society was presented to jpl mathematicians Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren at Society’s Annual General Meeting in Philadelphia. Muller and Sjogren were cited for “their discovery of lunar mascons leading to the first detailed gravimetric map of the moon.” Magellanic gold medal had been presented only 22 times since inception in 1790. Most recent recipient had been Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, in 1966. (jpl Release 604)
MSFC announced plans to launch 914-mm (36-in) Stratoscope II balloonborne astronomical telescope from msfc in August. Objective of mission was to study Galaxies M31 and M32, Planetary Nebula (NGC 7662), Orion Nebula, and planet Saturn. Stratoscope II project management, previously directed by Princeton Univ., had been recently assigned to msfc as part of project reorganization. Seven previous launches had been from National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Scientific Balloon Flight Station at Palestine, Tex. (msfc Release 71—78)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. editorial board for preparation and publication of review of space biology and medicine held second meeting in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Professor Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California and Professor Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Institute of Medical Biological Problems of Soviet Ministry of Health. (nasa Release 71-16)
President Nixon transmitted nasa’s 22nd Semiannual Report to Congress covering July 1 to Dec. 31, 1969. In letter accompanying report, Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, wrote, “The two successful Moon missions [Apollo 11 and 12] fulfilled the national goal of a manned lunar landing and safe return within the decade of the sixties and convincingly demonstrated the technological competence of the Apollo program.” Flights had shown “value of the space program as a unifying force in international relations, for interest in the Moon landings and in the astronauts transcended national boundaries. This Nation, in turn, took the view that the achievement was a triumph for all mankind even though the deed itself was performed by American astronauts.” (Text; CR, 3/17/71, H1631)
Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., was opened to public for signing of condolence book for Soyuz 11 cosmonauts. (W Post, 7/3/71, A12)
Tenth anniversary of Air Force Systems Command, afsc—in charge of planning, developing, and acquiring all usaf weapon and space systems and supporting technologies—administered annual contracts worth about $48 billion. Annual expenditures accounted for more than one fourth of total usaf budget, afsc was staffed by 9600 officers, 18 500 airmen, and 31000 civilians, (afsc Release 94.71; AFM, 4/71, 43)
USN plans to maintain offensive capability without exorbitant investment were described by Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Jr., Chief of Naval Operations, in speech before Cleveland, Ohio, chapter of American Ordnance Assn.: “We intend to develop small, high speed platforms. These will include escorts having a hard punch but which do not individually constitute a high percentage of our total capability. These will probably be . .. hydrofoils, air cushion platforms and surface effect ships. We have placed a very high priority on the surface effect ship on the premise that this offers the potential for destroyer-size ships to conduct anti-submarine warfare on top of the water at speeds 2 or 3 times greater than the fastest submarines.” With addition of v/stol aircraft, “one can envision a fleet of highly mobile craft which would be a potent striking force when concentrated, or a number of unique and flexible weapons systems when operating as individual units. By supplementing this force with small high speed craft as missilelaunching platforms we will add a new dimension to our present powerful aircraft carriers, frigates, destroyers, and guided missile ships.” (Text) January 28: nasa launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets from terls carrying Indian experiments to study ionosphere. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list) nasa announced award to Lockheed Electronics Co. of $800 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for scientific and technical support services for mtf Earth Resources Laboratory. Contract covered one year with provision for two one-year extensions. Company would support laboratory in research on application of remote-sensing data to Mississippi-Louisiana-Gulf area. Data would be obtained from aircraft, erts, Skylab, Gemini, and Apollo experiments, (nasa Release 71-13)
Soviet Aviation Industry Minister Pavel Dementyev told Paris press conference Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 was expected to go into commercial service in late 1973 or early 1974, about same time as Anglo-French Concorde. Only one Tu-144 was operational; two other prototypes under construction were expected to fly at year’s end. Tu-144 had logged several hundred flying hours and flown at 2458 km per hr (1528 mph) at 6100 m (20 000 ft). Aleksey N. Tupolev, designer of Tu-144, said at press conference that Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby was interested in aircraft, “but it is too soon to speak about markets or negotiations with international airlines until the Tu-144 has completed its test program.” (Reuters, W Post, 5/29/71)
European Space Conference President Tbeo Lefevre, Belgian Minister for Scientific Policy and Planning, told Brussels press conference that U.S. had refused at Feb. 11—12 conference in Washington, D.C., to sell U.S. launch vehicles for European comsats. Lefevre said State Dept, had told him, however, that if two thirds of Intelsat’s 72 members agreed that launch vehicles should be sold* U.S. would sell. (NYT, 2/17/71, 14; WPost, 2/17/71, A13)
Exhibits at new $6-million Air Force Museum near Dayton, Ohio, were described by New York Times: DC-6 Independence used by President Truman; Constellation Columbine HI and 47J Sioux helicopter used by President Eisenhower; reproduction of Wright 1909 Military Flyer; B-70, only remaining ultrasonic bomber; Douglas World Cruiser New Orleans, which flew around world in 1924; Soviet MiG-15; and relics of Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk. Museum, “first permanent repository of Air Force memorabilia,” was 244 m (800 ft) long, 91 m (300 ft) wide, and 24 m (80 ft) tall and housed 150 aircraft. It was built with funds provided by private gifts. NYT, 9/5/71, 28; nasa Hist Off)
NASA received design patents No. 220 980 through 220 985 for early conceptual designs of space shuttle. Inventors were employees of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. (Jones, NYT, 6/26/71; Patent Off pio)
Selection of National Science Teachers Assn., Washington, D.C., for negotiation of $39 000, 19-mo, cost-reimbursement contract for management and operation of Skylab Student Project was announced by NASA. Purpose of project was to stimulate interest in science and technology by directly involving students in space research, nsta would notify student and educational community of opportunity and method of participation, develop procedures for evaluation of proposals based on educational value, and develop certificates of participation and awards system for entrants, nsta also would develop plans for entrants whose proposal ideas had been selected by NASA and conduct Skylab Student Education Conference at Ksc in conjunction with Skylab launch, (nasa Release 71—183)
Government-industry program for development of experimental jet STOL aircraft was proposed by nasa and dot at meeting of nae Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board in Washington, D.C. Program would pool Government and industry funds in partnership to develop low-noise-level jet STOL technology. Development of prototype and operational aircraft for commercial use would be left to competitive industry decision and financing, nasa later said development of experimental aircraft was necessary to complete technology and proof-of-concept work for production of economically and environmentally acceptable stol air transport system. Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, estimated that research aircraft could be flight-tested in approximately two years from inception of cooperative program, (nasa Release 71-20; nae pio)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 400.7-km (249-mi) apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered May 13. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/71; 5/31/71; Pres Rpt 72)
President Nixon released statement on dedication of new USAF Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio: “The United States Air Force Museum demonstrates in a most compelling fashion the tremendous progress which American aviation has made in a remarkably brief time. It will afford a valuable opportunity for future generations of Americans to learn about the dedication and courage and skill which have made that progress possible.” At dedication ceremonies President said, “. . . the United States intends, and we resolve today, that having been first in aviation from the beginning, we will attempt to be first in aviation for the time to come. This should be our goal, and one that we can achieve.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1240-2)	.
NASA Wallops Station participation in Cornell Univ. experiment to obtain data on importance of celestial, magnetic, topographic, and meteorological cues in guidance systems of nocturnally migrating birds was announced by NASA. Station would provide support in tracking birds with 18-m (60-ft) dish on space range antenna (spandar). Birds would be captured in nets, examined, and small magnets would be attached. They would then be released by weather balloon to continue flight under varying cloud conditions. Each bird would be tracked by radar as it made orientational decision and departed in migration. (NASA Release 71—98)
New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and support” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C. “The development of new cities may be the important challenge we face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 39 266.4-km (24 399-mi) apogee, 328.3-km (204-mi) perigee, 701.8-min period, and 63.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; Av Wk, 4/26/71, 19)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 506.9 km (315 mi); perigee, 487.6 km (303 mi); period, 94.5 min; and inclination, 75°. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 7/26/71, 109)
International aspects of U.S. space program were discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in luncheon speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C.: Cooperation with Western nations in past decade had included 70 countries, 250 specific agreements, and more than 24 joint satellite projects at run-out cost in excess of $400 million. More than 50% of total had been funded by other nations. In 1970s, “opportunities exist for cooperation on a significantly larger scale.” U.S. wished “to build a foundation for important benefit- and cost-sharing in the major space programs of the future.” Canada, Japan, and Australia—“countries having the most obvious potential for post-Apollo work-sharing”—had been given “every chance to become fully acquainted with our plans and studies” to enable them to decide whether they wished to commit their own resources. European Space Conference had put several million dollars into studies of post-Apollo program possibilities and some member countries had invested still larger amounts. British, French, and West German firms were working with NASA prime contractors on space shuttle design studies. Europe would have to choose between significant participation in shuttle funding and funding independent European rocket program. Decision would be necessary “even if Europe funds only 10 per cent of the shuttle’s price tab.” U.S. had said it would “sell launch services for projects consistent with peaceful purposes and existing international agreements . . . [and] that general technical access to the entire program would be available, but that technology at the level of commercial know-how would be transferred in either direction only where one side required it to complete its commitments to the other.” Since Europe was talking of only 10% share of shuttle program, “we said that we would retain decision-making responsibility except where European costs were directly affected, in which case decisions would be joint.” In U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space, “it is particularly important that we give clear recognition to both . . . competition and cooperation.” U.S. was competing with U.S.S.R. “because accomplishments in space represent a measure of the state of our technology; and in today’s world, the level of our technology is of first importance, strategically, economically, and politically.” U.S. was cooperating with U.S.S.R. “because we both live in a vast universe that must be explored, where important new knowledge is to be gained, for the benefit of all men, everywhere.” While U.S. retained demonstrated lead over U.S.S.R., “it will not be an enduring lead without major new initiatives on our part— initiatives like the space shuttle and the exploration of the outer planets. . . .” In Jan. 18—21 Moscow talks with Soviet Academy of Sciences, “we specifically agreed, initially, to exchange three grams [0.11 oz] of sample obtained from Luna 16, for three grams each from Apollo 11 and 12. These relatively small amounts are sufficient for detailed scientific examination of a comparative nature.” Additional meetings on compatible docking arrangements had not been held because “docking discussions are well underway, and the planned exchange of information is taking place.” On visit to Soviet cosmonaut training area at Star City, “we were welcomed by Cosmonauts Beregovoy, Nikolayev, Leonov, Shatalov, and Valentina Tereshkova. We were shown the Soyuz mission trainer, and were invited to attempt to dock two Soyuz spacecraft in their docking trainer. While there, I also presented a plaque in memory of Yuri Gagarin [first man in space] from the U.S. astronauts.” (Text) • President Nixon announced appointments of members of President’s Science Advisory Committee for terms expiring Dec. 31, 1974: Dr. Lee A.	DuBridge, former Presidential Science Adviser; Dr. Herbert Friedman of nrl; Dr. Daniel P. Moynahan, former Counsellor to the President; Kenneth H. Olsen, President of Digital Equipment Corp.; and Dr. John G. Truxal of Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute. {PD, 2/1/71,
MSFC announced award of $1197 000 incentive contract to American Science and Engineering, Inc., for support services in Skylab atm project. Contract would run from Aug. 22, 1971, through June 30, 1972. (msfc Release 71-176)
Cornell Univ. and EDP Technology, Inc., announced that contract for sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell to edp had been allowed to expire by mutual consent. (Van Gelder, NYT, 7/14/71, 58) July 14: Apollo 15 completed final practice countdown at ksc in preparation for launch to moon July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/71, 16)
nasa announced six-month delay in development of space shuttle to give contractors more time to study in detail alternatives resulting from current studies. Under new schedule, North American Rockwell Corp., McDonnell Douglas Co., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., and Grumman Aerospace Corp. would study designs until April 30, 1972, rather than concluding at end of October. Selection of sites for shuttle development and operational flights would be deferred until overall system characteristics were defined, (nasa Release 71—199)
MSC announced award of four, four-month, fixed-price extensions to contracts for space shuttle preliminary design. McDonnell Douglas Corp,, North American Rockwell Corp., and General Dynamics Corp. would each receive $2 800 000, and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would receive $1 400 000. (msc Release 71—46)
faa announced award of $530 125 contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., for analytical and experimental program to develop new microwave landing system (mls) for civil-military common use, to replace vhf/uhf instrument landing system (ils) developed in early 1940s. Microwave system would provide more precise electronic guidance to aircraft on approaches and landings than current system; selectable flight paths to permit greater number of aircraft operations at airports; closer spacing of parallel runways; and procedures to ease noise over surrounding communities, (faa Release 71—109)
Mrs. Leatrice M. Pendray—early rocket experimenter, syndicated columnist, and public relations executive—died in Princeton, N.J., at age 66 following long illness. She had been cofounder of American Interplanetary Society in 1930. Society had been renamed American Rocket Society and was later merged with Institute of Aerospace Science to form American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (NYT, 10/9/71, 30; A&A 1963)
nasa plans to develop first space rescue capability during 1972 Skylab program were described by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, before aas meeting in Washington, D.C.: Studies indicated nasa could have rescue spacecraft standing by on launch pad 20 days before scheduled Skylab launch in spring 1973. Rescue technique would be facilitated by equipping Apollo spacecraft with two extra seats beneath three regular crew seats. In space emergency, modified spacecraft would be launched with two-man crew rather than three. It would rendezvous with distressed Skylab vehicle to recover three-man Skylab team. Rescue vehicle would have improved hydraulic telescoping landing legs to absorb impact on land if water landing was not practical. (AP, Huntsville Times, 3/11/71)
Full-size plywood model of B-l strategic bomber, designed as replacement for USAF B-52, was displayed for first time by North American Rockwell Corp. in Los Angeles. (W Post, 11/5/71, 3)
International Institute for Strategic Studies was quoted as saying in London that 30 to 70 new Soviet Sukhoi Su-11 delta-wing advanced fighter aircraft had been delivered to Soviet Air Force in Egypt. Aircraft were believed to be capable of mach 2.5 speed and were armed with air-to-air missiles. (Reuters, CSM, 12/28/71, 2)
National Space Club luncheon honored Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, late nasa Deputy Administrator, physicist, and Director of naca from 1947 to 1958. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech: “Dr. Dryden held that the decentralization of authority was a desirable goal and dictatorial control of projects, funds, and facilities should be avoided. He knew that ideas and skills would be widely dispersed. Even though the goals of applied research and development projects were concrete and specific, the approach to these goals had to he diversified. Freedom of the agencies and scientists engaged in the work was a necessity here, as it was in fundamental research, if the best use was to be made of their abilities. These concepts have lived and grown, and I believe, still represent the fundamental policy for the management of programs at nasa today.” During luncheon, bust of Dr. Dryden, commissioned by National Space Club and executed by sculptress Una Hanbury, was officially presented to nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (Text; nsc News Letter)
Astronaut Information: American and Soviet (Revised) (71—204 SP) was published by Library of Congress Congressional Research Service. Paper provided general reference on astronauts and cosmonauts, table of U.S. and Soviet space flights, and description of highlights of each flight. (Text)
Economic impact of end of sst subsidy was described by Frank C. Porter in Washington Post: While move could idle 13 000 workers across U.S., “it is unlikely immediately to cause more than a ripple in the $1 trillion American economy.” Some experts had suggested that continued sst development could cost more jobs ultimately than it would create. Meanwhile, it would cost U.S. Government extra $97 million to scrap program: contract termination costs of $52 million to Boeing Co., $33 million to General Electric Co., $10 million in miscellaneous termination costs, and $2 million to close sst project office at dot. Government also would have to return $22.4 million in downpayments made by airlines. (W Post, 3/25/71, A23)
RCA Corp. announced it had filed application with FCC for construction and operation of $193-million domestic satellite system for 50 states and Puerto Rico. System would consist of three satellites and 13 major earth stations. At Washington, D.C., news conference, Howard R. Hawkins—President of rca Global Communications, Inc., and rca Alaska Communications, Inc.—said system could begin first phase in 1974. System would include distribution of motion pictures by closed circuit telecasts instead of film. (AP, NYT, 3/12/71, 62)
LaRC Director of Aeronautics Laurence K. Loftin assumed for one year post of Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d Grant L. Hansen. (Av Wk, 5/31/71, 23)
New York Assemblyman Andrew J. Stein told Washington, D.C., press conference he had 76 cosponsors for bill which would ban supersonic transports from operating at New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport. Bill, if passed, would make it illegal to operate any aircraft producing noise at levels above that of existing subsonic jets. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/5/71, A6)
gao sent report to Congress that North American Rockwell Corp. stood to receive extra $1.5 million for beating target costs on nasa contract to develop F-l rocket while, actually, target cost had been overstated originally by $5 million. NR had not used most current cost data available, gao recommended that nasa seek adjustment in fees to NR and ensure that cost estimates in existing and future contracts were based on accurate, complete data. Report included NR statement of disagreement with findings and recommendations. (Beck-ler, W Post, 1/3/71, A8)
Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astronauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rockwell Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White II. Suit asserted spacecraft did not have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, BIO)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: 235-km (146-mi) apogee, 172.2-km (107-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 81.5° inclination. Satellite reentered April 12. (Pres Rpt 72)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
mit—“probably the world’s greatest technological university”—had committed itself to seeking change in current U.S. attitude of hostility toward technology, Washington Post reported. In series of statements that “can be taken jointly as a new scientists’ manifesto,” MIT leaders had urged change in national attitude toward “harnessing technology while not bowing to it,” urged end to scientists disclaiming responsibility for the effects of their work, and pledged to make profound changes in their own teaching and research, mit led U.S. universities in obtaining Federal research funding, with $92 million in FY 1970, more than double that of its nearest rival, Stanford Univ., which had Received $39 million. (Cohn, W Post, 9/5/71, D2) by U.S. and Soviet Academies of Science and organized by Soviet astronomer Dr. Yosif S. Shklovsky and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl Sagan. Later Dr. Sagan and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake reported conference conclusions to NAS. Group of scientists had concluded that civilization in another solar system “a few hundred light years away” might be trying to communicate with other bodies, including earth. Man had acknowledged existence of other universes and scientific evidence had shown that amino acids —building blocks of life—could be made from materials and energy sources in space. Scientists had recommended coordinated worldwide effort to intercept messages by searching sky with powerful radiotelescopes. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/19/71, 4:8, Auerbach, W Post, 9/23/71, A4; nas pio)
Medical instructions relayed by Ats 1 (launched Dec. 6, 1966) from equatorial orbit 35 800 km (22 300 mi) above the earth saved lives of two women in remote native Alaska villages. Native medical aide in Chalkyitsik, northeastern Alaska, and aide in Anatu-vuk Pass, north central Alaska, broke into satellite time reserved for relay of educational broadcasts to Alaskan village centers to request advice in treating hemorrhaging pregnant Indian woman and Eskimo woman suffering appendicitus attack. Physician in Anchorage, Alaska, hearing requests, broke into broadcast with instructions and alerted medical personnel nearer scenes. Univ. of Alaska officials handling transmissions telephoned NASA satellite control station at Rosman, N.C., and received permission to extend reserved satellite time during night. Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) later said in Washington, D.C.: “I am grateful for the teamwork in Alaska and at NASA that so dramatically saved two lives, and I am so proud of my fellow Alaskans who responded once again through the code of the North—but this time using a space satellite.” (AP, B Sun, 10/8/71, A10)
aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award was presented to Dr. Hubertus Strughold, former chief scientist of afsc Aerospace Medical Div., during ceremonies at San Antonio, Tex. Citation was for “significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space travel.” Dr. Strughold was cited for establishing rational biomedical functions for manned space exploration. (afsc Newsreview, 1/72, 13)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
Federation of American Scientists issued report Is There an R&D Gap? Report examined DOD charges that U.S.S.R. R&D expenditures exceeded those of U.S. and would result in Soviet assumption of technological superiority. Conclusion reached was: “This entire episode has been a classical numbers game featuring selective disclosure, questionable assumptions, exaggeratedly precise estimates, misleading language, and alarmist nonsequiter conclusionsThere was “no claim, much less any evidence” that U.S.S.R. was spending more than U.S. on military technological advances as measured by “military technology base—research, exploratory development and a fraction of advanced development.” No one had claimed to be able to measure Soviet expenditures in this category. “These expenditures would amount to a few billion at most and be most difficult to estimate. Necessary expenditures become progressively larger as one moves from research on basic technological discoveries to development of weapons. This shows the extreme difficulty in making meaningful comparisons on a financial basis of efforts to protect against technological surprise. Neither the funding nor numbers of personnel involved are a sensible measure of original technological advance. Of far greater importance is the organization and application of available intellectual and other resources.” (Senate Com on Armed Services, Hearings on FY 1972 Auth; Science, 8/29/71, 707-9)
It was “open secret” that USAF saw space shuttle as “broad highway that will lead to manned military space operations by the United States,” Universal Science News, Inc., said in Dallas Morning News. While “effort to keep NASA’s civilian image seemed so important at one time that the military were allowed to start their own manned orbiting laboratory program, even though NASA has a similar project,” recent budget squeeze had “forced NASA and the Air Force closer together in certain areas.” (Dallas Morning News, 11/22/71)
usaf launched Sesp satellite on Thor-Burner II booster from Van-denberg afb into orbit with 579.4-km (360-mi) apogee, 544-km (338-mi) perigee, 95.8-min period, and 90.2° inclination. Satellite would test infrared celestial mapping sensor system, (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 6/11/71, 221)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
Sonic booms from usaf jets had smashed prehistoric ruins and caused disintegration of cliff faces at Yellowstone and Teton National Parks, Director of National Park Service George B. Hartzog said in testimony before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of the Interior and Related Agencies. He believed jets originated in California but had received no meaningful response from correspondence with usaf. (Testimony) Dr. Frederick Seitz, former nas President, paid tribute to Dr. Dryden at opening session: “I am particularly pleased that these remarks can be made . . . following several successful lunar manned missions. In a sense, Dr. Dryden’s professional life was directed as by fate to the scientific and technological watershed represented by a successful Apollo program. Today we stand beyond that watershed and are privileged to inspect new vistas.” Dr. Dryden had become “perhaps the centred figure” in U.S. transition to space age following 1957 launch by U.S.S.R. of first successful Sputnik. He had helped prepare legislation to establish NASA. “In this process, he . . . drew upon his creative genius in helping to devise an administrative and operational instrument which would make flexible use of the existing and potential resources of our country and at the same time, focus, in a relentlessly systematic way, upon well-defined missions. Many individuals have contributed to the success of our space program, but none have been more crucial than Hugh Dryden working at his broadest as the scientist, the administrator, and the visionary.” Dr. Seitz estimated Dryden Memorial Fund contribution to auditorium’s construction represented nearly 40% of total cost. Following Dr. Seitz’ remarks, bust of Dr. Dryden presented to NAS by National Space Club was unveiled. At business session, nas announced decision to increase membership to include leaders in medical, social, and behavioral research. Limit of 50 new members elected annually would be raised to 75 in 1972 and 100 .in 1973. Thereafter limit would be reduced over several years to 60. (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 3/71, 1; Text; NASA Special Ann; Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/28/71, 3:32) Dr. Gary V. Latham, chief Apollo program seismologist, said most quakes shaking two Apollo seismometers left on moon appeared to be coming from one place that could be 644 km (400 mi) below lunar surface. Dr. Latham guessed quakes were result of molten rock being moved about under moon by tidal forces on earth. Larger quakes were too deep to be caused by escaping gas, which led to his theory that sublunar volcano caused quakes. He was unable to pinpoint quake source, except that they emanated from somewhere along 1290-km (800-mi) line between seismometers left on moon by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 astronauts. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/27/71, A3) Discovery by Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched Dec. 12, 1970) of slowdown in spin rate of x-ray star Centaurus X—3 in Milky Way Galaxy was reported by Dr. Riccardo Giacconi and Dr. Wallace Tucker of American Science and Engineering, Inc. Change, deduced April 12 from star’s pulsation’s, was caused, scientists thought, by some violent event, such as vast in-fall of material onto star. (Sullivan, AIT, 4/29/71, 52) Possible first interception of solar neutrinos—“ghost” particles that sped earthward from sun’s core—was described by Dr. Raymond Davis, Jr., of Brookhaven’s National Laboratory. Using tank containing cleaning fluid 1.6 km (1 mi) underground in gold mine in South Dakota, Dr. Davis was detecting average of one solar neutrino every third day. Detection was difficult because neutrinos had no electric charge and floated freely through atom unless they hit its nucleus squarely. If Dr. Davis’ observations were confirmed, they would contribute to understanding of how sun produced energy. Neutrinos were thought to be largely produced by reactions that began with fusion of two hydrogen nuclei (protons). (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/71, 3:23) Dr. V. Paul Kenney of Notre Dame Univ. told press briefing that “every 20 years or so we get a 1000 fold increase in the energy of onr accelerators and each time we enter a new era of physics.” (Lannan, W Star, 4/30/71, Aid)
Stanford Univ. and MIT experiments to determine internal structure of protons and neutrons by use of 21-bev beam at Stanford’s Linear Accelerator Center were described in Scientific American by Dr. Henry W. Kendall of mit and Dr. Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky of Stanford Univ. Scientific team had smashed what they thought were basic atom particles, to find that “the way ultrahigh-energy electrons are scattered by protons and neutrons suggests that these ‘elementary’ nuclear particles have a complex internal structure consisting of pointlike entities.” New entities had been named “partons” because they seemed to be parts within parts. Scientists had concluded, “It is still too early to say whether the parton model will lead to an understanding of the nucleon’s structure or whether entirely new ideas may be required.” (Scientific American, 6/71, 61—77)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Washington, D.C., that cutback in funding for nerva development in nasa FY 1972 budget was gross error reflecting on management capability of NASA. Cutting program funding to $30 million would mean virtual halt in work on nerva. (AP, Cleveland Plain Dealer, 2/9/71)
President Nixon had asked Congress for $9.1 million to purchase new presidential backup aircraft to replace 13-yr-old Boeing 707 used as Backup aircraft for Spirit of ’76, Washington Post reported. President’s aircraft, formerly known as Air Force One, was Boeing 707-320-B delivered to usaf in 1962. (W Post, 11/19/71, B7)
Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa.) said at Washington, D.C. press conference, “I hope to see the day when our astronauts go up in Russian spacecraft and the Russian cosmonauts in ours.” He would explore idea with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin before he left for visit to U.S.S.R. in August, “if our own government will permit me to do so.” (upi, W Post, 7/10/71, A3)
Mrs. Betty J. Baldwin, arc computer programmer, had been selected one of top 10 business women of the year by American Business Women’s Assn., for progress as NASA civil service employee and interests in educational and character-building programs, arc Astrogram announced, (arc Astrogram, 11/11/71, 1)
Two Sprint missiles successfully intercepted icbm nosecone over Pacific in latest test of Safeguard defense system. It was first time two missiles were used in Safeguard test. Target was launched from Vanden-berg afb, Calif., 6700-km (4200-mi) distance. (Reuters, C Trib, 2/23/71, 8)
Sen. Lawton Chiles (D-Fla.) inserted House Memorial 780 from Florida Legislature in Congressional Record “to request that Kennedy Space Center be the site for construction of the space shuttle.” (CR, 5/25/71, S7680) .......
New York Times editorial noted that U.S. planned to cut back on Apollo program to fund space station and shuttle while U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 was already in orbit: “In effect, the unique American capability to land men on the moon is being abandoned ahead of the original schedule so that this country can concentrate on an attempt to compete with what already exists under Russian auspices. To make it even more bizarre, when and if both countries have rival manned space stations in orbit, each is likely to suspect the other of using these installations for military as well as civilian purposes. This is a prospect that literally borders on lunacy.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 26) Astronaut David R. Scott said excitement of being on moon came in waves: “They are gentle swells, the kind that stop you, buoy you, but never sweep you off course. The wave enveloped me the moment our lunar module, Falcon, cleared the peaks of the Apennines and pitched over for our final descent to the moon.” Greatest thrill had been discovery of anorthosite rock: “. . . I radioed to mission control, ‘I think we found what we came for.’ I must confess that the sight of that rock, sitting there millions of years waiting for our arrival, set off another wave of excitement for me. It triggered an emotion much like finding The Easter Egg. You know, there are lots of eggs spread across the lawn, hut there’s only one golden one, and there it was—The Golden Egg.” Astronaut James B. Irwin said, although others might describe moon as barren and desolate dead world, “it can be a beautiful one to anyone who loves the mountains of earth. . . . When I first climbed down the ladder ... I was really taken back by those mountains [that] almost encircled Hadley Base. They seemed so close and so tall. But the real surprise was that the mountains, at first sight, were not grey or brown as I had expected. They were golden. Looking to the south and east, I saw the reflection of the early morning sun glancing off the mountains, especially Hadley Delta, giving them a glow of gold. It seemed like a friendly place, which surprised me. . . . you would have thought we would have felt a little lost, a little out of place. But no, I felt that I was where I should be. I knew exactly what to do, after more than a year of training, and I felt right at home.” Astronaut Alfred M. Worden compared orbiting moon in CSM with “riding in a free air balloon, floating over the countryside. You are suspended. You have no sensation of motion unless you look down and see the lunar landscape sweeping below you. At times, I thought of myself as a bird, soaring without sound, seemingly detached from all that is below. . . . one of the most important observations from Apollo 15, as far as I’m concerned, is the apparent evidence of a great deal more volcanic activity in the moon’s past. In our training we studied and discussed volcanoes . . . but I guess I wasn’t really prepared for the magnitude of the volcanic evidence I saw on the moon.” (NYT, 8/13/71, 1; 8/14/71, 1)
U.S. would resurrect sst program and have “production model by 1982,” fa A Administrator John H. Shaffer predicted in Washington, D.C. Shaffer, who had recently returned from world tour of faa installations, said France expected to sell three Concordes to Chinese Communists and Romania was expected to attempt purchase of several used U.S. jetliners, (upi, W Post, 11/27/71, A9)
New U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile gap was described by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “Today the United States bomber force is less than 600, our sublaunched missiles have numbered 656 for four years, and our land-based missiles have totaled 1,054 for four years. During this time the Soviet bomber force has remained almost constant, but their submarine missile force has grown to almost 400 launchers and is expected to overtake ours in two to three years. And the Soviet land-based intercontinental force has risen to over 1,440 operational launchers—with more on the way. Thus, while the Soviets are gaining and will soon exceed us in missile weaponry at sea, we have already fallen distinctly behind them on land. “Over the same period, the actual destructive power of the U.S. forcesvhas continually decreased, while the Soviet’s destructive power has greatly increased, until the total megatonnage that the Soviets could deliver against U.S. targets is several times our own. “The only strategic area in which we are staying ahead is in the number of individual warheads, and we are doing that only by going to small-yield nmltiples. Even here, the Soviets could in time overtake us, since their missile forces have considerably greater payloads than ours.” (Text) '
Use of machines, rather than men, in space after final Apollo mission was advocated by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold in New York Times Magazine article. For lunar or Martian exploration he suggested “roving vehicle with television eyes and one or two telefactor hands, a modern version of a centaur—half man, half automobile.” Vehicle could travel longer distances on lunar surface than man and. retrieve samples of different terrain. “The remote hands could pick up rocks and examine them under the television eyes, and, if desired, put them in a hopper for eventual transmission back to earth. The vehicle might then rendezvous with another that has earth-return capability and hand over the contents of the hopper to it. While this type of vehicle would allow us to explore almost all regions of the moon, manned missions have been severely limited both in the type of terrain for the landing and the distance that astronauts can travel from their spaceship.” Scientists had favored use of telefactor with sample-return capability but “the very success of the Apollo program had diverted attention from it.” Now that no “really purposeful” manned program was planned, Dr. Gold asked, “would not this be the right time for really learning how to do good remote control?” (NYT Magazine, 8/22/71)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed two nuclear control agreements in formal ceremony at State Dept. Agreements called for improved “hotline” communication between Washington and Moscow via comsats and immediate notification of any unexplained incident involving possible detonation of nuclear weapon which could cause outbreak of nuclear war. (Smith, NYT, 10/1/71, 1) During September: Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in interview published by Air Force Magazine that nasa planned to let hardware contracts for space shuttle by spring 1972, contingent on White House approval. NASA had decided in summer to extend preliminary design contracts by four months to “look more intensively at alternative configurations,” examining phased approach for building reusable upper stage first and testing and using it with interim expendable booster, instead of developing reusable booster at same time. Reevaluation of design concepts was stirred by need for additional analyses and research and by need to trim expenditures “in a given year.” nasa’s viewpoint on space in this decade was “to bring the program down to earth, both figuratively and literally. We must ask ourselves the question: Is what we are doing useful in alleviating our problems on the ground?” Crucial criteria of each prospective space program were “whether it will pay for itself by doing useful work; whether it can be expected to produce valuable scientific knowledge that can only be obtained from space; whether it is important to national security; and whether it will catalyze valuable new technologies or lead' to other practical results.” For shuttle “answers to all these questions is 100 percent affirmative.” (AF Mag, 9/71, 53-61)
faa announced start of major program to criss-cross U.S. with area navigation airways. Four transcontinental routes would link New York City with San Francisco and Los Angeles, effective April 29. faa would announce additional 115 area navigation routes within next two months. Shorter interim area navigation routes had already been established to test and develop air traffic control and piloting techniques. Area navigation used airborne computers that permitted pilots to extrapolate signals from existing ground navaids, allowing greater choice and flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 71—33)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
New York Times editorial commented on Soyuz-Salyut mission: “The latest Soviet spade spectacular follows a long series of indications by Kremlin leaders that their present priority in manned space flight is establishment of a long-lasting station in space. This latest experiment seems an important—as well as expensive—step on the road toward that objective.” But there was no guarantee that space stations would be restricted to benign purposes. “Logically, there should be no national space stations in space. All such facilities should be operated by the United Nations employing crews from many nations and they should all be open to appropriate international inspection.” Principle had been recognized in Antarctic “where the presence of Soviet scientists in American bases and American scientists in Soviet bases has a long, useful and honorable history. With the latest Soyuz and Salyut vehicles in orbit, the sensitive issues raised by space stations must be faced in the nearest future.” (NYT, 4/24/71)
Award of $23 800 contract to American Airlines to determine feasibility of using stol aircraft for short-haul runs was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Six-month study would cover certification and safety, avionics, stol service categories, system development requirements, user and community acceptance criteria, metro-flight feasibility demonstration, New York area STOLport sites, and STOLport acceptance, (dot Release 1771)
Air Force Assn.’s Schilling Trophy was presented to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin and Alfred M. Worden in recognition of “their unique contribution to manned spaceflight and science.” (NASA Activities, 10/15/71,172; afa pio)
dod Project mast (military assistance to safety and traffic) was example of “major role” of transfer of technical knowledge from DOD laboratories to civilian scientific community in “technological revolution,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said at meeting of Domestic Action Council in Washington, D.C. Since July 1970 inception of program, military helicopters had flown 767 missions and evacuated 983 civilian patients for civilian agencies. (Text)
usaf launched four unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. Oi'bital parameters: 999.4-km (621-mi) apogee, 983.3-km (611-mi) perigee, 104.9-min period, and 70° inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 12/16/71, 210)
Tenth anniversary of Mercury-Redstone mission that carried chimpanzee Ham up to 253-km (157-mi) altitude on suborbital flight. Ham was recovered in good health. He was now ward of National Zoo in Washington, D.C. (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A4; Natl Zoo Pio)
Plans for establishment of International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., France, Italy, Poland, and East and West Germany were described in New York Times by Walter Sullivan: Project, “fruit of four years of private Soviet-American negotiations” had culminated in eight-nation conference in Paris. Prominent among principals had been nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Dzherman M. Gvishiani, Soviet specialist in American management techniques. {NYT, 10/14/71, 1)
Data from Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched Dec. 12, 1970) was reported at American Astronomical Society meeting in Baton Rouge, La., by Dr. Riccardo Giaconni of American Science and Engineering, Inc., principal investigator for satellite. Explorer 42 had detected new x-ray pulsar Cygnus X—1 generating x-ray pulses at 15 per sec in Constellation Cygnus, 13 new x-ray objects in Milky Way and remote galaxies, and confirmed that quasar 3C273 in Seyfert Galaxy was x-ray emitter. Quasar was billion light years away—most distant object from earth known to emit x-rays, (nasa Release 71—50)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said significance of man’s movement into space with both “automated, unmanned spacecraft and manned vehicles,” ought to be grasped by every nation and every individual. Speaking at “Report on America” dinner sponsored in Washington, D.C., by Time magazine for group of European businessmen, he added: “Man has left Earth. There is as great an awesome potential in that simple statement as there is in the fact, man appeared on Earth. Human destiny now has another door opened to it that previously was firmly locked.” Satellite investigations and space probes had advanced human knowledge about earth, moon, and planets. “Astronomers now are able to view across the entire electromagnetic spectrum to obtain information about the birth, evolution, and extinction of celestial objects previously beyond reach of the most powerful telescope. Space is, in fact, a vast laboratory in which to experiment with weightlessness, hard vacuum, solar plasmas, and extremely high cosmic ray particles. “The potential value of space technology for Earth applications alone, including long-range weather forecasting, earth resources surveys, and communications, has been estimated ... at billions of dollars annually to the world.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/71, 182)
NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of 16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed lm, footprints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during eva, American flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
usaf launched four satellites from Vandenberg afb by one Thor-Burner II booster. Unidentified satellite entered orbit with 832.0km (517-mi) apogee, 767.7-km (477-mi) perigee, 100.8-min period, and 98.8° inclination. Calisphere 3, 4, and 5—launched to provide targets for radar calibration and evaluate surface material erosion and drag effects vis-a-vis their inert gold or aluminum surfaces—entered orbits with 833.6-km (518-mi) apogee, 762.8- to 772.5-km (474- to 480-mi) perigee, 100.8-min period, and 98.8° inclination. (Pres Rpt 72; SBD, 2/18/71, 224)
