Christian Science Monitor editorial commented on National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council Space Science Board’s report, Human Factors in Long-Duration Spaceflight [see April 4]: “What intrigues us most is that the board insists on the need for mental selfknowledge and control. To successfully undertake long space missions, men must make togetherness work in confined quarters.” Board had noted significantly that “men must learn to recognize when their thinking is manipulated by the fantasies of a brain challenged by feelings of isolation and boredom.” Requirements sounded like “basis for more harmonious living on Space Ship Earth. Perhaps this is space flight’s larger challenge: to expand our range even a little way into the cosmos requires us to transcend human shortcomings through deeper self-knowledge.” (CSM, 4/18/72) April 19:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Thorad-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 247-km (153-mi) apogee, 155-km (96-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 81.4° inclination and reentered May 12. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 4/28/72, 325)
Mackay Trophy for 1971 was awarded to l/c Thomas B. Estes (usaf) and l/c Dewain C. Vick (usaf) by Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award was for April 27,1971, 24 000-km (15 000-mi) nonstop flight at speeds over mach 3 in Lockheed SR—71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft, (naa News, 8/72, 1)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)
Federal Electric Corp. had received 1-yr, $19.9-million extension of contract with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Contract was for instrumentation and communications support services to Kennedy Space Center for Apollo and Skylab launches. Extension brought total value of contract to $113.9 million. (Av Wk, 7/3/72, 20) July 4:	NASA released mid-year review of items of collateral space technology which had been adapted to improve quality of life on earth. Items included compact, automatic gas analyzer that measured air in lungs to monitor human pulmonary and cardiovascular activity; temperature-activated remote thermistor alarm that sounded at nurse’s station when infant’s breathing stopped in hospital room; electroencephalograph helmet to diagnose hearing defects in children; powered prosthetic hand; portable light indicator for blind persons; ear oximeter to measure oxygen content of blood by noting red and infrared light absorption; analyzer to record intensity of sleep; and computer motion pictures that projected three-dimensional image of heart areas for study by physicians. Items used in industry included compound to prevent fogging of lenses; low-voltage switching circuits; fire-retardant or nonflammable foams, paints, fabrics, and glass fiber laminates; rapid-scan infrared tire tester; land-surveying system using laser and telescope that viewed laser pulse above obstructions; and management system develJuly 4:	NASA’s mid-year review of collateral space technology benefits on the earth described a compact, fully automatic, mobile medical gas analyser (above). The analyser measured composition of air breathed in and exhaled from the lungs to monitor pulmonary and cardiovascular activity in patients, f tula stria! items included an uitrathin, two-volt switching circuit for buildings. Low-volt circuits were displayed at the Second Annual Urban Technology Conference in San Francisco July 24-26, oped by NASA to supply daily updated information in Apollo program. (NASA Release 72-132)
Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden participated in pregame pageant at 1972 Orange Bowl Classic football game in Miami. Pageant, “The First Decade,” was dedicated to U.S. space program. (NASA Activities, 2/15/72, 35) January 2:	Research in U.S. was shifting from pure to practical, Thomas O’Toole wrote in Washington Post. “Changes that stress practicality have already been made to parts of U.S. science, but they’re scarcely detectable against the $16 billion the federal government spends every year to support U.S. science and technology. One of the few programs of any size begun by the Nixon administration is a $49 million project at the National Science Foundation code-named rann—for Research Applied to National Needs, rann supports a host of small programs aimed at improving things like subways, cancer treatment, earthquake forecasts and sewers.” Changes within NASA required “little new money, but they serve to spotlight the emphasis the Nixon administration places on the practical goals of science. In the last six months NASA has taken on study projects from the Departments of Commerce, Interior, and Transportation— none of which involves space exploration. The space agency also has a contract from the National Science Foundation to investigate the use of solar cells (used on most unmanned spacecraft) to electrify homes and buildings. It has another contract from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to look into ways an apartment complex might recycle its sewage and water the way future astronauts will do inside their spacecraft.” (W Post, 1/3/72, Al) 9-12 in experiments, demonstrations, or activities to be performed by astronauts during 1973 Skylab missions. NASA would select 25 proposals on basis of compatibility with Skylab requirements. Selectees and their teachers would attend Skylab Educational Conference and award presentation at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time. NASA would build required hardware in consultation with students. Regional and national selectees would be announced in April, (nasa Release 72-1)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told annual meeting of shareholders in Van Nuys, Calif., that he expected higher net earnings on lower sales volume in 1972. He predicted that Lockheed would receive substantial orders for L—1011 TriStar transport in coming years. (Pearlstine, WSJ, 5/2/72, 17; Lockheed pio) May 3—11:	Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space met to plan program for parent Committee. Italian space expert Franco Fiorio asked 28 members present if scientists from smaller countries would be allowed to stand in line and buy tickets to board Soviet or U.S. manned space laboratory. Dr. Fernando Mendonca of Brazil said advances in space technology were providing data that could help speed economic development in poorer countries but U.N. itself had neither technical manpower nor finances to assist these countries in using data. During debate over remote sensing by satellite, Sweden tried to open discussion of what U.N. could do to protect economic interests of small nonspace power from possible commercial exploitation by countries collecting data from satellites. Only Argentina supported Swedish view; majority, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., said such discussions were premature. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, renewed U.S. pledge that data from satellites would be shared with other countries without discrimination. All members of Subcommittee were invited by NASA to inspect data processing center at Goddard Space Flight Center but only six countries accepted. (Teltsch, NYT, 5/14/72, 15) May 4:	Areas ozone sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to measure performance of new parachute deployment technique and measure payload pendulation below parachute. Technique provided greater parachute opening shock and was expected to reduce parachute fouling experienced with older techniques. Parachute and payload performed nominally and experimental objectives were met. (nasa proj off)
Unidentified flying objects (ufos) were still being reported despite Air Force study that had found in 1968 that further study “could not longer be justified,” New York Times said. Spokesman for Aerial Phenomenon Research Organization—private investigation group— had said, “We still get about 1,000 reports a year . . . about 60 per cent of them lights and others sightings of disks.” (Waldron, NYT, 6/25/72, 40) June 26:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 496 from Baykonur into orbit with 253-km (157.2-mi) apogee, 176-km (109.4-mi) perigee, 88.8-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Satellite reentered July 2. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/72; 7/31/72; Sov Aero, 7/3/72, 6)
American Association for the Advancement of Science was beginning broad new program under National Science Foundation grant to enhance public understanding of scientific enterprise, Science editorial said. Program would include seminars for government officials and managers of mass media, new approach to science on television, critical journal to examine science and mass media, experimental project to interest AAAS members in more collegial activities, and modest research program into sources and cures of public misunderstanding of science. (Science, 8/4/72, 391)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $82 000 fixed-fee contract to Howard, Needles, Tammen and Bergendorff for preliminary survey of Launch Complex 39 as proposed site for Space Shuttle Landing Facility, (ksc Release 150-72)
U.S. press commented on safe April 27 return of Apollo 16 astronauts. New York Times: Mission had “reminded us once again that man’s study of the moon is but in its infancy, and that the great bulk of the moon’s territory is still completely unexplored.” Yet, “only one more manned lunar mission is now scheduled.” As Apollo program ended, “its enormous successes underline the opportunities on the moon and compel all men to lift their eyes to the heavens if they would understand whence and how our species, our world and our solar system came into being.” (NYT, 4/28/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution: “These three strong young men are heros in the truest sense of the term. They have pitted their courage, their physical strength and their minds against a multiplicity of awesome forces which singularly or collectively could totally obliterate them. And they did it for the noblest of reasons—the pursuit of knowledge. If mankind has any claim to greatness, surely it is men like this that give it credence.” Editorial also approved space funding: “It is appropriate to note, just when the next-to-last planned Apollo spacecraft is safely home from the moon, that a few days ago the U.S. House voted approval of a $3,4 billion space agency budget bill. Part of the money will go for the development of a space shuttle, the next logical step in the great adventure of exploring space. The technological advances that are part of the space program have already proven themselves of value here on earth. It’s likely that this kind of extra technical dividend will continue to lead to break-through areas not even related to space.” (Atlanta JC, 4/28/72) San Francisco Examiner:	. . Apollo 16 may well turn out to be the most rewarding of all our moon expeditions. All Americans can take pride in a feat so remarkably compounded of scientific precision and human courage.” (SF Exam, 4/28/72) Chicago Daily News: “With experience, the crews and the thousands of technical experts supporting them from the Earth have learned to correct the minor flaws and juggle the entire intricate timetable when necessary. It seems a pity that much of the experience so dearly gained is soon to be put on the shelf. . . . But the lessons of Apollo can be applied at least in part to the portions of the space program that will remain. . . . And if the pioneering aspects of the space program are about over, its benefits will continue—most spectacularly in the weather and communication satellites, but extending also into more mundane improvements in daily living.” (C Daily News, 4/28/72)
Spaceflight magazine reviewed Vanguard—A History, by Constance M. Green and Milton Lomask. Book presented “fine coverage of the project [first U.S. satellite program] which should be of interest at all levels. The subject is still controversial and though the present treatment will not meet with full approval everywhere, they have shown that without Vanguard a manned landing on the Moon in 1969 would have been highly unlikely.” (SF, 2/72, 77) March 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Air Force Eastern Test Range by Titan IIIC booster at 4:39 am est. Satellite entered orbit with 35 964-km (22 347-mi) apogee, 35 418.5-km (22 008-mi) perigee, 1429.9-min period, and 0.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/2/72, 15)
Fragments of Apollo 17 moon rock would be distributed to other nations for display in scientific and educational institutions, NASA announced. (NASA Release 72—225) Ground-breaking ceremony for Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was held on Mall in Washington, D.C. Museum was scheduled to open July 4, 1976. Chief Justice Warren Burger, Chancellor of Smithsonian, was principal speaker. (Program)
Sen. John G. Tower (R-Tex.) introduced S.J.R. 238 requesting President Nixon to designate July 20, 1972, as “National Moon Walk Day.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. {CR, 6/2/72, S8712) June 3:	Lewis Research Center announced award of four fixed-price contracts for four-month studies of methods to measure pollution due to aircraft emissions in upper atmosphere. American Airlines would receive $11 697, Trans World Airlines $14 177, and United Air Lines $19 699 to study costs of installing and servicing pollutionmeasuring instruments on. commercial aircraft. Boeing Co. would receive $31 350 to determine aircraft modifications needed to install instruments, data recorders, and support systems. Studies were in support of Global Air Sampling Program (gasp), managed by LeRC. (LeRC Release 72-39)	,
International Business Machines Corp. outlined variety of computers used in launching and tracking manned spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center for Judge David N. Edelstein, who was hearing Justice Dept, antitrust suit against IBM [see Nov. 23]. Judge and party would leave ksc for Goddard Space Flight Center Dec. 7 to examine computer operations there. {Today, 12/7/72)
GTE International, Inc., subsidiary of General Electronics Corp., announced it had received contract valued at about $4 million from Western Union International, Inc., for construction of satellite communications earth station in People’s Republic of China. Station would be ground link for first direct communications satellite between China and Europe, (gte Release) Primary objective of Explorer 48 was to measure spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation— within sas program to make investigations of celestial sphere from above earth’s atmosphere and search for sources inside and outside our galaxy, radiating in x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet, infrared, and other regions of electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma ray telescope was first satellite version of evolution of digitized spark-chamber telescopes that had begun with balloon-borne instruments. Advanced detector could establish gamma ray event and reject events that simpler instruments might identify erroneously. It could study gamma rays exceeding 20 mev in energy, in region of electromagnetic spectrum able to penetrate galactic and extragalactic matter. On Nov. 19 half of experiment’s high-voltage supplies were turned on and experiment was pointed toward earth. Real-time data acquisition indicated proper functioning of experiment, with detection of earth albedo gamma rays. Remaining high-voltage power was turned on Nov. 27. Experiment and spacecraft control section were functioning normally. Spacecraft was cylinder 59 cm in diameter and 51 cm high (23-in dia by 20). When deployed, four solar paddles—27 cm wide and 135 cm long (10.5 by 53 in)—provided raw power. Unique was separate development of spacecraft control section and experiment package, which had permitted flexible concurrent development of experiments and minimized costs by fabrication of standardized control section. NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team was responsible for cost-reimbursable launch preparation. Goddard Space Flight Center and Applied Physics Laboratory crew performed ground test and checkout. Satellite was designed and built at gsfc, which managed project. Langley Research Center managed Scout. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—204; gsfc proj off) November 16:	Briefing on results of low-cost-design concept completed by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. under NASA contract was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. Study had been conducted under NASA Low Cost Evaluation Project begun in May by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Information from panels was to be correlated and incorporated into program planning and execution. (msfc Release 72-147)
Space shuttle concept endorsed by President Nixon made it “all but certain” that Kennedy Space Center would be selected for shuttle’s launch site, New York Times said. Space experts seemed to feel that only by “converting the assembly buildings, launching pads and communications center” at ksc “would it be possible to develop a shuttle port for $300 million.” (NYT, 1/7/72, 7)
NASA released official summary of reasons for selection of North American Rockwell Corp. for $2.6-billion prime contract to build space shuttle. Summary said NR had been chosen over competitors—Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., Space Systems Div.; and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—because “North American Rockwell attained the highest score from a mission suitability standpoint* because its cost proposal was lowest and credible, and because its approaches to program performance gave high confidence to us, to the [Source Evaluation] Board, and to the Manned Space Flight center directors, that it will indeed produce the Shuttle at the lowest cost.” Summary—signed Sept. 18 by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—said NR’s “greatest advantages” within mission suitability area were in management, with efficient control of program and best overall top project management team. NR design provided lightest dry weight. NR’s “good understanding of all electrical power subsystems reflected the very thorough studies . . . made following the Apollo 13 accident.” Analysis of maintainability was excellent. Further, NR management techniques “should provide earlier identification of cost problems” and planned constrained buildup of resources in beginning of program lent confidence in ability to control costs. Grumman Corp. had been “very close behind” but its plan to build up its work force to early manpower peak had been seen by NASA as threat of “premature commitment of resources during the course of the program.” Grumman’s greatest strength had been in its technical design; McDonnell Douglas design had strong features but some technical drawbacks; and Lockheed’s proposal had lacked “consistent technical depth.” NASA had originally made summary available only to General Accounting Office and to competing bidders because of potential embarrassment to losers. Agency had later released summary, Wall Street Journal said, “to demonstrate that politics didn’t play any role in the decision and that the most painstaking selection procedures in the agency’s history were observed.” (Text; WSJ, 10/5/72, 12)
NASA announced selection of RCA Aerospace Systems Div. for negotiation on $175 000 fixed-price contract to produce long-range laser traversing system. Nicknamed “Smokey,” system had been developed at Goddard Space Flight Center for U.S. Forest Service. Two back-packable, 18-kg (40-lb) units contained vertical-firing laser and telescope receiver that viewed laser pulse above all obstructions, permitting surveyors to lay out property lines over terrain obstacles faster and cheaper than by previous methods, (nasa Release 72—79)
Public attitude toward space program in late 1960s was described by Washington communications consultant Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in Washington Post article. “There was a mixed feeling of pride and guilt . . . during those years.” Program had moved forward as “almost a solitary symbol of something that was working. But the question of its rightful place in the scheme of things always hung over it.” While “a cynic would conclude that the American people had turned from social problems,” realist “might conclude that what we were hearing in the late 1960s were the first real rumblings against large federal programs. The space program, meanwhile, had gained its momentum while this disillusionment was setting in. We got to the moon, it seemed, almost without anyone knowing it. The program had the velocity—and there was no turning back.” (W Post, 12/8/72, A26)
Award of $361 494 contract to egng Inc. Bedford (Mass.) Div. for production and testing of prototype cold fog dissipation (cfd) system was announced by Air Force Systems Command, cfd system, designed by Air Force Air Weather Service for global use, would be deployed to U.S.-operated bases in United Kingdom, Germany, Alaska, and Netherlands. CFD system used liquid-propane spray vaporized from tanks at preselected sites upwind of runway complex to disperse fog affecting aircraft at airports, (afsc Release 023.72)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan piloted lunar landing training vehicle on last flight before vehicle’s retirement. First flight had been Oct. 8, 1968. All prime and backup commanders of lunar landing missions had practiced lunar module landings in lltv at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex. (msc Roundup, 12/8/72, 1)
Retirement of Dr. Frank M. Branley as Chairman of American MuseumHayden Planetarium was announced by museum. He would be succeeded by Dr. Kenneth L. Franklin, Assistant Chairman, codiscoverer of high-frequency emissions from Jupiter, and innovator of first lunar watch to tell time on moon. Dr. Branley would devote time to science writing and communications. (Museum-Planetarium Release)
Legislation to rename Jet Propulsion Laboratory as H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory effective Jan. 4 [see Oct. 21] had set off negative reaction, Los Angeles Times reported. “General feeling” among JPL scientists and engineers was that Laboratory and its work should not be involved with politics. Protest petition had been signed by 210 students of California Institute of Technology, which operated Laboratory for NASA. Cal Tech officials were surprised and concerned at not having been consulted about change and planned to talk to Government officials in Washington, D.C. {LA Times, 11/5/72) * Spokesman for Cape Kennedy local of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees said Boeing Co. officials had defied union demands to submit wage dispute to Federal arbitrators. Attorney Bernard Mamet said 60 members of local had vowed to walk out by Dec, 5 if their request was denied. He said Boeing had halted negotiations in eight-month dispute and had refused to resume talks before Nov. 14. Boeing technical writers were asking at least partial restoration of April 1971 wage cut. Dispute had raised “slim threat” of walkout on eve of Apollo 17 launch, Orlando Sentinel said later. Sympathy strike by other locals of union could cause “serious problems.” (0 Sen, 11/8/72) November 6:	NASA selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for two unmanned Viking spacecraft in summer 1976 was announced by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs, in telephone interview. NASA also released Mariner 9 photos of sites-— two at edge of Nix. Olympics slopes, another near slopes of three smaller volcanoes north of canyons along Martian equator, fourth on desert plain, and fifth in region of flattened craters at edge of highland terrain. Observations from Mariner 9 (launched May 30, 1971) had shown sites were low, relatively warm regions, possibly moist, where life form was most likely to be discovered. Prime objective of Viking missions was to determine if Mars harbored life or potential for life. In choosing sites, project scientists had eliminated nearly one third of Mars because of high elevations. In mountainous regions, Viking parachutes would not have sufficient atmosphere to brake spacecraft descent. Scientists also had rejected areas where surface appeared too soft for spacecraft landing, too hard for retrieval of soil samples, or so steep that spacecraft might tip over on landing. Attention had centered November 6:	Selection of five potential landing sites on Mars for mass's two unmanned Viking spacecraft in 1976 was announced. The map showing the sites was based on photos televised from Mariner 9, launched May 30, 1971, and in orbit around Mars since Nov. 13, 1972. All the sites were fairly smooth areas near scientifically interesting geological features and were in regions of the planet where warmer temperatures and greater likelihood of water increased chances of finding evidence of life. The first map of the entire globe of Mars, prepared by the VS. Geological Survey from 1500 of 7000 photos taken by Mariner 9, was published Nov. 27. on broad Mars equatorial band with brightest sunlight and highest temperatures, which increased chance of finding water vapor in atmosphere and thus of finding biological activity. Landing zones were about 65 km (40 mi) wide and 650 km (400 mi) long. Precise sites would be selected after further analysis of Mariner 9 photos. U.S. and Soviet scientists 'would meet during winter to compare Mars landing targets. There was “no use in landing on top of each- other. We would also like to optimize the coverage of Mars.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/7/72, 61; NASA pio)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. began seventh round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in Helsinki, Finland. (Hamilton, NYT, 3/29/72, 3) March 29:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, loaded with propellants, completed countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center, (ksc Release 55-72)	' ' _
Navy F—14 fighter aircraft crashed into Chesapeake Ray during test flight from Patuxent River Naval Air Station, Md. Cause was unknown. Pilot, listed as missing, was identified by Navy as William H. Miller, who had piloted first F—14 to crash, Dec. 30, 1970. (AP, NYT, 7/2/72, 10) During June:	Discovery of new energy source from data returned by Office of Naval Research’s ONR-001 ionospheric research experiment launched on Air Force Sesp 1971—2 satellite Oct. 17, 1971, was announced by onr. Experiment’s low-energy energetic-ion spectrometer had observed intense fluxes of heavy ions precipitating into atmosphere at low-altitude edge of auroral zone during Dec. 17, 1971, magnetic storm. Fluxes were observed over entire energy rate of spectrometer on 24 satellite passes in two days. New source could aid understanding of Van Allen Relts and ionospheric processes affecting radio and radar propagation. (Naval Research Reviews, 6-7/72, 32-33)
Four companies submitted technical proposals to Manned Spacecraft Center for NASA space shuttle contract: Grumman Aerospace Corp., Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div., and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. (nasa Release 72-103; Marshall Star, 5/17/72, 1)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The Apollo missions are still high adventure. And if the firing sequence is now familiar, there was still suspense yesterday as the huge Saturn V rocket engines lifted another brave crew of American astronauts .... But as the thunder faded away . . . there was the same old question every recent space probe has inspired: What is to be the future of U.S. space research when the Apollo missions are completed?” (P Bull, 4/17/72) New York Times: “The Apollo effort began in 1961 in an aura of cold war Soviet-American rivalry. But yesterday the Moscow television news gave the Apollo 16 launch equal time with events in Vietnam. Soviet-American space cooperation—perhaps a prelude to truly international team-work—could help greatly in easing world tensions. It would be an unexpected but welcome by-product of the Apollo program.” (NYT, 4/17/72, 33)
Federal Communications Commission adopted by 4-to-3 vote policy of “multiple entry” of firms into domestic satellite communications field. Commission rejected proposal by its Broadcast Bureau for “limited entry” that would have required applicants with similar technology to combine efforts. Fee said that multiple-entry policy would require applicants to demonstrate that they were financially and technically qualified to provide domestic satellite service in public interest. American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and ComSatCorp would be subject to certain additional conditions. (B Sun, 6/17/72)
Tenth anniversary of first transoceanic TV via satellite—Telstar 1 comsat built by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. and launched by NASA from Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy), Fla. Millions of TV viewers had watched taped picture of American flag transmitted from Andover, Me., via Telstar 1 to Andover and Holmdel, NJ. Signals were also picked up by stations at Plemeur-Bodou, Brittany, and Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall. Within one week after launch Telstar 1 had transmitted first TV pictures from Europe and first pictures in color and, within one month, first international exchange of live TV. During four months of operation before it was disabled by radiation, satellite handled more than 400 transmissions, including 5Q TV demonstrations, telephone calls and data in both directions, and facsimile material. It was revived in January 1963 for communications tests. Telstar 1 was followed by Telstar 2 (launched May 7, 1963), 2 Relays, 3 Syncoms, and 15 Intelsats and commercial traffic grew to more than 2500 hrs of TV per year and more than 4000 full-time, leased, two-way circuits, (nasa Special Release, 7/4/72)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 17 crew at Kennedy Space Center to extend best wishes on eve of Apollo 17 mission. (PD, 12/11/72, 1735)
Federal Aviation Administration announced publication of 1972 edition of National Aviation System (NAS) Ten Year Plan and Policy Summary. Summary detailed FAa’s long-range program for development of balanced airport-airways system to meet projected demand for air transportation through 1982. Plan objectives included: completion of semiautomation of en route air-traffic control facilities; provision of basic automation equipment for radar-equipped terminal facilities and automatic metering and spacing of approaches in medium- and high-density terminal areas; increase in instrument-landing-system (ils)-equipped runways and installation of improved ILS at high-density airports; introduction of microwave ILS; investigation of use of satellite technology for air-traffic control communications, navigation, and surveillance and implementation of satellite communications in oceanic areas; expansion of designated area navigation routes to shorten en route and terminal flight paths; and plans for landing facilities and systems for vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft. (faa Release 72-63) April 15:	Apollo 16 preflight briefing was held at Kennedy Space Center. Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager James A. McDivitt said Apollo 16 countdown was “probably the smoothest” to date. McDivitt announced that Apollo 16 would be last flight with which he would be associated: “I really don’t have any plans for the future because I’ve really been concentrating on Apollo 16, and while I made the decision that it would probably be a good time for me to leave the program, I have not had time to really sit down . . . [and] think through what my future would be.” Primary reason for leaving program after Apollo 16, rather than after Apollo 17, was so that if change meant move to new location McDivitt’s children could enter new schools at beginning of new school year. McDivitt was Air Force brigadier general and had been commander of Apollo 9 mission (March 3—13, 1969) and command pilot of Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) during seven years as NASA astronaut. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. said it would conduct missile-carrier tests in Pacific through Dec. 31. It warned ships and aircraft to steer clear of area about 2400 km (1500 mi) east of Japan. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 11/24/72, Al; AP, B Sun, 10/24/72, 6) November 24:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of first launch of Aerobee sounding rocket on Nov. 24, 1947, from White Sands Missile Range. Launch had been unsuccessful; rocket carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload had veered off course and had been destroyed. But since then arrowshaped Aerobee had been busiest booster in U.S. space program, with launch rate of almost one per week and few failures out of 900 launches to date. Aerobees carrying scientific payloads to altitudes as high as 480 km (300 mi) had been launched by NASA, Air Force, Navy, and Federal scientific groups. Launches were mainly from NASA’s Wallops Station, White Sands Missile Range, and Fort Churchill Range in Manitoba, Canada. Aerobee—most widely used rocket in astronomy—had carried delicate instruments through blanket of air and dirt surrounding earth to area of greater visibility. Instruments launched June 13, 1969, by NASA on Aerobee 150 from Natal, Brazil, had detected x-ray star only 16 km (10 mi) wide that weighed as much as sun. Scientists at Univ. of California who conducted experiment had said stellar object might be first direct evidence of neutron star and first time size of x-ray source from deep space could be determined. Other scientific payloads aboard Aerobees had measured Crab Nebula, collected micrometeoroids, taken temperatures aloft, and recorded air densities. In 1952 Air Force Aerobee carried two monkeys and two mice in biomedical experiments. Rocket originally weighed 700 kg (1600 lbs), was 5.8 m (19 ft) long, and carried payloads under 45 kg (100 lbs). Over years Aerobee had grown to be 15 m (50 ft) long, powered by four clustered, liquid-fuel engines and solid-fuel booster. Largest Aerobee could blast 400-kg (900-lb) payload to altitude of 200 km (125 mi). (Lyons, NYT, 11/26/72, 39; A&A 1915-1950)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced three awards for space shuttle work. Textron, Inc., Bell Aerospace Div. received $261 500 firm-fixed-price contract and North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. received $258 000 for constructing and testing thrust chambers for space shuttle engines for in-space maneuvering. Bell Aerospace also received 15-mo, $540 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to study and design hypergolic bipropellant engine for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system. (msc Releases 72-140, 72—142)
Chemical & Engineering News published views and plans of presidential candidates for science and technology beyond general pledges in Democratic and Republican Party platforms. Same set of questions had been submitted to campaign organizations of Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and of President Nixon. President Nixon said he would continue general pattern of previous years on Federal research and development funding; its division among defense, space, and civilian sectors; its possible link to gross national product (gnp) ; and appropriate balance for basic research, applied research, and development. Pattern would include increasingly effective program in civilian sector R&D, “prudent space program, and a sufficient defense R&D budget.” Administration believed r&d funding should be based on opportunities for effective programs and necessity for creating new opportunities through fundamental studies and that R&D resources, excepting basic research, should be allocated to areas that provided “greatest opportunity for leverage or that satisfy an immediate future need.” Sen. McGovern recommended increased Federal R&D funding. Principal problem was “government spending that has masqueraded as R&D, yet has little technical content. For example, when an Apollo is launched ... all of the kerosene and liquid oxygen that it uses comes out of the federal R&D budget. Only a very small percentage of the federal R&D budget actually represents laboratory investigations, instrument design, feasibility studies, and other technical efforts that involve scientists and engineers.” Sen. McGovern would emphasize civilian sector R&D and strong military R&D program as “good investment for long-term national security. My space program would emphasize unmanned planetary exploration and scientific satellites and also earth resource and communications satellites.” Nixon Administration would continue to maintain “strong and up-to-date defense force” and to capitalize upon past space investments. Both candidates recommended increased priority on developments of new energy sources. Nixon Administration was opposed to S. 32, reconversion bill introduced by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy to amend National Science Foundation Act of 1950 to establish framework of national science policy. Bill would focus policy and U.S. scientific talent and resources on Nation’s priority problems. Administration believed segment of S. 32 that would establish independent agency within nsf was “particularly unwise” because it would “divorce the R&D from the departments of Government responsible for using its results” and “would divert attention from the primary mission of nsf—to support fundamental and basic research.” Sen. McGovern would continue to support S. 32. “In its original form, before compromise to get Republican support, it would have provided $1.2 billion for a new NASA-type Civil Science Systems Administration that would fund genuine r&d across a broad range of civilian technology needs.” Administration did not believe in Cabinet-level science department or “supra” agency, nor that “existing science apparatus is totally adequate. As with all human and governmental institutions, it too should be dynamic and subject to change as conditions and events dictate.” Sen. McGovern felt “more centralized federal science management and funding apparatus might be useful, but the key need is not to change the institutions but rather to give them more power in the Federal Government.” He favored establishment of Office of Technology Assessment [see October 13] which would “assess each new technical program with an eye toward cost efficiency and effectiveness, and domestic betterment.” Asked if federally owned laboratories should be expanded to deal with problems of health and environment, Nixon Administration pointed out that NASA Centers were “closely involved with the R&D components of other federal agencies in an effort to solve pressing national problems.” Sen. McGovern believed Federal laboratories and research facilities had “plenty of problems in their immediate areas” with which to cope. “I have no intention of taking the easy route and putting them on safe subjects.” (Chemical & Engineering News, 10/23/72, 14-19) October 23-27:	Conference on high-energy astrophysics was held at Cal Tech by division of American Astronomical Society. Dr. Kenneth I. Kellerman of National Radio Astronomy Observatory said most baffling phenomenon observed by radiotelescopes was speed at which objects seemed to be moving. If measurements taken in past two years were accepted at face value, objects associated with quasars were speeding away from each other faster than speed of light. Such speed had been considered impossible. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. W. L. W. Sargent said strange blue objects sighted in sky by Hale Observatory astronomers might be newly formed galaxies “about 100 million years old, and they seem to be made up of very young stars.” Discovery indicated that galaxies might still be forming. Dr. Herbert Gursky of American Science and Engineering, Inc., said astronomers using Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched by NASA Dec. 12, 1970) had spotted several x-ray objects that could not be detected by wavelengths other than x-ray. Impact of x-ray astronomy might be that “this new wavelength range may show some different aspects of stars and galaxies.” Through x-ray astronomy scientists “hope to . . . learn something about these objects that radio and optical observations can’t tell us.” Evidence of black hole—star whose gravity field was so strong that light could not escape from it—in constellation Cygnus was reported by Dr. Kip Thorne of Cal Tech, Dr. J. P. Ostriker of Princeton Univ., and Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering. Evidence had come from photos taken at Hale Observatory that showed bright blue line near source Cygnus X-l and from data gathered by XJhuru (see also Sept. 2). Scientists thought line in photos might be result of superhot gas being drawn from neighboring star in black hole. If finding was accurate, Cygnus X—1 would be first black hole discovered. Existence of black holes had been predicted by Einstein as part of his theory of relativity. (Cooke, Pasadena Star-News, 10/24/72; West, LA Times, 10/27/72; O’Toole, W Post, 10/28/72, A3; W Star & News, 10/28/72) October 24:	Soviet news agency Tass announced opening of Soviet National Conference on Space Biology and Medicine at Kaluga, U.S.S.R. Conference would hear papers on use of “terrestrial” atmosphere in spacecraft cabins, food and water regeneration, and establishment of bacterial medium in which future cosmonauts could live and work on extended space missions. Conference also would discuss weightlessness, crew selection and training, radiobiological aspects of flight, and psychophysiology of space crew work. Soviet Academician Oleg Gazenko had presented paper on topical problems of space biology and medicine at opening session. (fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, LI)
Col. Daniel D. McKee (usaf, Ret.), manager of Bell Aerosystems in Houston and former Assistant Director of NASA Manned Satellite Programs in NASA Hq., died in Houston at age 53 after apparent heart attack. (msc Hist Off) January 17:	Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C., asked, “Shall we spend our dollars on a space shuttle and an SST for the few to fly the heavens, when many here on earth have simple unmet needs like homes and schools and health?” (Text)
F—5E international fighter aircraft was unveiled in ceremony at Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div. in Hawthorne, Calif. Aircraft, not part of Air Force inventory, would be available to U.S. allies through Military Assistance Service funding program. Aircraft was powered by J—85-21 engines and had greater maneuverability, speed, payload, and range than previous F-5s, with new fire control system that included search-and-track radar. F-5E was scheduled for delivery in 1973. (afsc Newsreview, 8/72, 1)
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)
Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer received 1972 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. Citation was for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the Federal Aviation Administration which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and all who fly.” (naa Release, 9/22/72; FAA PIO)
Membership in National Academy of Sciences ranked “second only to the Nobel Prize as recognition of achievement in American science,” Univ. of Oklahoma political scientist Dr. Don E. Kash and team said in Science article. Striking aspect of composite picture of NAS membership was “extent to which members are educated in, elected from, and employed by a relatively small number of universities.” Academicians from top 10 universities made up 54.8% of NAS membership, averaged 48 yrs at election time, and were nearly 3 yrs younger on election to NAS than those with degrees from other universities. (Kash et al., Science, 3/10/72, 1076-83)
Explorer 45 Small Scientific Satellite (launched Nov. 15, 1971) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had carried eight experiments into highly elliptical orbit to study dynamic processes in inner magnetosphere from two to five earth radii. After six months in orbit all experiments and spacecraft systems were operating satisfactorily, excellent data had been received, and mission had exceeded its objectives. Scientific results of experiments had been presented at American Geophysical Union April 17. (nasa proj off)
LeRoy E. Day, NASA Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, described studies of shuttle’s effect on payload development costs during speech before American Institute of Astronautics and Aeronautics Rocky Mountain Section in Boulder, Colo.: “A number of . . . payloads have been flown and historical design and program cost data were available. We have determined by actual preliminary design, preparation of program plans, and detailed costing analyses, that these payloads could have been redesigned to fly on the shuttle with payload development cost savings ... of 50% of the historical baseline. The studies conclude that the cost of developing payloads (the major portion of space program costs) can be reduced primarily as a result of the shuttle’s ability to retrieve payloads for reuse, refurbishment and updating.” Dichotomy of unmanned and manned space programs should not be perpetuated, Day said. U.S. needed to continue “vigorous and meaningful manned space program” that did not “obscure the automated satellite programs.” Shuttle was “the one mechanism that can effectively support both goals in an optimum way” within national space budget. (Text)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
Bathroom commode system for space shuttle passengers was described by Manned Spacecraft Center engineer A. F. Behrend, Jr., and J. E. Swider, Jr., of United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div, during annual Environmental Control and Life Support System Conference in San Francisco. In space, high-velocity airstreams would compensate for earth’s gravity and would assist water-flush mechanism. Waste would be vacuum dried and chemically treated. System, being built for further testing and evaluation by Hamilton Standard under $238 000 NASA contract, was of type being studied by commercial airlines to reduce maintenance and operating costs, (nasa Release 72-163)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of nine-month $140 090 contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study operational processing of space shuttle payload carriers at KSC space shuttle launch site. Study would develop objectives, technical information, and recommendations for flexible, cost-effective procedures for shuttle processing, (ksc Release 86-72)
Air Force announced award of $2 471 953 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Inc., for operations, technical and civil engineering support at Satellite Test Center, and scientific-technical support at Vandenberg Tracking Station, (dod Release 69272)
New York Times editorial asked, “Which America?” In same week Apollo 17 astronauts fired their spacecraft home from moon, “American pilots fired bombs that broke through the heavens over a peasant nation in Asia. America the ingenious and America the vengeful had both struck.” U.S. and its people were being judged “for what our Government is doing with its mighty technology. Are we now the enemy—the new barbarians?” (NYT, 12/24/72) December 26:	Cosmos 540 was launched from Plesetsk by U.S.S.R. into orbit with 805-km (500.2-mi) apogee, 785-km (487.8-mi) perigee, 74° inclination, and 100.7-min period, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)	#
NASA and Dept, of Interior dedicated Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge at Cape Kennedy. Under agreement signed by NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley and Assistant Secretary of the Interior Nathaniel P. Reed, all land not used for rocket launch and launch support at Cape Kennedy would be used for wildlife management. Citrus grove and fish camp leases formerly managed by NASA for Army Corps of Engineers would be administered by Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife. Agreement added to existing refuge 16 200-hectare (40 000-acre) property at northern tip of Kennedy Space Center that included Indian burial ground, 1830 Army fort, and Civil War sugar mill. {Today, 6/3/72; M Her, 6/4/72)
Air Force launched two satellites in Dept, of Defense Space Test Program (stp) from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single two-stage Atlas-Burner II booster. Stp 72-1 entered orbit with 749-km (465-mi) apogee, 729-km (453-mi) perigee, 99.5-min period, and 98.4° inclination. Objectives were to measure background gamma radiation over entire earth; measure flux and spectra of low-altitude charged particles; determine effects of space environment on thermal control coatings; measure ultraviolet radiation and hydrogen and helium atoms and ions; and observe extreme- and far-ultraviolet radiation originating in interaction of solar wind with interplanetary medium or from galactic sources. Spacecraft was 566-kg (1248-lb) cylinder 2.1 m long and 1.4 m in diameter (7 by 4.5 ft), carrying antenna booms that extended 2.7 m (9 ft) from each end, gamma ray spectrometer, and low-altitude particle-measuring sensor. Radcat entered orbit with 751-km (467-mi) apogee, 729-km (453-mi) perigee, 99.5-min period, and 98.4° inclination. Spacecraft—cylinder 3 m long with 1.2-m diameter (10 by 4 ft) and weighing 220 kg (485 lbs)—would provide passive optical and radar calibration target. stp program was managed by Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). (Pres Rpt 73; LA Times, 10/3/72)
Air Force Space Technology Program satellite Sesp 1971-2 (launched Oct. 17, 1971) was still transmitting data after year in orbit. Satellite, designed to operate for 6 mos, had traveled more than 214 million km (133 million mi) in 5233 earth orbits, stp program manager at Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Robert T. Johnson, had said some experiments aboard satellite would be extended six more months. (Lockheed Release 72—73)
Discovery of ordinary star and pulsar “waltzing” together in constellation Hercules was reported by Dr. Harvey Tananbaum of American Science & Engineering, Inc., during Sixth Texas Symposium on Relativistic Astrophysics in New York. Discovery had been made through x-ray observation from Uhuru (Explorer 42) Small Astronomy Satellite, launched by Italy for NASA Dec. 12, 1970. X-rays from pulsar caused nearest part of its companion star to glow brightly as pulsar flew its orbit. Star became brightest when pulsar was on earth side of it, then suddenly dimmed as pulsar eclipsed bright region briefly, creating waltzing effect. (Sullivan, NYT, 12/22/72, 8)
Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 11:41 am pdt by Thorad-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 259-km (161-mi) apogee, 154-km (96-mi) perigee, 89,2-min period, and 96.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 4. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 6/5/72, 14)
American Society for Testing and Materials—non-profit organization that developed standards for more than 4700 materials, products, systems, and services—urged adoption by U.S. of metric system during Washington, D.C., workshop. In interview Society’s President Erie I. Shobert II said: “Basically, the reason for changing ... to the metric system is to enhance our ability to communicate with others, but that ability ... is reflected in hard dollars and cents.” Failure of U.S. to convert had been large factor in U.S. trade deficit, he said. (Kadis, W Star, 3/9/72, C8) March 9:	President Nixon ordered immediate implementation of new Federal Aviation Administration regulations to prevent carrying of weapons or explosives aboard civil aircraft and unauthorized access to aircraft, tighten baggage check-in procedure, and improve cargo and baggage loading security. Dept, of Transportation would expedite rule-making for new regulations governing airport operators to complement measures required of airlines. Action had been prompted by discovery of bombs aboard aircraft at New York, Las Vegas, and Seattle during 48 hrs. (PD, 3/13/72, 553)
Progress made in 1971 strategic nuclear arms talks with U.S.S.R., and on many subjects from scientific cooperation to trade, indicated that “1972 will be a year of substantial developments in bilateral cooperation,” Secretary of State William P. Rogers said in Washington, D.C., news conference. (Marder, W Post, 3/8/72, A2)
National Public Affairs Center for TV began poll of 223 public TV station managers at request of Corp. for Public Broadcasting, to determine response to CPB proposal to show up to 21 hrs of live coverage from moon during Apollo 17 moonwalks Dec. 11, 12, and 13. Washington Post said later that NASA had offered public broadcasting opportunity to cover past Apollo missions but cpb had declined, to avoid conflict with commercial networks. TV coverage of astronauts’ extravehicular activities (eva), however, had been declining. During Apollo 16 mission (April 16-27), American Broadcasting Co. had shown 6 of estimated 21 hrs of eva, National Broadcasting Co. had shown 8 hrs, and Columbia Broadcasting System, 6% hrs. (Carmody, W Post, 11/10/72, Bl)
Air Force qualification of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was announced by Air Force Systems Command. Qualification had followed July 11 and 26 and Aug. 13 and 19 tests by Martin Marietta Corp. at Roswell and White Sands, N. Mex. Tests had included supersonic, transonic, and free-fall environments. In Aug. 19 test, decelerator had been dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft). Previous tests had used rocket motors ignited after balloon had taken test system to desired altitude. In each test, decelerator deployed to slow down simulated softlanding instrument package, (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio)
San Francisco Examiner editorial praised U.S. Pay Board’s veto of 12% wage increase for aerospace workers: “Even in its ailing state the aerospace industry has continued as a major American exporter. It has thus prevented the serious deficit in this country’s balance of trade from Becoming truly horrendous. But it holds no monopoly on aerospace technology. Unless it can maintain high productivity and competitive wage costs, foreign-made planes will become as common in our skies as foreign-made cars are on our highways.” (SF Exam, 1/7/72) January 8:	Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said in press release that President Nixon’s decision to proceed with space shuttle development was “a great mistake, and an outrageous distortion of budgetary priorities” and “the last thing we need at this time.” It would keep NASA and aerospace industry occupied but “it will also insure a steady and very substantial drain on the federal budget. And it will insure that other needs will continue to go unmet.” (Text)
Second in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of Viking parachute system was conducted over White Sands Missile Range. Helium-filled balloon lifted simulated Viking entry vehicle from Roswell, N. Mex., to 11 200-m (36 880-ft) altitude where payload was dropped and rocket motors ignited, boosting payload to 41 000-m (135 000-ft) altitude. Parachute deployed as planned and payload landed at wsmr about 56 km (35 mi) northwest of Holloman Air Force Base. Objective—to check parachute system at transonic conditions and at lowest parachute loading conditions expected over Mars—was met. Successful completion of three tests—one supersonic, one transonic, and one subsonic— would qualify Viking parachute system for use on Mars mission scheduled for launch in 1975. [See July 11, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off)
Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, received Hermann Oberth Award of Huntsville, Ala., Chapter of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for outstanding scientific achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. He was cited at awards banquet in Huntsville, for his “many valuable contributions to lunar science, planetary formation, and better understanding of the origin of the solar system through the Apollo program; high resolution astronomy through the Stratoscope and lst (large space telescope) programs; the science of our sun through the ATM . . . program; stellar astronomy, earth resources, and life sciences through the Skylab program; the future of high energy astronomy through HEAO . . . and the promising possibilities for scientific payloads through the Shuttle program.” (msfc Release 72-14)
Aerospace Employment Project to transfer idled talents from aerospace industry to other endeavors in public sector began phase-out. Project had started in 1971 under $1.3-million contract from Dept, of Labor, Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, National League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors. Project had found reemployment for 297 out of 371 candidates—194, or 65%, in city, county, or state government work. (NYT, 7/16/72, 15) September 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 381-km (237-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 30. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 9/6/72, 3)
Environmental Action, group of 31 scientists and professionals, issued statement in Washington, D.C., urging Congress to deny Administration’s request for $500 million to build demonstration model of nuclear breeder reactor to generate electricity. Group, which included Nobel Prize winners Dr. Harold C. Urey (physicist) and Dr. Linus C. Pauling (chemist), questioned safety of nuclear reactors and favored concentration of coal to generate power. (Cowan, NYT, 4/26/72, 7) April 26:	Air Force SR-71 reconnaissance jet aircraft set record for sustained speed at high altitudes in lO^-hr flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif. Aircraft, piloted by l/c Thomas B. Estes (usaf), flew 24 100 km (15 000 mi) at speeds over mach 3 and altitudes above 24 400 m (80 000 ft). Flight plan included two round trips across northern and central U.S. and complete circle of western states, equivalent to nonstop flight from San Francisco to Paris and return. (Haughland, AP, W Post, 7/17/72, A3)
Dept, of Defense officials had approved long-range plans to purchase additional Defense Satellite Communications System Phase 2 (dscs 2) satellites, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. First two had been launched in 1971. Plan called for eventual simultaneous deployment of four dscs 2 spacecraft in orbit with the fourth satellite as a spare to handle special emergencies. Plans also called for spare dscs 2 satellites and Air Force Titan IIIC launch vehicle on ground for fast orbit of replacement satellites. (Klass, Av Wk, 12/11/72, 64-7)
Kennedy Space Center minority and female employees increased steadily. During first 18 mos of ksc Equal Employment Opportunity—from April 1971 through September 1972—contractor employees increased by 249, to 11 382. Female employment increased by 128 persons, to 1240, an 11.5% increase. Minority personnel members increased from 609 to 847, 39.1%. During third quarter 1972, ksc contract personnel increased by 162 and minority employees increased by 70 to peak 7.44% of ksc contractor work force. Minority population in Brevard County, based on 1970 census, was 9.4%. (ksc Release 348-72)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals on space tug systems. Tug—space shuttle 3rd stage—would extend capability of shuttle booster and orbital stages by adding propulsion for higher orbit. Propulsion would be provided by temporary use of existing rocket stage adapted for launch from shuttle cargo bay or by use of interim tug. Studies of rocket stage use were under way. rfps had been issued for possible interim tug development. Three $750 000 contracts would be awarded—two for work on cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants and one for study of tug using storable propellants. Proposals were due Dec. 22, with contracts to be awarded during first quarter of 1973. Air Force would assist in funding cryogenic tug studies and in selection of contractors and study management. Interim tug would be developed for use in space shuttle’s first flight scheduled for late 1970s. (msfc Release 72-155)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., parachuted safely from NASA T-38 jet aircraft just before it crashed near Bergstrom Air Force Base, Tex. Cause of crash was being investigated. Conrad was on routine flight from Dobbins AFB, Ga., to Ellington AFB, Tex. (UPI, W News, 5/11/72, 20)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.) told press in Washington, D.C., that Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences would include probe of Apollo 14 crew’s decision to carry 200 privately minted silver medals on Jan. 31-Feb. 7, 1971, mission in scheduled Aug. 3 hearings on commercial exploitation of Apollo 15. (AP, Pasadena Star-News, 8/1/72)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., dissolved temporary restraining order it had issued June 29 and refused to grant preliminary injunction against NASA reduction in force of 503 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. Suit brought by American Federation of Government Employees charged NASA with violations of Civil Service Commission rules applicable to reductions in force. (Bell, Birmingham [Ala.] Post-Herald, 7/11/72)
Space technology had become “forcing function to bring nations together in mutual undertakings with a common purpose,” Dr. Allen E. Puckett, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics President, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space agreement “expresses our intention to cooperate in various fields of space activity, and in particular proposes a joint experimental flight of U.S. and Soviet manned spacecraft in 1975. We may debate the immediate technical values of this experiment, but the overriding consideration is the fact that we will be working together. Regardless of the technological outcome we will be communicating and collaborating, getting to know each other better, in a common enterprise. On such small beginnings, a new era of mutual understanding and cooperation might evolve.” (A&A, 9/72, 19)
Harmon International Aviation Trust named winners of awards. Harmon Aviation Trophy for 1971 would be awarded jointly to chief test pilots of Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner, Brian Trubshaw of England and Andre Turcat of France. Trophy for 1972 would go to U.S. Air Force pilots l/c Thomas B. Estes and l/c Dewain C. Vick for unprecedented long-distance nonstop flight at three times speed of sound in usaf SR-71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft. Geraldine Cobb was named winner of Harmon Aviatrix Trophy for series of humanitarian flights over Amazon Basin in 1972. (AP, NYT, 10/16/72)
NASA conducted successful trial run of airborne visible-laser opticalcommunications (avloc) flight tests to determine effects of atmosphere on vertical transmission of laser beams. Two-month series of tests using WB-57 aircraft at 18 000 m (60 000 ft), above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, would be operated by Manned Spacecraft Center over ground station at Redstone Arsenal near Marshall Space Flight Center. Tests were part of overall NASA program to develop optical communications systems for use during 1970s. Similar visible-light experiment was planned for Applications Technology Satellite ats-g, to be launched by NASA in 1975. In trial test, experiments, checking out pulsed-laser radar acquisition-and-ranging system, located aircraft flown from Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., and tracked it to 18 000 km (58 000 ft) but did not attempt laser communications, (msfc Release 72-109)
Number of visitors taking Kennedy Space Center tours had risen from 47 220 in May 1971 to 72 890 in May 1972, Today reported. Total of 519000 visitors had taken tour in first five months of 1972 ; 398 000 had taken tour in same 1971 period. (Today, 6/4/72)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II received Distinguished Service Medal and astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Mattingly was Navy commander, (dod Release 526-72)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Trailer in which NASA formerly quarantined astronauts returning from moon was being used by Air Force Military Airlift Command, St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported. Trailer was positioned at McGuire Air Force Base, N.J., and could be airlifted by Air Force C-141 cargo aircraft to transport patients with communicable diseases. Previously aircraft had to be decontaminated after carrying contagious patients. {St. Louis P-D, 11/26/72)
Directors of North American Rockwell Corp. proposed to change firm’s name to Rockwell International Corp. at meeting in El Segundo, Calif. If change was approved by shareholders at Feb. 15, 1973, annual meeting all trace of name North American Aviation, Inc., founded in 1928, would disappear, Los Angeles Times said later. NR had been formed in 1967 through merger of North American Aviation and Rockwell-Standard Corp. (LA Times, 11/12/72) November 11:	Four hundredth anniversary of discovery of Tycho’s Star by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe. Supernova that increased in brightness by millions of times, Tycho’s Star was first unusual star ever recorded by European astronomers and first definite proof that sky was not immutable. (American Museum-Hayden Planetarium Release, 11/6/72) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Fairchild Industries, Inc., Vice President and former NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, told press in Rio de Janeiro he did not believe in flying saucers. “Such things do not exist. I gather the whole business is a hallucination.” Dr. von Braun was in Brazil to promote sale of communications satellite equipment to government. (AP, W Star & News, 11/12/72, A5)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) conveyed to Senate report by General Accounting Office on C-5A aircraft program that showed Air Force was continuing to accept delivery of defective C-5A aircraft. From February through September 1971 Air Force had accepted 15 C-5As with average of 251 deficiencies per aircraft. Most serious defects were in wings, landing gear, and radar. (CR, 4/6/72, S5510-7) April 6-7:	Outstanding Handicapped Federal Employee of the Year Award—given annually by Civil Service Commission—was presented in Washington, D.C., to Shirley Price, armless 1.2-m-tall (4-ft-tall) administrative aid at Manned Spacecraft Center. Miss Price had graduated from Texas Southern Univ. with honors and had attended graduate school at Univ. of Wisconsin. At msc she controlled 10 000-event data library, used and interpreted univac 1108 computer runs, filed, answered telephones, and typed 45 to 50 words per minute. Her hobbies included drawing, embroidering, crocheting, and knitting, all of which she did with her toes. Mayor Walter E. Washington presented keys to city of Washington, D.C., to Miss Price on April 7. (W Star, 4/8/72; NASA Activities, 5/15/72, 95-6)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), said in Washington, D.C., that he would carry his efforts to restore original name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy to courts if Congress refused to cooperate. If courts also refused, he would try to persuade Florida Gov. Reubin Askew and Florida residents to “ignore Federal name.” (upi, NYT, 10/6/72)
Symposium on significant accomplishments in sciences was held at Goddard Space Flight Center. GSFC scientists presented papers covering their studies and experiments in astronomy during 1970. Dr. Norman H. MacLeod said imagery obtained by high-resolution infrared radiometer on Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) could now be handled quantitatively and might permit estimations of the location, amount, and seasonal changes in water available. Data could be used by governments for better management of natural resources. Study of effect on earth’s surface temperature and climatology of climatic modification by carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and aerosol was discussed by Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool. Study had indicated that “runaway greenhouse effect” from accumulation of man-made carbon dioxide alone probably was not possible. But, as aerosol dust in air increased, albedo increased “very fast, compared to the opacity in the infrared; as the albedo increases, the solar radiation decreases, and the surface temperature goes down.” Temperature could decrease in next 30 yrs as much as about 3 K [5.4°F], Several climatologists had suggested that “3K decrease in global temperature is sufficient to trigger an Ice Age!” (Transcript)
Dr. Nicholas C. Costes of Marshall Space Flight Center Space Sciences Laboratory received Norman Medal, highest award of American Society of Civil Engineers, at asce annual meeting in Houston. Award was for paper “Apollo 11: Soil Mechanics Results,” published by asce in 1970. (Marshall Star, 10/18/72, 1)
Transmitting to Congress fourth annual report of National Science Foundation [see Feb. 10] President Nixon said: “I have great hope that we can realize the full potential of American technology for serving our national purposes. The commitment of this Administration to continue progress toward that goal is clearly reflected in the array of programs which I have detailed in my latest Budget Message.” (SPD, 4/17/72, 750) April 14:	U.S.S.R. launched two satellites. Prognoz 1 (Forecast), launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome, entered orbit with 199 667-km (124 067.3-mi) apogee, 1005-km (624.5mi) perigee, 5782.1-min period, and 65.0° inclination. Primary objective was “to study processes of solar activity, their influence upon inter-planetary medium and the earth’s magnetosphere.” Prognoz 1 weighed 845 kg (1863 lbs) and carried instruments to study corpuscular, gamma ray, and x-ray solar radiation; solar plasma flows and their interaction with magnetosphere; and magnetic fields in nearearth space. Cosmos 486, launched from Plesetsk, entered orbit with 253-km (157.2-mi) apogee, 218-km (135.5-mi) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 81.3° inclination. Satellite reentered April 27. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/17/72, LI; Sov Aero, 5/1/72,9; SBD, 4/17/72,120)
Approval by NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences of report of May 8-12, 1972, joint meeting of experts on lunar cartography in Washington, D.C., was announced by NASA. Experts had exchanged documents on lunar coordinating systems and map making and agreed on joint development of principles for compiling lunar maps, on joint program to compile complete lunar map on scale of 1 to 5 000 000, and on development of common basic system of selendetic coordinates. Experts would exchange drafts and proposals for review, then meet to make recommendations for submission to cochairmen of Joint Working Group on the Exploration of Near-Earth Space, the Moon and the Planets, (nasa Release 72-186)
Success of first 27 test flights of new Maverick missile had enabled Air Force Systems Command to end demonstration phase of Maverick flight testing ahead of schedule, AFSC reported. Maverick Program Director Col. James A. Abrahamson (usaf) had canceled 13 additional tests originally scheduled under contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. (afsc Release 256.71) January 12—14:	Secretariat for Electronic Test Equipment—organization funded by NASA, Dept, of Defense, and Federal Aviation Administration to collect and disseminate test equipment information for Government agencies—held electronic test equipment conference at Kennedy Space Center. NASA presentations described design, development, procurement, and deployment of automatic test equipment for Apollo program, sete was administered by New York Univ. under direction of David M. Goodman of New York Univ. School of Engineering and Science, (ksc Release 8-72; ksc pao)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
North American Rockwell Corp. Downey Div. announced receipt of $5 500 000 contract from Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Organization (samso) to build one-of-a-kind satellite for late 1973 launch. Spacecraft would be orbiting base from which quartet of instruments would gather scientific data for several Government agencies. (NR Release) September 22-25:	NASA launched Explorer 47 (imp-h) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform from Eastern Test Range at 9:20 pm edt by three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered transfer orbit with 237 796-km (147 759.6-mi) apogee, 246-km (152.9-mi) perigee, 7365-min (5.11-day) period, and 28.6° inclination. Primary objective was to provide more detailed understanding of dynamics of regions discovered and broadly surveyed by previous earth-orbiting imps and lunar imp by obtaining scientific data during period of decreasing solar activity. Explorer 47 would continue studies of interplanetary radiation, solar wind and energetic particle emissions, and magnetic fields in earth’s environment from orbit halfway to moon. Apogee kick motor was fired Sept. 25 to place Explorer 47 in circular orbit with 235 639-km (146 419.3-mi) apogee, 201599-km (125 267.8-mi) perigee, 12.3-day period, and 17.2° inclination. Ry Sept. 25, 10 experiments had been commanded on and were operating satisfactorily. Three remaining experiments would be turned on about Oct. 5. Explorer 47 was drum shaped, weighed 378 kg (833 lbs), and carried 13 experiments to measure energetic particles, plasmas, and magnetic and electric fields. Experiments were provided universities, industry, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Explorer 47 was ninth spacecraft in imp series. First—Explorer 18 (imp—a)—had been launched Nov. 26, 1963, and most recent—Explorer 43 (imp—i) . —had been launched March 13, 1971. Four of the eight previously launched spacecraft were still operating, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-185) September 22:	Skylab Orbital Workshop, scheduled to carry three-man crews in earth orbit in 1973, arrived at Kennedy Space Center after two-week barge trip from McDonnell Douglas Co.’s Huntington Reach, Calif., plant. Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) was flown to KSC from Manned Spacecraft Center, where it had been undergoing thermal testing since mid-July. Airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) were scheduled to arrive at ksc Oct. 9 and instrument unit Oct. 22. (upi, NY News, 9/23/72; ksc Releases 268-72, 270-72)
Delegation of Soviet scientists headed by Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh flew from Moscow to New York. Scientists would participate in general meeting of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., and visit U.S. scientific institutes. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/17/72, LI)
Manned Spacecraft Center awarded North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. $200 000, fixed-price, research and development contract to study feasibility of manned and unmanned multipurpose spacecraft to provide support for spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit. Spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit were stationed at 37 800-km (23 500-mi) altitude, where they conducted communications, earth observations, and navigation experiments, (msc Release 72-141)
Expansion of environmental and resource base beyond earth was urged by North American Rockwell Corp. scientist Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke in New York Times article. Great crisis of the time was fact “man’s nature is attuned to anr infinite, indestructible world” but earth had ceased to be indestructible. Global development, therefore, “must be based on an open-world concept and include both the development of extraterrestrial resources and the wiser management of our terrestrial resources.” Extraterrestrial imperative was “indivisibility of Earth and space.” (NYT, 3/31/72)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 122km (75.7-mi) altitude to study ion composition in D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launch was fifth of six launches to study ionosphere under July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigation del Espacio (conie). (nasa Rpt SRL)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced election of 19 new Fellows, including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Bruce T. Lundin, Lewis Research Center Director; and Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory Project Manager. Fellows would be honored at annual banquet during Jan. 8-10, 1973, annual meeting and technical display. Dr. Fletcher had been cited for “pioneering work in missile guidance systems and for his farsighted administrative leadership of this nation’s aeronautical and space research and development programs.” Lundin citation was for “contribution to research in turbojet and ramjet engine technology and his management of many aircraft, missile and spacecraft research programs.” Schurmeir was cited for “basic work in systems engineering for lunar and planetary spacecraft and in particular for his leadership of the Ranger photographic missions to the moon and the Mariner missions to Mars.” Assistant Secretary of the Air Force Grant L. Hansen had also been elected AIAA Fellow, for “contributions to the electronic design of the Nike, Sparrow, Thor and Skybolt Systems, management and direction of the Centaur program and his perceptive leadership in military research and development.” (aiaa Release)
Smithsonian Institution opened exhibit “Ballooning: 1782-1972” at Arts and Industries Building in Washington, D.C. Exhibit, depicting ballooning and brave aeronauts, was described by New York Times as prototype show for National Air and Space Museum, “appropriately headed by Michael Collins, the ‘anchor astronaut’ for man’s first landing on the moon in 1969.” (Robertson, NYT, 2/29/72, 14) During February:	NASA selected three life scientists to receive first grants under NASA life scientist program. Dr. Roger P. Maickel, professor of pharmacology at Indiana Univ., would study effects of stressful or otherwise abnormal environment, such as space travel, on action of selected therapeutic drugs. Dr. Walther Stoeckenius of San Francisco Medical Center Cardiovascular Research Institute would conduct exobiology research to determine physiologic role of bacterial membrane dependent on high salt concentration. Dr. William A. Bonner, professor of chemistry at Stanford Univ., would conduct exobiology research to develop means for detecting measurable, optically active molecules in remote regions of space. Program had been established in July 1971 to increase cooperation among university and NASA life scientists in contributing to advancement of life sciences disciplines related to NASA mission. Scientists and their graduate students would spend one third of their time at a NASA center. (NASA Release V2—41)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of transistor—invented Dec. 23, 1947, by Dr. John Bardeen, Dr. Walter H. Brattain, and Dr. William Shockley at American Telephone & Telegraph Co.’s Bell Telephone Laboratories. Invention had introduced age of electronic miniaturization, advanced computer development, and simplified communications. New York Times said that, “without the tiny transistor, it is highly unlikely that man would yet have walked on the moon.” (Smith, NYT, 12/22/72, 45)
NASA launched Javelin sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and particles experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
NASA and National Science Teachers Assn, (nsta) announced approval of experiments proposed by 19 high school students from 16 states for Skylab space station. Experimenters were from 25 finalists selected from 3409 proposals submitted to NASA by U.S. secondary school students as part of Skylab Student Project. Six other finalists could not be accommodated because of Skylab performance requirements and schedule constraints. Medallions would he awarded to finalists, sponsors, and schools during Skylab Educational Conference at Kennedy Space Center at Skylab launch time, (nasa Release 72—146)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Columbia Broadcasting System said it had rejoined original TV pool arrangement to cover Apollo 17 launch Dec. 6. Under arrangement, National Broadcasting Co. would act as pool agent for itself, CBS, and American Broadcasting Co. in relaying close-up TV photos of launch from NASA cameras. (AP, W Post, 12/5/72, A3)
Senate confirmed nominations of Kenneth Rush as Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Eberhardt Rechtin as Assistant Secretary of Defense (Telecommunications). {CR, 2/3/73; dod Directory, Spring 1973) February 4:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of one-month $l-million interim contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine. Contract was awarded pending completion of General Accounting Office review of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested by competing contractor, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., on Aug. 3, 1971. (msfc Release 72-9; A&A 1971)
Was it “reasonable to expect that Europe’s disorganized space effort can make a positive contribution to a major American manned space programme?” English aerospace expert Kenneth W. Gatland asked in New Scientist article. Poor showing of European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) to date had “done nothing to inspire confidence” since its 1962 inception. Despite 11 firings with last 4 intended to achieve orbit, “we have yet to see an eldo satellite circling the Earth.” In same period U.S. had “developed Apollo and landed 10 men on the Moon!” European specialists had been working with U.S. aerospace companies on shuttle components and it would be possible, “depending on the financial arrangements,” for Europe to build complete unit like sortie can or space tug. “Whatever Europe produced, in effect, would be supplied free of cost to NASA. Actually, there should be a bonus as labour costs here are about half those in America, which would . . . offset the extra costs involved in collaboration.” In return “Europe would gain access to the fully operational system, opening the way for our satellites to be launched cheaply and allowing European scientists and engineers to conduct their own experiments in space.” Money might better be spent by Europeans on commercial satellites but “we might then have to pay whatever price is demanded for launching and become dependent on America for all advanced commercial services in space.” Biggest problem was “to assess precisely what importance space will have in the last quarter of the 20th Century. We need— and have never had—an in-depth assessment of the scientific and commercial potential.” Possibly post-Apollo period held “beginnings of a new growth industry which . . . will rival commercial air transport. If so, America’s offer to internationalise her manned space programme provides an excellent opportunity to get in on the ground floor.” (New Scientist, 6/22/72) June 23:	U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk. Cosmos 494 entered orbit with 804-km (499.6-mi) apogee, 789-km (490.3-mi) perigee, 100.7-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 495 entered orbit with 320-km (198.8-mi) apogee, 171-km (106.3-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination and reentered July 6. (gsfc SSR, 6/30/72 ; 7/31/72; SBD, 6/26/72, 241)
Associated Press reported Apollo 15 crew had been favored to receive Air Force Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy but that trophy would be withheld because of unauthorized postal cover incident [see July 11]. Trophy was awarded annually for most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress. AP said Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B. Irwin also had been invited to annual meeting of Federation Aeronautique Internationale in Parts in October to receive other awards with Soviet cosmonauts and that Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, had advised Fai that efforts would be made to have astronauts accept invitation. (AP, W Star & News, 7/23/72, A23) * Federal Aviation Administration announced award of $119 249 contract to Parsons, Brinckeroff, Quade and Douglas, Inc., for architectural and engineering plans for 600-by-90-m {2000-by-30Q-ft) elevated STOLport for short takeoff and landing aircraft. Exterior design of structure supporting STOLport would be planned to provide approaching pilot with realistic cues resembling those included in actual landing facility on top of a multilevel structure, (faa Release 72-142)
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
United Auto Workers filed suit in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., in attempt to recoup part of first-year wage increase denied 30 000 aerospace workers by Federal Pay Board Jan. 13. UAW contended portion of wage increase requested represented cost-of-living agreement made in 1968. (Rowe, W Post, 2/8/72, A7) February 8:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, returned to Vehicle Assembly Building Jan. 27 for replacement of command module fuel tank damaged during testing, was rolled out to Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. Spacecraft would be mated with Saturn V booster Feb. 11 and was to begin flight readiness test Feb. 29 in preparation for April 16 launch toward moon, (ksc Release 26-72)
Award of $35 913 123 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to TRW Systems Inc. for Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System satellite was announced by Dept, of Defense. Contract called for design, development, construction, and test of qualification-model spacecraft, software, and support equipment. Separate contract for production of five flight-model spacecraft would be awarded later. When operational, fltsatcom would provide satellite communication link among mobile users including major Navy ships, selected Air Force and Navy aircraft, and ground stations, (dod Release 775-72)
Soviet officials in Washington, D.C., said they would be prepared to begin next round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) in September to maintain momentum generated by May 22-26 summit talks. (Berger, NYT, 6/2/72, Al)
Reception in House Rayburn Building honored retiring Chairman George P. Miller of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Rep. Miller (D-Calif.)—defeated June 6 in California primary for nomination for reelection to House—had presided over House Committee in overseeing and funding U.S. space program since 1961. House Speaker, Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), said that “never had so much been accomplished in the national interest in so short a time” as by Committee. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., praised work of Committee in evolution of entire U.S. space effort. Rep. Miller responded that U.S. space achievements were “a beginning and not an end” of the national enterprise required to serve Nation and society in the future. National Space Club President Donald R. Rodgers presided over ceremony attended by 300 guests, including Congressmen, NASA and industry representatives, and Senate and House Space Committee staffs. (NASA Hist Off)
Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) said during campaign visit to Manned Spacecraft Center that “future American space effort should focus on unmanned exploration.” In statement released to press before his msc tour, Sen. McGovern said he favored going ahead with earth resources experiment package (erep). He accused Nixon Administration of eliminating some 500 000 aerospace jobs and 1.8 million positions in defense-related industries “without even thinking about new jobs to replace the ones destroyed.” (Knee-land, NYT, 9/8/72, 20)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were nearing “historic agreement to begin joint ventures in space,” Wall Street Journal reported. “For the first time, the Soviets are dropping their secrecy curtain enough to provide detailed engineering data on their spacecraft—a sign that Brezhnev, Kosygin & Co. really want to go ahead.” U.S. officials—including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser—“are eagerly committing themselves to cooperation; American spacemen, feeling pinched for funds, now count on accord to keep them flying in the future.” Political decision on joint space mission “is in the hands of the Kremlin and the White House.” Some officials believed “announcement of this Soviet-American engagement could come before June—perhaps in Moscow if President Nixon goes ahead with his scheduled trip there this month.” (Spivak, WSJ, 5/16/72, 1)
Phase II of prototype development program for advanced medium STOL (short takeoff and landing) transport (amst) was authorized by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Contractors Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. would design, build, and test two prototype aircraft, using existing engines, (dod Release 863-72) Dissident group, Scientists and Engineers for Social and Political Action, unsuccessfully attempted to disrupt opening aaas meeting and later held press conference to protest alleged AAAS attempts to “exclude political dissent from scientific and community groups.” (Lyons, NYT, 12/27/72, 14)	_ Space Shuttle Payloads Symposium Dec. 27-28 considered space shuttle system and its capability, science payloads, space operation roles, and other aspects of space shuttle system. Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, Deputy Director of Planetary Programs in NASA Office of Space Science, discussed effect of data derived from Mars and Venus probes on understanding of solar system, during Dec. 29 session on NASA planetary research. (AAAS Bull, 11/72; AAAS PAO) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Deputy Director of National Science Foundation, presented progress report on nsf’s Research Applied to National Needs (rann) Program Dec. 29. rann, originated in August 1968, was “gaining in strength and effectiveness.” It had been receiving “excellent proposals in great numbers from good people” and had in hand “proposals which would cost over $400 million to support—which unfortunately, would somewhat overstrain our present budget.” (Text) William A. Fischer of U.S. Geological Survey said Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched by NASA July 23) had discovered at least two major deposits that might contain large quantities of copper. “And if I were a geologist looking for oil and natural gas, I’d buy up every erts photograph of Northern Alaska and Northern Canada that I could get my hands on.” (Kirkman, Cl Press, 12/28/72) During shot meeting Dr. John B. Rae, Chairman of Dept, of Humanities and Social Sciences at Harvey Mudd College, was elected shot President for term expiring Dec. 31, 1974; Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, was elected to Advisory Council. (NASA Hist Off) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 541 from Plesetsk into orbit with 348-km (216.2-mi) apogee, 218-km (135.5-mi) perigee, 81.3° inclination, and 90.2-min period. Satellite reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; 1/31/73; SBD, 1/3/73, 2)
Team of Naval Research Laboratory and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory scientists had discovered chemical technique for stabilizing meteorological mists, nrl announced. Discovery had been made during attempts to eliminate fog. Release of certain organic compounds into atmosphere had been expected to diminish for intensity; instead, chemicals reduced fog evaporation rates. Findings might be used to change intensity and distribution of rainfall, (nrl Release 48-72-9)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 17 performance as astronauts worked on moon’s surface following Dec. 11 touchdown: Cleveland Plain Dealer: “On time and on target, the Apollo 17 mission has made it to the moon and provides further proof of excellence in American space technology. The temptation is to dismiss such performance as routine, but there is nothing at all routine about the assignments of the men and equipment on this far journey.” Apollo 17 was “establishing even more clearly the high degree of expertise and • perfection that is built into the American space exploration effort. It is doing so, however, with Schmitt and Cernan continuing the very unroutine work begun by astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin Jr. on the moon three years ago.” (Cl PD, 12/12/72) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “With all the other firsts of this last Apollo mission to the moon, there is tinge of sorrow mingled with the superlatives of performance.” To realize this was “last time humans will visit the moon in the foreseeable future is to feel a certain loss along with the sense of accomplishment.” (P Bull, 12/12/72) Miami Herald: “Knowledge gleaned from the Apollo program . . . is upsetting long-held theories. The venture thus is contributing to the demise of dogmatism, and encouraging open-mindedness which may lead mankind to many new truths.” (M Her, 12/12/72)
NASA launched Astrobee F sounding rocket from Wallops Station, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
North American Rockwell Corp., winner of $2.6-billion NASA space shuttle prime contract, might retain up to 70% of contract money for itself and four principal subcontractors, New York Times reported. Subcontractors were Honeywell, Inc., International Business Machines Corp., General Electric Co., and American Airlines. Acceptance by NASA of 70% figure could be “major blow” to Grumman Aerospace Corp., Times said. Only hope for Grumman, loser in shuttle contract competition, and other aerospace companies to obtain substantial subcontracting on shuttle project would be to enter competition with NR subcontractors for whom NR might already have preference. (Andelman, NYT, 9/5/72, 3)
NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences had approved Summary of Results of second meeting of Joint Working Group on the Natural Environment, NASA announced. Group had exchanged information in Washington, D.C., May 8-12 and defined further investigations in structural geology, surface geology and geomorphology, archeology, hydrology, agriculture, soil moisture, and oceanography. Coordinated satellite observations in these areas were contemplated. Next meeting of Group, established under NASA and Academy of Sciences agreement of January 1971, would be held in Moscow at year’s end. (NASA Release 72-171)
NASA announced initiation of cooperative program with Air Force to establish technology base needed by USAF and industry for development of military and civil short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft. Memorandum of Understanding signed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, called for close coordination of USAF advanced, medium STOL transport (amst) program and NASA quiet, experimental stol (questol) program to ensure that “the stol technology developed will . . . serve both areas of interest without undue compromise to either.” Program would be managed by new Air Force/NASA stol Coordinating Council, cochaired by Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development Grant L. Hansen and NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, (nasa Release 72-44)
Grumman Corp. and American Aviation Corp. had agreed in principle to merge American Aviation with Grumman’s commercial aircraft programs, Wall Street Journal reported. American manufactured sport, utility, and training aircraft. Grumman manufactured, sold, and serviced Gulfstream II corporate jet, and Ag-Cat agricultural aircraft. (WSJ, 9/6/72) September 7:	Skylab Orbital Workshop was delivered to Marshall Space Flight Center Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. President Walter F. Burke in Huntington Beach, Calif., ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Workshop would be moved to U.S. Naval Facility at Seal Beach Sept. 8 for transfer to U.S.S. Point Barrow and 14-day voyage to Cape Kennedy. Workshop, weighing 25 000 kg (55 000 lb), was largest section of Skylab experimental space station scheduled for 1973 launch. (nasa Off Admin; Miles, LA Times, 9/8/72)
Smithsonian Institution displayed collection of 60 works by astronomical artist Chesley Bonestell in Aerospace Art Hall of Arts and Industries Building. Artist had been commissioned by Collier’s magazine in 1952 to illustrate series of articles by rocket expert Dr. Wernher von Braun, later NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and by rocket historian Willy Ley. Articles had resulted in Viking Press books: Conquest of Space, Conquest of the Moon, and Exploration of Mars. Smithsonian exhibition was coincidental with American Museum showing of Bone-stell’s works in New York [see May 16]. (Smithsonian Release; Smithsonian Pio) June 1:	President Nixon returned from state visits to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland and reported to Congress on trip. Commenting on agreements signed with U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings, he said: “Recognizing that the quest for useful knowledge transcends differences between ideologies and social systems, we have agreed to expand United States-Soviet cooperation in many areas of science and technology. “We have joined in plans for an exciting new adventure ... in the cooperative exploration of space, which will begin—subject to Congressional approval of funding—with a joint orbital mission of an Apollo vehicle and a Soviet spacecraft in 1975.” President asked for “fullest scrutiny” of antiballistic missile treaty signed May 26, “because we can undertake agreements as important as these only on a basis of full partnership between the executive and legislative branches of our Government.” {PD, 6/5/72, 975-81)
Engine concepts for space applications were described in Air University Review. Government and industry had spent more than $100 million on high-pressure-engine technology since 1961. Air Force XLR-129 engine program had provided strong technical base for space shuttle engine. Shuttle’s orbiter stage would use advanced-concept staged combustion engine “very similar to that of a turbojet equipped with an afterburner; . . . there are two different stages of combustion.” While first turbojet combustion occurred in main chamber, shuttle engine’s first burning occurred in gas generator or preburner. Preferred engine concept for future spacecraft would be “single engine that could operate as a rocket, a ramjet, a scramjet, and a turbofan.” At liftoff, rocket would be firing and “turbofan might also be operating to supply additional air to improve the performance of the rocket. After the vehicle is moving at a greater speed, the ramjet would start operating, and the turbofan would be removed from the airstream. The pure rocket would continue to operate briefly to aid the ramjet. As the vehicle reaches the outer fringes of the atmosphere, the inlets would be closed, and the pure rocket would be used alone for reaching, maneuvering in, and leaving orbit. To return to base after re-entry into the atmosphere, the ramjet and/or the turbofan might be used separately or they might be used like an afterburning turbofan.” To improve spacecraft performance further, “we would like to get away from having to carry an oxidizer for the rocket portion of the flight.” Future space engines would “mate the tremendous energy available from nuclear explosions with the ability of a rocket to operate at high thrust levels.” Performance of nuclear rocket “more than makes up for its being heavier than a normal rocket.” Nuclear rocket’s specific impulse was about twice that of “even the best chemical rocket.” Nuclear stage also would be useful for seeding space with unmanned applications satellites. (Holder, Siuru, Air IJniv Rev, 9/72)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Wallops Station, carrying Univ. of New Hampshire energetic particle experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific requirements were not satisfied. (SR list)
Kennedy Space Center awarded $4.7 million contract to MorrisonKnudsen, Inc., to develop ksc facilities for Viking spacecraft encapsulation. Contract provided for modification of an addition to one structure and construction of new building in ksc Fluid Test Facility area, (ksc Release 346-72)
Air Force announced award of $1 353 205 firm-fixed-price contract to Space Data Corp. for production of meteorological probes and launch support equipment, (dod Release 204^-72)
NASA had definite plans for international rendezvous and docking mission to link three Soviet cosmonauts with three U.S. astronauts in 1975, Washington Post reported. Tentative date was June 14, four days after U.S.S.R. orbited Salyut station and three days after cosmonauts docked Soyuz spacecraft at one end of Salyut 15 m (50 ft) long. Apollo spacecraft would dock with orbiting Salyut on 15th Apollo orbit of earth, day following Apollo launch. For 56 hrs astronauts and cosmonauts would work and live together under guidance of mission control centers in Houston and in Baykonur. There were “no longer any technical doubts that the feat of flying an American and a Russian spacecraft together can be accomplished.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Manned Spacecraft Center, had said, “We haven’t seen anything in a technical sense that says we should stop.” (O’Toole, W Post, 5/7/72, B2)
Soviet Politburo member Mikhail A. Suslov, in speech before foreign affairs commissions of Supreme Soviet, endorsed formal ratification of U.S.-U.S.S.R. antiballistic missile treaty, but warned against U.S. attempts “to distort the spirit and letter of the treaty and interim agreement.” He said U.S.S.R. would “take into consideration in its policy all changes that may appear in the position of the American side.” (NYT, 8/24/72, 6)
Second delegation of scientists from People’s Republic of China—seven specialists in physical and biological sciences—arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin four-week tour of major U.S. research centers and universities. Delegation included Chien Wei-chang, professor of Engineering at Chinghua Univ. in Peking, who had worked at Jet Propulsion Laboratory from 1940 to 1946. At National Academy of Sciences press conference Chien said: “We welcome and congratulate the work on space done by American scientists. We also congratulate you on the success of this problem; this is why we pay so much attention to work on space.” In answer to question, Chien said his country was seeking to develop communications satellites but had no plans to put men in orbit. Visit was sponsored by National Academy of Sciences, Social Science Research Council, and American Council of Learned Societies. Delegation of physicians from PRC had toured U.S. in October. (McGehan, B Sun, 11/22/72; Schmeck, NYT, 11/22/72, 43)
Retirement ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., honored l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command. Gen. O’Neill, who was succeeded by l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, received Oak Leaf Cluster to Air Force Distinguished Service Medal from AFSC Commander, Gen. George S. Brown, (afsc Newsreview, 10/72, 4) During August: House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space published U.S.—U.S.S.R. Cooperative Agreements. Report of June hearings to explore scope of scientific and technical agreements signed during May 22-30 summit meeting in Moscow included texts of agreements and comments of experts. Dr. Philip Handler, National Academy of Sciences President, had said of space cooperation agreement: “The symbolism of the proposed link-up in space may prove to be the most significant aspect of the venture.” Agreement was “symbolic of a mutual awareness that the planet earth is a small and fragile spaceship, that all men are its fellow passengers, and that the fate of the people of all nations is essentially a common fate.” Subcommittee had concluded: “While a gradual amelioration of fundamental political conflicts and disagreements is the most that can be reasonably hoped for, the genuine cooperative spirit that has made these agreements possible opens the door to more effective communication and deeper understanding between the world’s two predominant powers that could have the most profound effect on the future of mankind.” (Committee Print)
NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars probe photographed area of Mars 800 km (500 mi) from south pole from 3335-km (2072-mi) altitude. Photos, released to press Jan. 11, showed pits and hollows—including two large closed basins 16 km (10 mi) wide—with more detail than seen before. According to Dr. Carl E. Sagan of Cornell Univ., spots occurred in sizes from more than 160 km (100 mi) to size of Yankee Stadium in New York. Many blotches seemed to be associated with craters, indicating that they might be wind shadows where hill or other feature had protected downwind area from dust deposition. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/12/72, 1)	_ _
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., blamed pressures of public life following participation in first lunar landing July 20, 1969, for mental condition that had forced him to seek psychiatric help. In interview published by Los Angeles Times, Aldrin—who had announced retirement as Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., effective March 1—said he was writing book about “personal experiences.” {LA Times, 2/27/72, Al)
Sprint antiballistic missile launched by Dept, of Defense from Kwajalein Atoll and guided by missile site radar on Meek Island successfully intercepted Minuteman warhead over Pacific. Test was 24th in series to check out Safeguard antiballistic missile components, (upi, NYT, 3/19/72, 15) March 17:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 9:00 am pst. Orbital parameters: 396-km (246-mi) apogee, 141-km (88-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 11. (Pres Rpt 73; Sov Aero, 3/27/72, 91; Av Wk, 3/27/72, 17)
l/g August Schomburg (usa, Ret.), former Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces and former Commander of Ordnance Missile Command at Redstone Arsenal, died at age 63. He had served as consultant to NASA Administrator 1967-1970. (W Post, 1/16/72, Dll) January 15:	Pioneer-F spacecraft to probe Jupiter’s environmental and atmospheric characteristics arrived at Kennedy Space Center to begin final checkout before Feb. 27 launch. Pioneer-F 3rd stage had been erected Jan. 7 and overall vehicle interface test had been conducted Jan. 10. Pioneer-F would mark first use of Atlas-Centaur booster in Pioneer program and first use of Atlas-Centaur with 3rd stage— TE-M-364r^l solid-propellant engine with 66 750-newton (15 000-lb) thrust, (ksc Release 7-72; NASA Release 72-25)
New York Times science reporter John Nobel Wilford toured Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), near Moscow, as first Western correspondent to be invited to center of U.S.S.R. cosmonaut activities. Guide for visit arranged by Soviet Novosti News Agency was Soyuz Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training. Shatalov said U.S.S.R. did not announce space mission dates “because we don’t want to bind the people who are preparing the flight.” Cosmonaut flight training areas were closed to most visitors “because we just don’t want journalists to interfere with the working atmosphere of the cosmonauts.” Area contained medical center with centrifuge that cosmonauts called “Devil’s merry-go-round.” From size and number of apartment buildings, Wilford estimated Star City population at 1500 to 2000, City was “smaller than Houston space center because it does not also serve as the mission control complex and apparently has no primary responsibility for the management of spacecraft design and development.” Like NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Star City contained facilities for premission training of cosmonauts and postmission physical examinations and recreation. Like U.S. astronauts, Soviet cosmonauts were trained in aircraft “that make deep dives to simulate weightlessness.” Parachuting tested ability to handle high-stress situations. First simulator for Salyut orbiting laboratory was being installed in new building to be completed at year’s end. Wilford said that “this could mean that no major advance beyond the present version of Salyut should be expected until well after the simulator is ready.” Of about 50 cosmonauts in Soviet space program, one third were civil engineers living in Moscow, Shatalov said; remainder were Soviet air force pilots who lived in Star City. No women were preparing for space missions but U.S.S.R. had “many women who specialize in meteorology and medicine, which are professions necessary on the orbital stations.” From descriptions by Shatalov and Cosmonaut-engineer Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, Wilford had constructed outline of preparations for Soviet space mission: Cosmonauts were assigned to mission one year in advance of launch date by commission of medical and engineering experts and Shatalov. There were two backup crews. After learning spacecraft mechanics and electronics and practicing in spacecraft simulator at Star City, crew went to Baykonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan three weeks before launch. There they completed training in actual spacecraft, checked instruments, stocked food, adjusted couches, and recommended minor changes in housekeeping. “Unlike Cape Kennedy,” Baykonur had no simulators for last-minute practice. For two days before launch, “after the state commission approves the spaceship’s readiness,” crew relaxed. On launch morning cosmonauts were examined physically and biomedical sensors were attached to their bodies before they donned spacesuits. Traditionally, cosmonauts then gathered in quarters for few moments of silence broken by shouts of “off we go!” They signed their names on door before leaving for launch pad. Between missions, cosmonauts were expected to devote time each month to “social work”—visits to schools, collective farms, and factories. Shatalov had suggested that new Soviet manned missions were possible within months and that U.S.S.R. was studying mission longevity in preparation for earth-orbiting laboratories. Of next Salyut mission, Shatalov said: “We are going to make it better .... We will prolong the visits of men, and the number of expeditions will grow. This is the difference now between our program and yours.” Yeliseyev had said his countrymen would “probably” be on the moon by 1975. At tour’s completion, Shatalov had offered toast: “To cooperation between our peoples, to working together in space, which is our future and the future of the world.” (Wilford, NYT, 3/22/72, 30 ; 3/26/72, 7; Huntsville Times, 4/2/72, 17)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
Apollo 16 lunar module (lm) pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was admitted to Patrick Air Force Base Hospital for treatment of bacterial pneumonia. Duke’s illness was not expected to have serious impact on training preparations for Apollo 16 launch, scheduled for March 17. (msc Release 72-02)
President Nixon signed ratification of Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation and urged prompt action on other measures to combat international terrorism. Convention required extradition or prosecution of persons committing sabotage or violence against international civil aviation. Other measures were draft convention for prosecution or extradition of persons who attacked foreign officials, convention suspending air service to countries who failed to punish or extradite aircraft hijackers or saboteurs, and convention requiring prosecution or extradition of persons who injured, kidnaped, or killed innocent civilians to blackmail any state or international organization. (PD, 11/6/72, 1608) November 2:	American Astronautical Society presented its 1971 awards and honored newly elected fellows at Washington, D.C., luncheon. Flight Achievement Award was presented to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar B. Mitchell for “achievements in flight testing which have contributed significantly to the advancement of manned space flight.” Lloyd V. Berkner Award was presented to Willard F. Rockwell, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of North American Rockwell Corp., for “outstanding contributions to the commercial utilization of space technology.” Space Flight Award went to Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., Grumman Aerospace Corp. President, for “outstanding efforts and achievements which have contributed significantly to the advancement of space flight and space science.” Victor A. Prather Award was presented jointly to Robert E. Breeding of United Aircraft Corp. Space Systems Dept, and Leonard F. Shepard of ilc Industries, Inc., for “outstanding contributions in . . . extravehicular protection in space.” Randolph Lovelace II Award went to Dr. Maxime A. Faget, Manned Spacecraft Center Director of Engineering and Development, for “outstanding contributions in space technology.” Melbourne W. Boynton Award for “significant research contributions to space flight safety” was presented to Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director for Medical Operations at msc, and Dr. Harald J. von Beckh, Naval Air Development Center Director for Medical Research. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan were among newly elected Fellows. (aas Release)
Bridgeport (Conn.) Post commented on March 1 launch of Air Force reconnaissance satellite. Satellite “is intended to monitor rocket tests of the Soviet Union and Communist China. And it is to remind us all not to get so carried away in the new approaches to the two Communist giants that we will let down our guard against them. . . . informed guesses are that the new spy satellite’s major job is to monitor submarine launching missiles. In its high position, the sensors would be able to observe one third of the globe. Another outpost would complete surveillance of the whole globe.” Despite President Nixon’s visit to China and prospective visit to Soviet Union “spy satellites are needed precautions.” (Bridgeport Post, 3/12/72, 23)
Air Force HC-130H piloted by l/c Ed Allison established world record for nonstop, unrefueled flight by turboprop aircraft of 14 052.94 km (8732.09 mi) in flight from Ching Chuan Kang Air Base on Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111. (Airman, 7/72, 2-8)
Astronaut James A. Lovell—holder of record for hours logged in space [see Nov. 22]—had been elected to the board of American Bakeries Co., Chicago Daily News reported. (C Daily News, 12/15/72)
Arthur B. Freeman, Director of Administration at Ames Research Center and arc’s first employee, died at age 62. Freeman had begun his Government career with National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) at Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1935 and had joined ARC when it was founded in 1941 as Moffett Field Laboratory. (Marshall Star, 6/14/72, 1)
NASA authorized construction of two additional buildings to augment visitor facilities at Kennedy Space Center. Buildings, designed by Charles Luckman Associates, would add some 3580 sq m (38 600 sq ft) of air-conditioned space for exhibits, films, lectures, snack bar, and ticket sale area. Extension of facilities, necessitated by increased public attendance, had been authorized by Congress, (ksc Release 298-72)
NASA announced appointment of Raymond J. Sumser as Director of Personnel, effective Jan. 21, 1973. Sumser had been Personnel Director at Goddard Space Flight Center since July 1967 and was awarded NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1972. (NASA Ann) “if private enterprise finds it profitable to do so after paying all costs, including any environmental costs imposed by third parties.” He opposed governmental subsidizing of sst because “a governmental decision to produce an sst largely at its own expense is a step toward socialism and away from free enterprise.” Committee Chairman, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), criticized failure of Administration witnesses to testify on possible sst plans. “If nothing is planned, why don’t they come forward and say so?” (Testimony; upi, W Post, 12/28/72, A7)
U.S. was moving towards conversion to metric system despite opposition from some industries concerned about resultant confusion and cost, Now York Times reported. American chemical and pharmaceutical industries were now largely on metric system, as were NASA and “important parts” of weapon and aircraft industries. General Electric Co., whose products for foreign consumption were already made to metric dimensions, had come out for conversion. In “carefully timed manner,” each industry was following pace suited to its needs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/72, 4:6)
Inauguration of Traffic Control and Landing System (tracals, 404L Program) at Air Force System Command’s Electronic Systems Div. at Hanscom Field, Mass., was announced by afsc. Program would update management and control of Air Force aircraft takeoffs, en route flights, and landings in U.S. and overseas. Effort included development and acquisition of solid-state, low-cost, reliable electronic components and systems to replace outdated tube equipment in use for more than two decades, (afsc Release 112.72)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1971 was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his achievements as Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Trophy was awarded annually by National Geographic Society to Air Force member who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. Gen. Phillips had been Apollo Program Director in NASA and was currently Director of National Security Agency, (msc Release 72—197)
Vanguard 1, second U.S. satellite, began 15th year in orbit. When launched March 17, 1958, satellite’s lifetime was estimated at 5-10 yrs; current estimate was 200 to 2000 yrs. Vanguard 1 was one of 5865 man-made space objects cataloged by North American Air Defense Command Space Defense Center. Of these, 2659—including 504 payloads and 2155 pieces of debris—were still orbiting earth. (Miles, LA Times, 3/13/72; gsfc pao)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, was chosen President of American College of Preventive Medicine at annual meeting in Atlantic City, NJ. (NASA Activities, 12/15/72; NASA Pio) November 14:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, visited Kennedy Space Center for briefings on ksc plans for 1970s. Programs included Apollo 17, Skylab, U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, space shuttle, applications programs, and Viking unmanned Mars missions for 1975 launch. Dr. Fletcher’s visit included Vehicle Assembly Building, to see Saturn V Orbital Workshop and Saturn IB launch vehicle for Skylab. (ksc Release 320-72)
Selection of Dr. Manson Benedict, Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear physicist, to receive Enrico Fermi Award for 1972 was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission. President Nixon had approved nomination. President had informed Dr. Benedict that award was being given “in recognition of your pioneering leadership in the development of the Nation’s first gaseous diffusion plant, while paying equal tribute to your imaginative contributions in the development of the nuclear reactor and its safe use for generation of electrical power.” (aec Release P-366) November 4:	President Nixon, in foreign policy speech over nationwide radio, referred to U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings: “We agreed ... to cooperate in protecting the environment, explore in space, fight disease. This means the day is fast approaching when a Russian cosmonaut and an American astronaut will shake hands in space, when a Russian chemist and an American biologist will work side by side to find a cure for cancer, and each time our nations join hands in the works of peace, we advance the day when nations will no longer raise their hands in warfare.” {PD, 11/13/72, 1639-41)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said “real increase in productivity in space” would come with shuttle, in speech before National Space Club in Washington, D.C. “. . . we have built more than 80 launch stands in this country, 50 of which are still either active or on standby . . . [and] we are using 17 different combinations of boosters and upper stages . . . today. The shuttle will allow us to consolidate most of these. . . .” Shuttle, “major investment in a new tool for space exploration,” had been designed for productivity “in terms of launch services, . . . access it will provide to space, . . . [and] the way it will let us operate in space.” (Text)
Radar-guided usaf Sprint missile launched from Kwajalein Atoll intercepted multiple-warhead missile launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base over Pacific in second successful test of antiballistic missile against multiple targets, (upi, NYT, 5/9/72, 33)
Dr. Karl Klager, Vice President and Director of Science for Aerojet Solid Propulsion Co., was named winner of 1972 James H. Wyld Propulsion Award by American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics for his development of hybrid and solid propellants. (Av Wk, 11/20/72, 11; aiaa pio)
Robert Stern of Bellcomm, Inc., said in Washington, D.C., that his studies “tended to agree” with those of Rice Univ. scientists who had reported on Oct. 15, 1971, detection of possible water vapor being vented from lunar surface. Reuters had reported release March 2 of Bellcomm computer analysis suggesting vapors could have come from urine dumped .into lunar orbit by Apollo 14 astronauts. {NYT, 3/4/72)	.
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket, launched hy NASA from Wallops Station, carried 5.9-kg (130-lb) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 852-km (529.4mi) altitude to study upper atmosphere. Onboard instruments measured ion composition and concentration and solar-wind neutral hydrogen atoms during 16%-min flight. Data would be correlated with ground observations. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (WS Release 72-1)
Apollo 17 crew had selected mission emblem to emphasize beginning of golden age of space flight that final Apollo flight would usher in Dec. 6, NASA announced. Emblem showed Apollo gazing toward planet Saturn and a galaxy, symbolizing that man’s goal in space would someday include planets and even stars. Suspended behind Apollo image was American eagle with four red bars on wing, representing U.S. flag. Three white stars represented Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt. Eagle’s wing overlying moon suggested moon had been conquered by man. (nasa Special Release)
Air Force F—111 fighter bomber aircraft plunged in Choctawhatchee Bay after takeoff from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., killing both crew members. Cause of accident was being investigated. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
European Space Conference delegation visited U.S. to complete resolutions for July 11 esc conference in Brussels, which would discuss government action on European participation in U.S. post-Apollo space program. Brussels conference later was postponed. During Washington, D.C., meeting NASA and Dept, of State officials told esc delegation that space tug was no longer being considered as item for European development. Possibilities for European participation had been reduced to four structural areas of space shuttle. U.S. urged esc to undertake development of shuttle sortie laboratory. (NASA OMSF; Av Wh, 7/17/72, 19)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to measure spectrum of planetary atmosphere. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa Technology Utilization Office representatives met in San Francisco with Public Technology Inc. officials and representatives of cities to review two-year joint effort to apply new technology to selected city problems. Discussed were improved protective clothing and equipment, improved detection and locating equipment for underground piping, equipment to determine presence of illegal drugs in human blood, and improved pavement patching materials that used waste matter. Meeting also discussed civil cooperation to form mass market for goods and services produced by application of new technology. Meeting prefaced July 24—26 second annual Urban Technology Conference at which nasa, other Federal agencies, and business and industry exhibited contributions to new technology, (nasa Release 72-154)
Two volunteers began pilot investigation at U.S. Public Health Service Hospital in San Francisco to retrace Apollo 15 mission profile and determine cause of astronauts’ slower-than-usual return to physiologic norm. Program, conducted for Manned Spacecraft Center, included set periods of vigorous physical exercise, bed rest, and posttest analysis. Bed rest portion was considered analogue of weightlessness. Potassium intake would be closely controlled because NASA doctors postulated Apollo 15 crew had not consumed enough potassium for their workload and adjustment to weightlessness. Program consisted of 9-day equilibration, 7-day control phase, 12-day bed rest, and 14-day recovery period, (msc Release 72-39; msc pao)
Senate received President Nixon’s nominations of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., for promotion from lieutenant colonel to full colonel in Air Force and of Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II for promotion from lieutenant commander in Navy to permanent grade of commander. Senate confirmed both nominations May 16. (CR, 5/2/72, S7135; 5/16/72, S7969) May 3:	Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., held press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center and showed films and still photos taken during April 16-27 mission. Crew’s physical condition was already back to normal. Mattingly’s exercise-response tests had been normal one day after landing, and Young’s and Duke’s had been normal two days after landing. Tests to determine potassium levels were still under way. Young said engine problem that had delayed lunar landing six hours had made Apollo 16 “a cliff-hanger of a mission from where we were sitting in the cockpit; but the ground came through . . . with a couple of clutch hits and put us right back in the ball game. I know there was a lot of work being done on the ground and, speaking for the flight crew, we certainly appreciate it.” Young also praised lunar roving vehicle which carried him and Duke over lunar surface. “The suspension system on the Rover is absolutely remarkable. We never had the feeling of spinning out or anything, but sometimes we went in some deep holes and sometimes the vehicle bounced up in the air and came down on a rock . . . [but] it didn’t seem to affect the performance of the machine.” Duke said lunar surface was so clear that “features look almost like you’re right next door to them,” like a clear day in western U.S. desert. “Some mountains you think are right next to you and [they] end up 20 miles [32 km] away. You have the same feeling on the lunar surface. Looking out the window from the lunar module . . . South Ray Crater . . . looks like it’s just right next to you, but it was 6 kilometers [3% miles] away.” (Transcript)
President Nixon and Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev of Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee signed “Basic Principles of Relations” outlining agreements made between U.S. and U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 summit meetings in Moscow. They then released joint communique at conclusion of President’s visit to U.S.S.R. Communique described agreements on cooperation in science and technology and space: “It was recognized that the cooperation now underway in areas such as atomic energy research, space research, health and other fields benefits both nations and has contributed positively to their over-all relations. It was agreed that increased scientific and technical cooperation on the basis of mutual benefit and shared effort for common goals is in the interest of both nations and would contribute to a further improvement in their bilateral relations.” In peaceful exploration of space, “both Sides emphasized the importance of further bilateral cooperation.... In order to increase the safety of mam’s flights into outer space and the future prospects of joint scientific experiments, the two Sides agreed to make suitable arrangements to permit the docking of American and Soviet spacecraft and stations. The first joint docking experiment of the two countries’ piloted spacecraft, with visits by astronauts and cosmonauts to each other’s spacecraft is contemplated for 1975.” NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences would plan and implement flight “according to principles and procedures developed through mutual consultations.” (PD, 6/5/72, 945-51)
Saturn IB stage for Skylab 2 arrived at Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Orion. Saturn IB would launch command and service module to join orbiting Skylab Workshop day after Workshop launch as Skylab 1 in 1973. Stage would Be processed in Vehicle Assembly Building and would be erected on Mobile Launcher Aug. 31 at ksc. Arrival of stage marked first time in nearly four years that a Saturn IB had been in processing at ksc and first time vehicle would undergo flight preparation in Vab. Last mission for a Saturn IB was Apollo 7 earth-orbital mission Oct. 11, 1968. (ksc Release 246-72)
Univ. of Washington architectural student R. Danning Roberts had won $3000 first prize in competition for interior design of orbiting space station sponsored by NASA and California Council of American Institute of Architects, San Diego Union reported. (SD Union, 6/25/72)	_	_
l/g John W. O’Neil, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command since 1969, would retire from Air Force Sept. 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. President Nixon had nominated as successor to Gen. O’Neil, m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who had also been nominated for promotion to grade of lieutenant general, (afsc Newsreview, 7/72, 1) August 1:	Launch of first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, Erts 1, and selection of prime contractor—North American Rockwell Corp.— for space shuttle system demonstrated “how we have begun to turn the space program . . . around, how we are returning to the home seas of space after 12 years of strenuous and highly successful effort to explore the Moon,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to NASA staff. NASA would continue new direction with 1973 Skylab launch, joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, and first orbital flight of space shuttle in 1978. Additionally NASA would explore solar system with improved unmanned spacecraft, build and orbit improved unmanned observatories, and accelerate efforts to develop “basic new technology for the most promising space missions of the Eighties and Nineties. We will . . . maintain a balanced national space effort with our main area of concentration shifted from the Moon to Earth orbit.” (NASA Activities, 8/25/72, 160-1)
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)
Nimbus 5 (Nimbus-E) meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 11:56 pm EST by two-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered near polar orbit with 1101.3-km (684.3-mi) apogee, 1089.5-km (677.0-mi) perigee, 107.2-min period, and 99.95° inclination. Solar array lock-on and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. Activation was proceeding. Nimbus 5 carried new and improved instruments to extend observation into cloudy areas and higher altitudes, making first vertical temperature and water vapor measurements through clouds of earth’s atmosphere. Assigned primary objectives were to improve and extend capability for vertical sounding of temperature and moisture in atmosphere with particular regard to altitude coverage and cloud interference, providing nearly total global coverage for first time, and to demonstrate improved thermal mapping for 10 wks. As secondary objectives spacecraft would determine feasibility of using passive microwave remote sensing techniques to obtain earth observational data and would demonstrate capabilities of improved selective chopper radiometer (scr), provided by United Kingdom, to obtain atmospheric soundings. Butterfly-shaped 769-kg (1695-lb) satellite carried six meteorological and earth resources experiments: scr; infrared temperature profile radiometer (itpr) ; Nimbus E microwave spectrometer (nems) ; electrically scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) ; surface-compositionmapping radiometer (scmr) ; and temperature-humidity infrared radiometer (thir). Nimbus 5 was sixth of seven spacecraft designed to provide atmospheric data for improved weather forecasting. With added sophistication program had grown to include wide range of earth sciences. Sensors aboard Nimbus 5 would map Gulf Stream off east coast of U.S. and Humboldt Current off west coast of South America. By knowing locations of streams, shipping interests could make substantial saving. Nimbus 5 would also provide information about El Nino— change in Humboldt Current. El Nino had been causing great economic damage by warming coastal waters, killing nutrients and fish. Nimbus 2 (launched May 15, 1966, with design life of 6 mos) had returned data for 32 mos, for detailed study of effect of water, carbon dioxide, and ozone on earth’s heat balance. Vertical temperature measurements of Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) had been termed by meteorologists as one of most significant events in meteorological history, providing worldwide atmospheric information. Six of nine experiments on Nimbus 4 (launched April 8, 1970) could still provide atmospheric data. Nimbus program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under NASA Office of Applications direction, (nasa proj off; gsfc proj off; NASA Release 72-234)
Final Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill heard testimony on space shuttle by Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist and Chairman of nasa Space Program Advisory Council and of National Academy of Sciences’ Advisory Committee to Air Force Systems Command. Committee also heard shuttle testimony from Dr. Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. of Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences and Chairman of nasa Space Systems Committee. Dr. O’Brien said he believed shuttle would provide “space transportation system which can be available on short notice to meet unforeseen conditions which may result from world events, and . . . great flexibility in our space operations, whether civil or military.” It “should make possible a drastic reduction in cost of launches and in cost of payloads destined for earth orbit; while providing the opportunity for refurbishing or repairing satellites in orbit, or returning them to earth. In short, it should prove an invaluable tool in keeping us at the forefront in our operations in space.” Dr. Perkins said nothing NASA could do “could have a more profound effect on the total space program in the years ahead.” Shuttle would provide launch capability for nearly all programs, manned and unmanned, permitting elimination of large stable of rocket boosters and large complex of launch sites. Program provided strong signal to young scientists and engineers that U.S. wasn’t “about to throw away our carefully developed competence in space” and it was one of only few new national programs continuing “growth and stretch” in high technology. (Transcript)
Half-hour documentary film “The Worlds of von Braun” was televised by wmal-tv in Washington, D.C. Documentary, filmed at NASA Wallops Station, included footage never before televised, from NASA, U.S.S.R., and moon. In film, Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, discussed his careers as World War II rocket expert and with NASA in interview with wmal-tv Public Affairs Director James Clarke. Washington Post TV critic Victor Cohn said of film: “Wernher von Braun is a compelling man and a true believer . . . and the joy is that of seeing any man so thoroughly absorbed in a discipline that he absorbs you, even at the distant end of a TV tube.” (nasa Special Ann, 1/4/72; W Post, 1/7/72, Bl)
Air Force F-15 fighter aircraft completed first supersonic flight, reaching mach 1.5 during 45-min test at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Flight test program was scheduled to end March 1, 1973, when decision on production of first 30 of 729 aircraft would be made. (SBD, 8/7/72, 188)
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, died at age 59 after long illness. Wasielewski had been principal official for institutional management of gsfc and for operation of worldwide tracking and data-acquisition network. He had joined gsfc in 1960 after career in private industry. (W Post, 7/19/72, C4)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Ronald E. Evans would receive promotion from commander to captain in Navy despite Government freeze on promotions, Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C. Exemption had been granted specifically for Evans. Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan had received promotion to captain in Navy for previous space exploits. (W Post, 12/16/72, A4)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) released statement saying he would ask Dept, of Justice to investigate alleged overpayment for building Lockheed C-5 military transport aircraft, gao study made at' his request had found that Air Force paid some $400 million in excess progress payments to Lockheed because Lockheed overstated value of work in progress. (Text)
Five Soviet aviation officials toured Kennedy Space Center and were briefed on current and future NASA programs. They were among first Soviet citizens to visit ksc. Poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko had visited ksc and witnessed Apollo 16 launch as NASA guest April 16. (ksc pao) November 17:	Successful radio tracking of solar energetic particles through interplanetary space was reported in Science by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Dr. Joseph Fainberg, Larry G. Evans, and Robert G. Stone. Satellite observations by Explorer 6 (launched Aug. 7, 1959) of ejection of energetic sun particles at long radio wavelengths had provided means of investigating gross magnetic field configuration over distances of one astronomical unit. (Science, 11/17/72, 743-5)
Air Force Systems Command announced plans for summer launch of particle identifier developed by Air Force Cambridge Laboratories to measure energetic particles across polar regions and South Atlantic Anomaly over Brazil. Measurements would permit more accurate prediction of ionization buildup that interfered with communications systems. Experiment would be carried on satellite launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base into polar orbit with 740-km (460-mi) altitude. It would transmit data twice daily for at least one year. (afsc Release 059.72)
Apollo 17 astronauts arrived at Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., after flight from Samoa, via Hawaii, aboard Air Force C—141 jet transport. After reception at airport by crowd of 5000, they went to Manned Spacecraft Center for debriefings that would continue through Dec. 23. (Wilford, NYT, 12/22/72, 15; WSJ, 12/22/72)
Grove Webster, NASA Director of Personnel, died at age 48 after long illness. Webster had joined NASA in 1959 after working for Air Force and Civil Service Commission. (NASA Special Ann) The 941-kg (2075-lb), butterfly-shaped satellite carried RBV camera system, MSS subsystem, data-collection system (dcs), and two wideband video tape recorders (wbvtr). Launch was first step in merging space and remote sensing technology to manage earth resources more efficiently. Satellite would be able to cover earth with 500 pictures— 1000 times fewer than 500 000 needed to cover earth from high-altitude aircraft. Each picture would cover 34 000 sq km (13 000 sq mi). Satellite would view 185-km (115-mi) strip of earth with global coverage every 18 days, crossing equator daily at about 9:30 am local time. Solar array lock-on to sun and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. By July 25 instruments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Initial imagery from RBVC system and MSS was excellent and showed detail. Data were being transmitted to stations at Fairbanks, Alaska; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md.; and would be sent to data-processing facility at Goddard Space Flight Center. Ground station at Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, constructed and operated by Canadian government, would also receive data. Data would be distributed in form of high-quality film images or digitized data on computer-readable magnetic tape. Unlike previous unmanned programs where principal investigators had own instrumentation on board spacecraft and were responsible for own data analysis, all Erts 1 investigators had access to all data from onboard instruments. The 300 investigators from 43 states, District of Columbia, 31 foreign countries, and two international organizations would be assisted by 25 specialists assigned by NASA to analyze results. To carry out research required to evaluate satellite techniques, NASA was working with user agencies—including Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, and Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, and U.S. Corps of Engineers—and state and local organizations. Extensive cooperative earth resources projects had been established with Canada, Brazil, and Mexico, using Erts 1 and NASA earth observations aircraft. erts program was managed by gsfc. under direction of NASA Office of Applications, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-137)
Hall of Science, visited by some 5 million persons during 1964-65 World’s Fair in Flushing, N.Y., was reopened with exhibits including NASA satellite and Apollo mockup. Hall had been revived and remodeled as free scientific exhibition for public under grants from Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. (Andelman, NYT, 11/2/72; NY Visitors Bur) November 20:	Apollo 17 crew underwent preliminary medical checks and men were reported in good shape, while final test countdown for mission, begun Nov. 14, proceeded smoothly at Kennedy Space Center. Crew was not present as propellants were pumped into Saturn V rocket, to avoid risk. They planned to participate in dry run Nov. 21 after flammable oxygen and hydrogen had been drained from rocket. (UPI, NYT, 11/21/72, 46)
Benjamin 0. Davis, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs, met with aviation representatives in Washington, D.C., to discuss joint Government and industry action to combat aircraft hijacking and extortion which were threatening civil aviation. At press conference following meeting he said: “The success rate for the hijacker has been dropping sharply over the past 3years—from 85 percent in 1969 to 37 percent thus far this year.” Government would “continue to press for full compliance with aviation security relations . . . , for increased resistance to hijack demands, and for full cooperation with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].” (Text) June 8:	Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, in secret testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services, had disclosed that U.S.S.R. was flight-testing multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (mirv). Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim later confirmed that Laird had made statement. To date, mirvs had remained a U.S. monopoly. (Gwertzman, NYT, 6/9/72, 1)
Tristate Regional Planning Commission had reached agreement with NASA for astronauts aboard Sky lab to photograph New York metropolitan area after launch from Cape Kennedy in April 1973, New York Times reported. Planning Agency would use infrared and standard photographs taken from height of 435 km (270 mi) for planning in three-state region. Photographs of housing trends and streets within 100-km (60-mi) radius of Times Square would complement those already taken by Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23) and would be used to prepare computergenerated maps and charts available to any state, county, or local planning agency. (NYT, 11/12/72, 32) November 13:	Space shuttle program requirement review was held by prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. at Downey, Calif. Work on shuttle orb iter stage under $2.6-billion contract had been accelerated and design of system had been altered to trim rising weight and cost of both orbiter and overall system. Orbiter weight had increased from 114 800 kg (253 000 lbs) to 125 600 kg (277 000 lbs); gross weight of overall system was up from 2.2 million kg (4.8 million lbs) to 2.4 million kg (5.3 million lbs). NR Space Div. Vice President and Program Manager Bastian Hello said orbiter currently planned would be about 38 m (126 ft) long, with 25.6-m (84-ft) wingspan. Manned Space Flight Center Space Shuttle Program Manager Robert Thompson announced schedule for shuttle flights: first horizontal flight (orbiter only), 1976; unmanned vertical flight, 1977; first manned orbital flight, early 1978; first operational flight, early 1979; regular operations (60 flights per year), end of 1982. Program officials said program cost was estimated at $5.15 billion. (Miles, LA Times, 11/27/72; NR pio)
NASA announced publication of The Experiments of Biosatellite II (NASA SP-204), edited by Joseph F. Sanders. Book described first successfully completed Biosatellite mission, which carried plants, frog eggs, amoeba, and seeds on earth orbital mission Sept. 7-9, 1967, to determine effect of space flight on living organisms, (nasa WR, 5/1/72, 5; A&A 1967) May 1—4:	Fourth meeting of Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Editorial Board for preparation and publication of space biology and medicine review convened in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Dr. Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Ministry of Health. Under Oct. 8, 1965, Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Board reviewed research from the two countries for publication, (nasa Release 72-89) May 2:	Apollo 16 rock and photography briefing was held at Manned ' Spacecraft Center. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said first few weeks of preliminary examination of Apollo 16 samples would be occupied with opening bags and weighing, dusting, photographing, and examining rocks. Catalog, including photos, of all samples should be completed by end of May. Rocks examined to date appeared to be breccias. One rock—collected during third extravehicular activity and described on moon by Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., as “an honest to goodness igneous rock”—was different in texture and appearance from other typical breccias, but had not yet been precisely classified. “Zap pits” on the surface indicated rock had been lying on one side. It was flattish with very fine, silverish crystals in finer grain matrix with no vesicules. Dr. Gast said rock could be rapidly crystallized igneous rock, very-high-grade metamorphic rock, or metamorphic rock that had been at temperatures of 1000°C (1300 K) long enough to be completely recrystallized. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas and U.S. Geological Survey expressed surprise at “the tremendous number of clasts [rock fragments]” within rocks. Clasts represented “crustal material hauled in from somewhere and that’s a tremendous plus beyond what we had originally conceived of as getting. ... So whether it’s volcanic in origin and therefore . . . this is crust from straight under somewhere or whether it’s impact origin and therefore crustal material thrown in from some distance doesn’t matter.” By selecting Descartes as landing site, NASA*had obtained extra sampling, “maybe even a better sampling,” than in other highlands missions. “And we may even have sampled another quadrant of the Moon that we wouldn’t have gotten in any other way. ... we may have a good deal more than the 15 percent or so of the highlands represented in these rocks and we may have a much older segment of the time scale represented.” (Transcript)
Congressional restraints on sale of military aircraft and equipment to developing nations were “not working,” and had cost U.S. aerospace industry “more than $800 million and 70,000 to 90,000 jobs in the last two years,” Copley News Service reported. Denied credit purchases of jets and other modern aeronautical equipment, nations once dependent on U.S. had turned to United Kingdom, France, Italy, Scandinavian countries, and Japan. U.S.S.R. was “trying to push its way into the market, particularly in Latin America.” (San Diego Union, 4/9/72, 20) April 10:	Six-day countdown for Apollo 16 began at 8:30 am est at Kennedy Space Center. Spacecraft was scheduled for launch at 12:45 pm est April 16. (AP, NYT, 4/11/72, 15)
Total eclipse of sun over northern Canada was studied by Marshall Space Flight Center physicists Dr. Robert J. Naumann and K. Stuart Clifton and five Johns Hopkins Univ. physicists. Observation period of 90 sec marked last opportunity in North America to observe total solar eclipse until 1979. Team recorded shadow bands on either side of totality in first attempt to use low-light-level TV to obtain actual images of bands. Bands were extremely difficult to photograph because contrast between bands and surrounding light was faint, msfc participation had been requested because of Center’s experience with low-light-level TV observations of transient phenomena during meteoroid research and study of barium clouds and aurora. Team made observations from schoolyard near Cape Chat, Quebec. In second experiment 24 scientists from Los Alamos (N. Mex.) Scientific Laboratory rendezvoused in Air Force cargo aircraft with eclipse totality at altitude of 12 000 m (39 000 ft) northwest of Churchill, Manitoba. Scientists observed solar corona using telescopes, cameras, and radiation-measuring devices. Eclipse extended from north of Japan, across Siberia and Alaska, eastward through Canada, and ended in Atlantic Ocean south of Azores. It was partial throughout U.S. (msfc Release 72-84; Rensberger, NYT, 7/10/72, 35; O’Toole, W Post, 7/10/72, A3; AP, B Sun, 7/11/72, A3; msfc pao)
Flight Research Center received F-lll aircraft from Air Force for joint NASA—usaf supercritical flight program. Aircraft, 13th F-lll built, would be flown by frc project pilot Einar Enevoldson to check out systems before NASA F-lll went off flight status until mid-June for instrumentation. It would then be flown with conventional wing to collect baseline flight data for comparison with future supercritical wing data. (frc X-Press, 2/18/72, 2; frc pao)
m/g Don R. Ostrander (usaf, Ret.), former NASA Director of Launch Vehicles, died at Andrews Air Force Base hospital, Md., of cancer at age 58. He had retired from Air Force as Vice-Commander of Ballistics System Division in 1965 and became Vice President for Planning, Bell Aero Systems Corp., until 1971. Gen. Ostrander had been appointed to NASA position in 1959. (W Post, 10/28/72, B10; Rosholt, Administrative History of NASA) October 26—27:	California newspapers reported reaction at Jet Propulsion Laboratory to news of renaming facility for retiring California Congressman H. Allen Smith (D-Calif.) [see Oct. 3 and Oct. 21]. News had come as surprise to officials, who had refused to comment. JPL engineer Charles D. Hepburn had said that several engineers deplored renaming of facility for political office holder when there were many great local scientists who had contributed to space program. Hepburn had said it was “insult to technology .... Our work has to do with the physical universe, not with the meanderings of a political career.” (LA Times, 10/26/72; Pasadena Star-News, 10/27/72) October 27: U.S.S.R. launched Meteor 13 weather satellite from Plesetsk to obtain “meteorological information needed for the operative weather forecast service.” Orbital parameters: 891-km (553.6-mi) apogee, 866-km (538.1-mi) perigee, 102.5-min period, and 81.2° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; fbis-Sov, 10/30/72, LI; SBD, 10/30/72, 266)
U.S. Patent No. 3 677 502 was issued to Soviet aircraft designer Aleksey A. Tupolev and seven associates for Tu-144 Soviet supersonic aircraft. Tupolev had carried on Work of his father Andrey N. Tupolev on Tu—144. Earlier applications had been filed for Soviet patents and other American patents were pending on specific features of aircraft. Patent indicated that aircraft design was intended to prevent engine exhaust from contacting tail portion of fuselage. (Jones, NYT, 7/22/72, 33; Pat Off pio)
Apollo 16 countdown demonstration test (cddt) without propellants began at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for launch toward moon April 16. (ksc Release 55-72)
U.S. communications firms announced agreements with Telesat Canada for use of Canada’s satellite system to provide communications service in U.S. Chairman Robert W. Sarnoff of RCA said rca would lease one full-time channel and occasional time on second channel. Subject to approval by U.S. and Canadian governments, rca Global Communications would install earth stations in Washington-New York corridor, California, and Alaska to relay voice, message, and TV traffic between East and West Coasts and between both coasts and Alaska at reduced costs. American Satellite Corp. announced preliminary agreement with Telesat Canada for lease of up to three satellite channels to provide U.S. domestic communications market with private-line channels for voice, data facsimile, TV programming, and interconnections of cable TV systems and private and industrial video service, (rca Release 12/5/72; AmSatCorp Release FL-9-240)
Tenth anniversary of Canada’s Alouette 1 satellite launched by nasa from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Thor-Agena B booster. Satellite, designed and built by Canada to study ionosphere, was still transmitting data from 960-km (600-mi) circular orbit. Canada celebrated anniversary with special ceremonies Sept. 29, highlighted by official opening of new Spacecraft Assembly and Test Facility of Dept, of Communications Research Centre at Shirley Bay near Ottawa. Canadian Communications Minister Robert Stanbury said Alouette 1, as the “oldest satellite still sending back useful information from space, symbolizes the high standards of technology which Canada has maintained . . . and ... has helped to meet two important national needs—expertise in space-age technology, and improved communications.” (SBD, 9/27/72, 118; A&A 1962)
Advanced technology aircraft to evolve from increased NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Dept, of Defense use of research and experimental aircraft were described in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright. “nasa, in coordination with DOD and DOT, plans a program to design and manufacture two STOL transports. Although these aircraft probably will be smaller than anticipated production models, they will suit the needs of developing promising stol augmented-lift concepts, control systems, and crosswind landing gear. They will be able to operate within acceptable noise limits to and from stol strips about 2000 ft [610 m] long.” Joint NASA-Army plan “should lead to advanced helicopter and tilt-rotor research vehicles. Although oriented primarily toward military applications, the research results will apply to commercial vtol transports.” Advanced subsonic transports of the 1980s “will incorporate most of the applicable advanced technology . . . with significant gains in productivity. A longer range, higher capacity SST [supersonic transport] would fill a need on the transatlantic routes and the longer routes across the Pacific. And no forecaster can discount the possibility of a hypersonic transport (hst) for the 1990s.” (A&A, 1/72, 30-4) February 1:	NASA released preliminary timeline for Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 16 would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 12:54 pm est April 16—with lunar module landing on moon at 3:41 pm est April 20 and lifting off moon at 4:39 pm est April 23. Returning command module would splash down at 3:30 pm est April 28. (ksc Release)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
Unidentified senior analysts said in Washington, D.C., that People’s Republic of China had deployed “handful” of ballistic missiles with estimated 2400- to 4000-km (1500- to 2500-mi) range. Missiles used storable liquid propellant that permitted underground installation in concrete and steel silos. (Beecher, NYT, 2/1/72, 1)
American Satellite Corp., Maryland-based company formed by Fairchild Industries and Western Union International, had told Federal Communications Commission it was ready to set up domestic communications satellite network, Fairchild announced. Company had said service was planned for late 1973 or early 1974. asc President Emanuel Fthenakis had said proposed network would be developed in phases to provide point-to-point private line transmission for voice, data, and facsimile teletype. (Fairchild Release FI-9-229)
S.R. 193, joint resolution to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral, was introduced by Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Childs, Jr. (D-Fla). Resolution would retain name John F. Kennedy Space Center for NASA facilities on Merritt Island. Sen. Gurney said it was from ksc, “and not from the Cape itself, that President Kennedy’s dream was realized.” Desire of Cape’s residents for restoration of 400-yr-old name Canaveral and “desire of a lasting memorial to the President” could be accomplished through adoption of resolution. “From a historical standpoint, no greater justice could be done.” (■CR, 2/1/72, S862^)	_
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of $19.9-million contract extension to ITT Federal Electric Corp. to provide communications and instrumentation services at ksc. Contract would expire June 30, 1973. (ksc Release 145—72; DJ, W Star, 6/26/72, A13)
Dept, of Defense spokesmen told press in Washington, D.C., that swingwing F-lll jet fighter-bombers had been withdrawn from combat service in North Vietnam after Sept. 28 loss of one F—111 but aircraft had since returned to action. (AP, W Post, 10/5/72, A29)
U.S. sources quoted in Washington Post said U.S.S.R. had begun building modified class of missile-firing submarines to carry fewer but longer range missiles than current Soviet undersea fleet. New submarines would each carry 12 new SSN-8 missiles with estimated range about 5600 km (3500 mi), or more than twice that of missile currently installed on “Y” class Soviet submarines. (Getler, W Post, 5/31/72, A12) During May:	Air Force Materials Laboratory (afml) was preparing experiment to determine stability of thermal-control coatings or paints and thin films of polymeric materials in space environment. Samples of materials and films would be carried in trays on discs 25 mm (1 in) in diameter on NASA Skylab mission in 1973. After exposure to space, samples would be returned to earth for evaluation of degradation. (afsc Newsreview, 5/12, 14)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh and five members of Soviet Academy began 21-day coast-to-coast tour of U.S. scientific and space installations. Academician Keldysh addressed unpublicized session of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., from which even NAS staff members were banned. NAS had withheld announcement of Keldysh visit to discourage anti-Soviet demonstrations. He had been invited to U.S. by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (W Post, 10/18/72)
Apollo 16 astronauts were honored with luncheon and hour-long ceremony at Kennedy Space Center. Astronauts greeted KSC employees who had worked to make mission successful. (O Sen, 5/18/72; KSC pao)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
Society of Air Safety Engineers presented Distinguished Service Award to Dr. Janies J. Ryan, Jr., professor emeritus of Univ. of Minnesota, for pioneering development of flight data recorder. Plaque was awarded during Society seminar in Washington, D.C. (Soc Air Safety Engineers; Av Wk, 10/23/72, 13)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
Award of $ 46-million contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft prototype was announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Aircraft would use components of existing aircraft to reduce time and expense before first flight. If prototype was successful, Navy might develop operational v/stol aircraft, (dod Release 723-72)
Air Force grounded entire fleet of U.S.-based F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft “as a precautionary measure” until cause of June 15 and 18 F-lll crashes had been determined. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range. First rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, advocated development of supersonic transport in speech before National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “The day will come when virtually all intercontinental and some transcontinental air traffic will be supersonic—or faster.” U.S. “must develop a supersonic transport or abdicate its enviable position as master builder of the world’s commercial aircraft.” If U.S. reentered sst competition, next sst “must be better than the one we canceled. It must be quieter, have a greater payload fraction, and have longer range—transpacific if possible.” Because of lost time, competition “will not be the Concorde, Sut a follow-up super-Concorde of unknown characteristics.” U.S. should “proceed with a sense of urgency” in developing necessary technology to produce a superior aircraft. “I believe that there is a remarkable unanimity in the aircraft and air transport industries that a good sst would be a winner for the United States—creating jobs and National income.” (Text)
Apollo 17 spacecraft atop Saturn V booster, scheduled for launch toward moon Dec. 6, was rolled to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at Kennedy Space Center. Roll-out was watched by about 5000 persons, including Apollo 17 astronauts. (Benedict, M Her, 8/29/72)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiments. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Air Force launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single Titan IIID booster. First satellite entered orbit with 340-km (211-mi) apogee, 150-km (93-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 96.9° inclination and reentered Feb. 29. Second entered orbit with 550-km (342-mi) apogee, 470-km (292-mi) perigee, 94.8-min period, and 96.5° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 1/24/72, 100)
Achievement Award of Small Business Assn, was presented to Kennedy Space Center for its aid to President Nixon’s Minority Business Development Program for FY 1971. (NASA Activities, 8/1/72, 171) July 2:	U.S. had been using weather control for military purposes, Washington Post reported. Previously ignored passage in Pentagon papers Dept, of Defense report on Vietnam war released by press had indicated Indochina had been “test battleground, the site of purposeful rain-making along the Ho Chi Minh trails.” Report by DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) called Nile Blue had been cited as prime evidence of dod rainmaking. Post said report was computer study of how man-made changes might affect world’s year-to-year climate. AHPA Director Stephen J. Lukasik had told Senate Committee on Appropriations that Nile Blue was established in FY 1970 to achieve U.S. capability to evaluate consequences of possible actions to manipulate climate, detect changes in global circulation, and determine means to counter deleterious climatic changes. (Cohn, W Post, 7/2/72, C2) July 3:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, believed U.S.S.R. was working toward year-long manned space mission in earth-orbit, Aviation Week & Space Technology article reported. Opinion was based largely on “intuition,” Dr. Fletcher had said, but long-duration flight would be necessary before either U.S. or U.S.S.R. could attempt manned planetary mission. “I don’t know what the optimum flight time would be before we could be sure man could survive extremely long missions.” (Strickland, Av Wk, 7/3/72, 21)
The UFO Experience: A Scientific Inquiry by Northwestern Univ. astrophysicist Dr. J. Allen Hynek was reviewed in Science by Dr. Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology Div. of Geological and Planetary Sciences: Book was “more than just an attempt to justify scientific interest in ufo [unidentified flying object] phenomena.” Dr. Hynek had criticized 1968 report of Univ. of Colorado physicist Dr, Edward U. Condon and group that said further study of UFOs could not be justified “in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Air Force, which sponsored Condon study, had terminated ufo Project Blue Book investigation following Condon report recommendation. Hynek book was “Hynek’s version of what the Condon report should have been.” Book discussed 80 ufo sightings, drawn mainly from Project Blue Book files, many unexplained by Condon. Book advocated “sufficient scientific respectability for the UFO subject to permit modest federal research funds to be awarded to it and new data to be gathered without fear of ridicule.” Dr. Hynek had “won reprieve for UFO’s with his . . . provocative unexplained reports and his articulate challenge to his colleagues to tolerate the study of something they cannot understand.” (Science, 8/25/72, 688-9) August 26:	Work reductions in manned space flight area announced by NASA Aug. 22 would eliminate about 1400 contract support personnel positions at Manned Spaceflight Center, Los Angeles Times reported. Kennedy Space Center was expected to dismiss about 500 workers after December launch of Apollo 17, and another 2000 technicians and engineers at end of Skylab program. Reductions necessitated by budget restrictions would force closing of KSC flight crew training after Apollo 17, reduction in force at White Sands Missile Range, and eventual'closing of Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory, astronauts underwater training facilities, and altitude test chamber at msc. “Even distribution of moon rocks . . . for display purposes” would be curtailed. (Chriss, LA Times, 8/26/72)
Redesignation of undersea long-range missile system (ulms) as “Trident” was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird during Washington, D.C., press conference, (upi, W Star, 5/17/72, A6) May 16-17:	Conference on Aircraft Engine Noise Reduction was held at Lewis Research Center to present latest results of nasa Quiet Engine Program and efforts to reduce noise of future short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to airline industry representatives. Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, said future of civil aviation depended on “making the airplane acceptable to the community ... in noise level and . . . engine emissions.” nasa’s goal was to provide technology to make aircraft “unobtrusive in its environment. Noise levels beyond the airport boundaries should one day be indistinguishable in the ambient level.” Primary work in propulsion-source noise reduction was “technology to modify existing engines and ... to design new propulsion systems . . . that operate at significantly lower noise levels.” nasa also was working on steep approaches in landing to reduce ground noise and studying community response to noise. Flight tests in 1971 with modified American Airlines Boeing 720 aircraft from Stockton (Calif.) Metropolitan Airport in clear weather had shown “cockpit modifications made procedure of reducing ground noise by effecting steeper approaches in terminal area safe, repeatable, and reasonable under clear-weather conditions.” Carl C. Ciepluch, Deputy Manager of LeRC Quiet Engine Project Office, discussed first tests, in May, of experimental engine A with acoustic nacelle and 97 900-newton (22 000-lb) thrust. LeRC had tested engine A at takeoff and landing speeds when noise was most noticeable. Tests had shown that if four such engines were installed on DC-8 or Boeing 707 aircraft takeoff noise would be 90 effective perceived noise in decibels (epndb) instead of 116 on takeoff and 118 on approach with current DC-8 and Boeing 707 engines. Although not suitable for wide-bodied jets, quiet engine and nacelle was 8 to 13 epndb quieter than engine used on Boeing 747s and DC-1 Os. Testing of engine with nacelles would continue through fall to measure more precisely effectiveness of noise suppression techniques and measure engine’s internal noise sources other than the fan. Late in year, engine would be tested in a new altitude chamber at Lewis. Second quiet engine was undergoing aerodynamic tests by manufacturer General Electric Co. at Peebles, Ohio, before being delivered to LeRC at end of year for acoustic tests, nasa would use evaluation of both engines in designing quiet experimental engine Mark II for “optimum trade-off period noise reduction and installed weight penalty for aircraft application.” Newell D. Sanders, Chief of LeRC v/stol and Noise Div., chaired conference and discussed noise levels, methods for noise reduction, and quiet engine principles. (LeRC Release 72-29; Text; Lewis News, ■	5/5/72, 1; 5/19/72, 1; nasa SP-311) May 17:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 490 from Plesetsk into orbit with 339-km (210.6-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered May 29. (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; Sov Aero, 5/22/72, 32)
TRW Inc. Systems Group Div., Hughes Aircraft Co., and Philco-Ford Corp. submitted proposals in competition conducted for North Atlantic Treaty Organization (nato) by Air Force Space and Missiles Systems Organization (samso). Competition was for development of NATO Phase 3 communications satellite program. (Av Wk, 10/30/72, 17)
Areas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Antigua, West Indies, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 55.8-km (34.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone in upper atmosphere in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite and to validate new parachute deployment system further [see May 4]. Payload was ejected successfully, parachute inflated properly, and good ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
Air Force unveiled F—15 air superiority fighter aircraft in ceremonies at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis, Mo. F-15 was fixed-wing, single-place aircraft in 18 000-kg (40 000-lb) class, with maximum mach 2 speed, (afsc Release 080.72) Organization’s Research and Technology Center, estec had been asked by esro to determine resources required by Europe if European Space Conference decided to develop space shuttle sortie lab [see June 14]. NASA told estec officials Europe should view sortie lab as nearly uniquely European as possible, with dependence on U.S. held to minimum. If U.S. agreed to let Europe build system to U.S. design, U.S. would insist on completely new qualification program to qualify source and system. NASA found esro and estec representatives “eager” to undertake sortie lab program. (NASA omsf, Memo for Record, 9/7/72) June 27:	Eole transponder—radio receiver/transmitter developed for French-built weather satellite Eole (launched by NASA for France Aug. 16, 1971)—had sailed on American yawl Foolscap during Newport Bermuda race, Goddard Space Flight Center announced. Objective was to test its potential for locating lifeboats by satellite. Transponder had sent position data to Eole as satellite passed 800 km (500 mi) over Foolscap. Information, transmitted to tracking station operated by French Center for Space Studies (cnes), was processed and tele-typed to gsfc. Foolscap’s up-to-date location was then plotted and sent on to U.S. Coast Guard in Miami, Florida, and race committee in Bermuda. Test, sponsored by gsfc engineers, had proved highly successful and indicated that small inexpensive transponders might become standard equipment on ship and aircraft lifeboats, (gsfc Release G—10-72; gsfc proj off)
Finding by California Institute of Technology astronomers of waves 1000 km (600 mi) from crest to crest undulating outward from center of sunspots at speeds to 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph) was reported at meeting of American Astronomical Society in College Park, Md. Astronomers believed waves—named Stein waves after Alan Stein, Cal Tech student who discovered them by accident in motion pictures taken through telescope—were sound waves caused by thunder on sun. (AP, B Sun, 4/6/72, A3) April 6:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 484 from Plesetsk into orbit with 236-km (146.6-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 81.5° inclination. Satellite reentered April 18. (gfsc SSR, 4/20/72; Sov Aero, 5/1/72, 9)
First Skylab command and service module (CSM—116), which would transport astronauts to and from Skylab orbital workshop in 1973, was shipped by aircraft from North American Rockwell Corp.’s Downey, Calif., plant to Cape Kennedy, Fla., for start of prelaunch operations. Other Skylab segments—including Orbital Workshop, multiple docking adapter, airlock module, and Apollo Telescope Mount —were undergoing final checkout at contractor plants and at Manned Spacecraft Center, (msc Release 72-144)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford as U.S. Air Force brigadier general. {CR, 2/18/72, S2125)
Unidentified satellite launched by Air Force from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 8:30 am pdt by Titan IIIB-Agena booster failed to achieve orbit. (Av Wk, 6/5/72, 14)
Federal Grand Jury in Dallas, Texas, indicted General Dynamics Corp. and four officials for conspiring to defraud Government by charging Air Force for defective parts for F—111 fighter-bomber aircraft. Indictment said defendants had concealed from Air Force unauthorized production procedures by subcontractor Selb Manufacturing Co. Dept, of Justice said defective parts—carry-through plates for center sectioir of wings and longerons or main fuselage braces—had not been turned over to Air Force. (AP, B Sun, 5/31/72, A9) May 31:	NASA announced completion of major preflight verification test of Skylab Workshop at McDonnell Douglas Corp. Huntington Beach, Calif., plant. Two teams of six astronauts each had performed checkout activities in two six-hour shifts daily for three days, activating Workshop to demonstrate that it could support all activities planned for missions. Test was one of last two major tests for Workshop, 14.6 m (48 ft) long, 6.7 m (22 ft) in diameter, and scheduled for launch in early 1973. Flight demonstration would be conducted before spacecraft was shipped to Kennedy Space Center during summer, (nasa Release 72-117)
New York Times editorial criticized Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird for insisting that U.S. press on with large defense budget increases that were requested before conclusion of U.S.-U.S.S.R. arms limitation pacts, including funds for accelerated buildup of strategic arms not covered in treaties. “If this were needed to insure Congressional approval of the Moscow agreements—the overriding need at the moment—the cost might not be too high. Rut the real aim seems to be to create ‘bargaining chips’ for the next round of negotiations to limit strategic arms. And the first round of . . . salt talks suggests that the Soviet Union will insist on matching or exceeding the additional American buildup before further agreement can be reached. Both sides already have more than ten times the number of warheads they need to deter or destroy each other. Mutual restraint now could speed up a salt ii agreement and, more important, assure much lower limits on offensive strategic forces than would be possible if both sides now press ahead to add to overkill as bargaining chips for the next negotiating round.” (NYT, 6/5/72, 30)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
Edwin E. Aldrin, Apollo 11 astronaut and second man to set foot on the moon, announced he was retiring from Air Force in summer. Col. Aldrin had been Commandant of Aerospace Research Pilots School at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., since he retired from NASA July 1, 1971. He said he was leaving usaf because his 10 yrs with space program had hurt his chances for promotion. (W Post, 1/15/72, A9)
Wall Street Journal article asked if U.S. supersonic transport revival was imminent: “Administration planners insist the U.S. will eventually build a supersonic transport, NASA researchers work up advanced ‘second generation’ designs, differing from the downed Boeing version. Backers claim progress against the sonic boom problem, plus the promise of developing a more profitable plane.” (WSJ, 9/1/72, 1) September 2:	Navy Triad OI—IX Transit satellite was launched by NASA for Navy from Vandenberg Air Force Base by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 838-km (520.7-mi) apogee, 743-km (461.7-mi) perigee, 100.6-min period, and 90.1° inclination. Objective of mission was to simplify navigation procedures by correcting long-term drift in satellite oscillator, reducing data-gathering time for navigation fix, demonstrating capability of experimental disturbance compensation system (discos), obtaining performance data on radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg), evaluating environmental survey panel and thermal coating experiment, and providing operational satellite for Navy Navigation Satellite System. discos forced satellite to adhere to highly predictable orbit uninfluenced by forces of external atmospheric radiation. System, developed by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory and Stanford Univ., compensated for external forces by providing equal and opposite thrust force. Success of discos might lead to navigation satellites with orbits so precise and unchanging that their paths could be published in reference tables that would facilitate calculation of navigational fixes. Triad, 01—IX weighed 93.9 kg (207 lbs), was 1.7 m long and 0.8 m wide (5.5 x 2.5 ft), and was powered by Atomic Energy Commission RTG that would provide 30 w of power for five years. With three components—spacecraft, Discos, and rtg—extended separately in orbit, overall length was 3.7 m (24 ft). Satellite was transmitting data on nominal frequencies of 400 and 150 mhz. After six-month experimental phase satellite would be available to all Transit system users. NASA would be reimbursed by Dept, of Defense for cost of launch vehicle and services, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; dod Release 632-72; NASA Scout Prog Off; Pres Rpt 73)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II began three-week preflight quarantine at Kennedy Space .Center to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay launch toward moon, scheduled for April 16. (AP, B Sun, 3/28/72, A6)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed future air superiority aircraft in speech before Aero Club of Washington in Washington, D.C. Air Force had not developed new fighter aircraft that could maintain air superiority in battle area in 20 yrs, while U.S.S.R. had developed “whole family of sophisticated fighters.” F—15 program should give U.S. “what we need for the air superiority mission.” For allies, U.S. had developed F-5E international fighter, “a simple design that cost about half that of our present long-range, multipurpose aircraft.” It would “play a particularly vital role in improving the self-defense capabilities of our Asian allies. ... In modernizing our forces, we have learned an important lesson in the last few years. You cannot build an aircraft with every possible new technological device and expect to buy enough of them to get the job done. . . . The unit cost of high performance aircraft has increased tenfold every 18 years.” Avionics was factor in driving up cost of new aircraft systems. F-111D included Mark II avionics system costing over $4 million. To lower unit cost of systems, Air Force was tailoring new aircraft for “somewhat narrower purposes.” Through specialization “we hope to obtain aircraft that can both survive and perform more effectively in their individual mission and ... we will be able to afford many more of these aircraft than we could obtain in the case of one super-capable, multipurpose plane.” (Text)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. One carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology x-ray astronomy experiment. Second carried Goddard Space Flight Center cosmic ray experiment. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Selection of Kennedy Space Center in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California as launch and landing sites for space shuttle was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in Washington, D.C. ksc site would be used for research and development launches, to begin in 1978, and for all operational flights into easterly orbits. NASA would provide facilities for shuttle users at ksc by modification of existing facilities. Vandenberg afb site would be phased in toward end of decade for shuttle flights requiring high-inclination orbits. Dept, of Defense would provide basic shuttle facilities. NASA Site Review Board studies had shown Kennedy-Vandenberg combination had cost, operational, and safety advantages over all other U.S. sites. Cost of establishing facilities at ksc was estimated at $150 million; at Vandenberg, $500 million. Decision to use KSC was “most gratifying to NASA’s launch organization” and ensured “continued utilization of this base and the supporting Eastern Test Range,” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, said in statement read at KSC press briefing following announcement of shuttle site selection. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, explained at ksc briefing why site construction at Vandenberg AFB would cost more than at ksc : “At Kennedv we can make full use of the Saturn V launch complex—Complex 39. The Shuttle will be brought back in there after flight, . . . refurbished there, . . . mated with its booster ... in the vab [Vehicle Assembly Building], taken on the trawler transporter to the existing launch pad and launched.” ksc modifications would be minor but at Vandenberg “launch facilities . . . are not yet as well suited to the shuttle.” Larger modifications would be required, “and this is where the cost is.” Selection between KSC and Vandenberg for a particular launch would depend on required launch azimuth, Dr. Low said. “If we launched something toward the east . . . then it makes sense to launch it from the east coast, whether it is for the Department of Defense or for NASA or for civilian users. When you launch into a polar orbit, or a high-inclination orbit, then it makes more sense to launch from the west coast so you don’t overfly land.” In response to question, Dr. Low said NASA did not plan to mate Air Force-supplied booster with shuttle, “nasa will develop, or have developed under NASA contract by industry, the full shuttle including the orbiter, its large tanks, and the solid rocket motor.” NASA did have “clear understanding” with dod that it would use shuttle when it became available and if it met requirements. (NASA Release 72-81; Transcript)
Clocks were turned back one second at midnight Greenwich Mean Time at Royal Greenwich Observatory, England; Naval Observatory in Washington, D.C.; National Bureau of Standards in Boulder, Colo.; and NASA tracking stations around the world. Radio time signals worldwide inserted extra second. Action was taken to align clocks and signals with atomic time scales adopted internationally in 1967 as official time measurement. Under atomic scale, 9 billion internal vibrations of cesium atom equaled atomic second. Because earth was rotating at relatively slow rate, occasional addition of one second to gmt was necessary. Adjustment was particularly important to seamen who navigated by earth time and position. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, 2; W News, 6/28/72, 7)
Community Action Agency officials announced Office of Economic Opportunity approval of $80 000 grant to start program of welfare aid for jobless aerospace workers and families in Brevard County, Fla. Families included those of 1500 workers laid off at Kennedy Space Center. (M Her, 10/28/72)
Aerosonic Corp. President Herbert J. Frank, testifying before Subcommittee on Priorities and Economy of Joint Economic Committee of Congress, said Navy had paid $1700 each for altimeters for 300 aircraft without competitive bidding. Almost identical instruments had cost Air Force $565 each after competitive bidding. (Witkin, NYT, 3/30/72, 12)
NASA announced signing of definitive contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for development and production of space shuttle main engine. NASA had announced selection of Rocketdyne for negotiation of contract July 13, 1971, but award had been delayed pending outcome of protest by United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. Initial work had been under way for several months under temporary contracts during final negotiations. First increment of cost-plus-award-fee contract for primary development through- Aug. 31, 1975, was estimated at $205 766 000. Second increment of $236 709 000 would be for engine production and remaining development from Sept. 1, 1975, to June 30, 1979. (nasa Release 72-167)
Role of Vandenberg Air Force Base in space shuttle program was doubtful, Frank Macomber said in San Diego Union. California politicians were claiming “partial victory” in NASA’s selection of West Coast site for second shuttle launch and landing site. But “clear-cut win went to Florida’s Cape Kennedy.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had “made it clear it will be another eight years before space shuttle launch base work would begin at Vandenberg.” In eight years “entire U.S. space picture will have changed. There will be a whole new set of American leaders, and a Congress which today would approve a space shuttle program for the West Coast might be so changed by 1980 that it would be voted down.” (Copley News Service, SD Union, 5/14/72, 23)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 11487, bill that would authorize sale of land at Kennedy Space Center for Chapel of the Astronauts. (CR, 1/26/72, D28) January 27:	High-speed interferometer (hsi) developed for NASA at Jet Propulsion Laboratory would be used by JPL engineers to record levels of chemical components of Los Angeles smog, NASA announced. California Div. of Highways had requested JPL assistance in monitoring trace constituents of city’s atmosphere to help fight air pollution. Data gathered would also be given to Los Angeles Air Pollution Control District, hsi, designed for use on future NASA spacecraft, could detect five parts of carbon monoxide per billion parts of atmosphere. Instrument would monitor Santa Monica Freeway, particularly during traffic peaks, (nasa Release 72-15)
MSFC announced it had extended interim contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for space shuttle main engine design. One-month, $l-million extension was awarded pending completion of review by General Accounting Office of original $500-million contract awarded July 13, 1971. Review had been requested Aug. 3, 1971, by competing contractor United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (MSFC Release 72-23; A&A 1971)
Soviet delegation had visited Boeing Co. second time and had revived discussions of possible U.S. certification and marketing of Soviet Yak-40 short-haul transport aircraft by Boeing, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. U.S.S.R. also had discussed Yak-40 with North American Corp. and World Airways Inc. [see Oct. 27]. (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 9)
Philadelphia Inquirer quoted Lockheed spokesman as saying last C-5 Galaxy military transport aircraft to be built under Government contract was on assembly line and was expected to be completed in mid1973.	Lockheed was selling 81 C-5s to Air Force for $4.9 billion. (.P Inq, 3/17/72, 89)	_
NASA announced that NASA Assistant General Counsel Arthur D. Holzman had been detailed to Federal City College in Washington, D.C., to develop seminar courses in government. Courses would provide minority group students with background in government management and enhance their competitive position in government service. Assignment of Holzman was made under Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970, which provided for temporary exchanges of personnel between Federal agencies and state and local governments and institutions of higher learning, (nasa Release 72-125)
North American Rockwell Corp. released statement that it was awarding $8 million in subcontracts to Grumman Corp. for engineering work on space shuttle. McDonnell Douglas Corp. would receive subcontracting worth $4 million, and $200 million worth of subcontracts would be parceled to companies throughout U.S. early in 1973. Grumman subcontracts would preserve jobs of some 300 top engineers and McDonnell Douglas subcontract, 140, New York Times reported. (NR Release; Andelman, NYT, 9/17/72, 23) Air Force succesfully flight-demonstrated powered balloon system (pobal) that had fly-and-float capability readily adaptable to military use in electronic fields. POBAL—coupling free helium-filled balloon to propulsion system—flew from White Sands Missile Range for three hours after reaching altitude, driven by 11.9-m (39-ft) propeller connected to 9-kw (12-hp) electric motor. Steering rudder, connected to lengthy tail boom, was 2.7 m (9 ft) high and 0.8 m (2.5 ft) wide. System was controlled by radio signals from the ground, pobal would extend station-keeping capabilities by combining free balloon flight with propulsion and autopilot control system, with planned I2-hr flight under power at speed of 15 knots. It would float powerless remainder of time. (AF Release 129.72)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics would sponsor U.S. aerospace industry trade exhibit in Moscow in early spring 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Exhibit would center on air traffic control equipment but probably would include other aviation and avionics gear. U.S.S.R. was expected to purchase $10 million to $20 million worth of equipment but total orders might exceed $1 billion. (Av Wk, 12/18/72, 30) December 19:	Following successful splashdown—after Dec. 7 launch on longest lunar mission—Apollo 17 astronauts were greeted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga by 12 Congressmen. President Nixon telephoned his personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said Apollo program results would “give us such scientific values that we will be required to have another lunar program before the end of the century.” (AP, NYT, 12/20/72, 30; PD, 12/25/72, 1789)
New York Times said it had asked more than 20 scientists and scholars with no part in space program to assess probable place of space exploration in “broad sweep of history and in the evolution of man and man’s perception of himself and his universe.” British historian Arnold J. Toynbee and American anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead had seen space experience as “turning point in human history.” Univ. of Michigan biophysicist Dr. John R. Platt had said that “the great picture of earth taken from the moon is one of the most powerful images in the minds of men today and may be worth the cost of the whole Apollo project.” He saw photo as “a great landmark in exploration—to get away from the earth to see it whole.” Soviet poet Robert Rozhdestvensky had said: “Man has become . . . more perceptive to what worries other people. He has no possibility of hiding away . . . of escaping reality and shutting himself up in the narrow world of his own.” French anthropologist Dr. Claude Levi-Strauss had said: “I never look at TV except when there’s a moon shot, and then I am glued to my set.” Dr. Garrett Hardin, ecologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, had said it was time to pull back from further manned space exploration for several centuries. Space program “can only be called ‘spiritual’ in both the good and bad senses.” Technological spinoffs of space program “could surely have been achieved with an expenditure of much less.” Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of History and Technology, had said greatest thing about space exploration was “that we don’t know what its payoff will be. This symbolizes the American civilization. The people who settled America had no idea what the payoff would be. They settled it before they explored it.” Nobel Prize winning biologist Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi had said Apollo flights demanded that word “impossible” be struck from scientific dictionary. “They are the greatest encouragement for the human spirit.” Oak Ridge National Laboratory Director, Dr. Alvin M. Weinberg, said successes in space and nuclear energy had given people “the feeling that essentially any technological problem can be solved. This has created within the technological community and within the public at large a kind of technological euphoria.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/3/72, 1)
Interview with Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, NASA Director of Equal Employment Opportunity, was published by Washington Sunday Star. Mrs. Harris had adopted as her philosophy phrase, “We are all fellow astronauts on Spaceship Earth.” She had said, “My position is to make sure the space program is for everybody. We have to get the alienated minorities into every NASA level, especially space exploration.” (Trescott, W Star, 1/9/72, Cl) January 10:	European participation in space shuttle development was discussed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers during press briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. European space officials had released to European industry “fairly extensive study . . . leading to the definition of the tug that the Europeans might build for the shuttle to carry.” Tug was 3rd stage of shuttle transportation system. Myers said NASA had examined three possible areas for European participation: “One would he in elements, physical pieces of the shuttle that would be managed ... as the prime contractor manages a subcontractor. We will expect the prime contractors to Work directly with the European industries in that case.” Europeans would supply money for parts developed by Europe. Second area Was tug. “If the tug were developed, we would expect it to be paid for by the Europeans.” Third area was sortie can, “experimentcarrying device to be carried in the payload compartment,” which would give them “an opportunity to enter into the use of the shuttle very extensively.” European space officials would meet with NASA within two months to respond on interest in participating. Timetable called for selection of industrial contractors in summer 1972, with subsonic and suborbital test flights beginning in 1975, manned orbital tests in 1978, and first fully operational mission by 1980. Site evaluation board would make its next report to NASA within few weeks, and site for shuttle launch and recovery would be selected by spring. One site would be selected initially, with another or others selected later according to program needs. “We don’t see the shuttle as a highly limited operation. And, I think that eventually there will be more than one site.” Location depended on mission. “Today . . . there is a preponderance of due-east missions out of ksc [Kennedy Space Center!, and . . . different azimuths out of the West Coast. We can’t go due east out of the West Coast very well . . . because of the populated areas east . . . and we can’t get as efficient in polar orbits out of Kennedy ... so there is a tendency to ... go to the two coasts. Now whether that really ends up being that way in the shuttle system, we don’t know yet.” (Transcript)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., was inducted into Aerospace Primus Club of Air Force Systems Command by Gen. George S. Brown, AFSC Commander, in ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md. Aldrin, retired Air Force colonel, became 28th member of club restricted to military and civilian members of Air Force who had accomplished significant aerospace firsts. He was recognized for his historic flight to moon as pilot of Apollo 11 lunar module Eagle July 16-24, 1969. (afsc Newsreview, 10/72/16)
Swiss federal aircraft factory in Emmen had developed hot-water rocket for assisted aircraft takeoffs, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Pohwaro (pulsated, overheated, water rocket) had been tested on Swiss air force Dassault-Breguet Mirage 3 and Pilatus Porter aircraft. (Av Wk, 5/8/72, 9)
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)
Major advance in research to control nuclear fusion for commercial / energy was announced by Atomic Energy Commission. Experiments using adiabatic toroidal compressor (atc) at aec’s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory had achieved, for first time, plasma density in range in which tokamak fusion reactor was expected to operate and had demonstrated new technique for heating tokamak plasma to thermonuclear temperatures. ATC was device for containing and heating plasma fuel to temperatures that would melt any other container. It was improved version of Soviet-developed tokamak containing and heating device that had been hailed internationally as promising approach to production of fusion power. Soviet results from T-3 tokamak experiment, published in 1969, had been confirmed by Princeton tokamak experiments in 1970. Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, had said new ATC results “further brighten the prospect of realizing commercial fusion power in a tokamak confinement system.” But aec had “many years of hard work ahead” to develop concept into “practical power system.” (aec Release P-404; aec pio)
First three of 749 F—15 Eagle air superiority fighter aircraft in Air Force program had done well in initial flight tests, according to Air Force sources quoted by New York Times. Two were undergoing tests at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., and third at McDonnell Douglas facility in St. Louis. Aircraft was U.S. answer to Soviet MiG-23 Foxbat and Mikoyan Fearless, new Soviet air superiority fighter forecast for 1974 deployment. (Middleton, NYT, 11/25/72, 17) November 26:	Sign posted by Grumman Aerospace construction personnel on gantry work platform near Apollo 17 spacecraft said, “This may be our last but it will be our best,” United Press International reported. Grumman foreman had said sign was to inform Apollo crew that “they don’t have to worry about our letting down.” Jobs of 600 Grumman workers at Kennedy Space Center would terminate with completion of Apollo 17 mission. (W Post, 11/27/72, E6)
NASA announced issuance of invitation to scientists in U.S. and other countries to propose additional uses of data from Oao 2 Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and oao-c (Oao 3 when launched), scheduled for launch in late summer 1972. Data would be available from Oao 2 Univ. of Wisconsin experiment (array of four photometers and three spectrophotometers to study stars, galaxies, and nebulae in ultraviolet portion of spectrum) and oao-C Princeton experiment package (81-cm [32-in] reflecting telescope to study effects of interstellar space on uv light from stars). (NASA Release 72-138)
President Nixon had approved assignment of m/g Kenneth W. Schultz (usaf) as commander of Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) effective Aug. 1, Dept, of Defense announced. Gen. Schultz, Deputy Chief of Staff for Air Force Systems Command, was nominated for promotion to lieutenant general. (Reuters, NYT, 5/20/72, 8) Science Institute of Space Research, headed Soviet group. (NASA Release 72-106)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) addressed aerospace workers in presidential campaign speech at Redondo Beach, Calif. He felt “American people are getting sour” on science. “They’re weary of watching billions of dollars going into what they see as exotic projects, when their basic needs and concerns are still not being met. They’re tired of hearing about ‘spin-offs.’ And they’re wondering why we can’t go after some of these problems directly instead of just hoping for beneficial effects from other projects to do the job.” (McGovern Release)
Dr. Robert C. Cameron—first director of NASA’s Johannesburg, South Africa, tracking station from 1958 to 1959—died in Washington, D.C., at age 47. He had resigned earlier in year as astronomer at Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Cameron had made first successful photos of U.S. satellite (Explorer 1, launched Jan. 31, 1958) and had received special award from gsfc in 1966 for writings on astronomy. Before joining NASA, he had worked for Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. In 1952 he had discovered asteroid Winifred, named after his wife. (W Post, 12/17/72, D12)
President Nixon sent message to Congress outlining plan for Federal Partnership in District of Columbia’s observance of American Revolution Bicentennial in 1976: “. . . there will be a handsome new building for one of the Mall’s oldest tenants, the Smithsonian Institution. This structure, which will house the National Air and Space Museum with exhibits ranging from Kitty Hawk to Hadley Rille and with a former astronaut [Michael Collins] in charge, can be ready in 1976 if the Congress will move now to approve FY 1973 construction funds for it; the plans are nearly complete.” {PD, 2/7/72, 184-93) February 6:	Fire leveled eight-trailer modular complex being used by nasa as temporary office space near Astrionics Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center. Redstone Arsenal Fire Dept, extinguished blaze within one hour but officials said portion of building containing high vacuum and thin film research section of hybrid microelectronics research laboratory had suffered minor damage. MSFC Director, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, later appointed six-member board to investigate cause of fire that led to estimated $100 000 loss, but no injuries. (Huntsville Times, 2/8/72) February 7:	Experiment turn-on and checkout of Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (launched by NASA for European Space Research Organization Jan. 31) was completed and spacecraft became fully operational. Heos 2 carried seven experiments to study interplanetary physics and high-latitude magnetosphere. (NASA Release 72-29)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of Office of Naval Research Project Skyhook was celebrated with launch from Cape Girardeau, Mo., of 940 000-cu-m (33.1-million-cu-ft) thin-walled plastic balloon. Balloon carried 1360-kg (3000-lb) experiment designed by Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Jonathan F. Ormes to measure high-energy cosmic rays. It reached altitude of nearly 40 000 m (more than 130 000 ft) and on-station time of more than 25 hrs. Payload was recovered 25 mi east of Nashville, Tenn. Project Skyhook, gathering information for future space flights, launched its first balloon Sept. 25, 1947. Since then more than 3000 flights had been launched throughout the world, including launches from the high seas, (onr, Naval Research Reviews, 2/73, 1-10)
Air Force and Dept, of Defense viewed space not as a mission but “as a place that offers more effective ways of accomplishing certain defense missions,” Grant L. Hansen, Assistant Secretary of Defense for r&d, said in published interview. There was no “space program in the sense of nasa” within dod. During first phase of space exploration and use for national defense, Air Force has been assigned role as DOD’s executive agency for military space efforts, from operation of Joint dod and Atomic Energy Commission Vela space surveillance system to launches of payloads for other military services. New instructions from Dr. John S. Foster, dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering, in 1971 had encouraged all military services to “look for ways of using space systems to perform their jobs better and cheaper.” Air Force would continue launches but “will no longer operate space systems of other services, nor will there be the requirement to develop their systems for them. The cooperation among the services on space matters is excellent, and, I believe, this change, which recognizes that space as a military medium has reached maturity, benefits everybody.” (AF Mag, 6/72, 35-40)
Revision of NASA’s FY 1973 operating plan to adhere to $3.2-billion budget limitation would necessitate work reductions in manned space flight, NASA announced. Work reductions at Manned Spacecraft Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Kennedy Space Center would not affect Apollo 17 or Sfeylab launch schedules or safety and quality assurance requirements. Support contractor manpower at msfc would be reduced by 600 to 700 positions. Cost ceilings also would necessitate additional reductions in prime contractor personnel. (NASA Release 72-176; msfc Releases 72-111, 72-113)
Twenty-five years ago—Oct, 14, 1947—Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew the Bell X-l experimental jet aircraft (at top above), launched from a B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, to the speed of 1078 kilometers (670 miles) per hoar to break the sound barrier in level flight. The X-l had been developed under an Army Air force contract with National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics cooperation. In 1972, research plans included hypersonic flight, with flights in 1973 of the X-24B lifting body in a nasa-usaf program to develop technology for future aircraft that could cruise at hypersonic speeds at the edge of space. The X-24B was delivered to the usaf and nasa by Martin Marietta Carp, in Littleton, Calif., ceremonies Oct. 11 and unloaded at Flight Research Center Oct. 22 flower photo). The B version of the X-24A, flown in 1971, had an extended nose, flattened underside, and blended wings. Primary objectives'were to place 34-5-kg (760-lb) spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator-crossing time between 9:00 and 9:20 am and conduct in-orbit engineering evaluation, before turning operational control of spacecraft over to Noaa’s National Environment Satellite Service (ness). Orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime temperature soundings of earth’s atmosphere and cloud-cover observations by both direct readout and onboard storage in support of National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). First flight to implement operational atmospheric sounding and very-high-resolution infrared cloud-cover viewing, Noaa 2 carried two new sensors: redundant very-high-resolution radiometer (vhrr) and vertical-temperature-profile radiometer (vtpr). Equipment also included scanning radiometers (srs) and single solar proton monitor (spm) as secondary sensor. Oscar 6 (Oscar C) Orbital Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio, carried pickaback on 2nd stage for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. (amsat), was successfully ejected and entered orbit with 1456-km (904.7-mi) apogee, 1451-km (901.6-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 101.7° inclination. Oscar 6 was sixth in Oscar series; previous spacecraft was launched by NASA as secondary payload with Itos 1 (Tiros-M) mission Jan. 23, 1970. Satellite, to conduct experimental program of multiaccess communication techniques using low-powered earth terminals, had been developed by U.S., Australian, and German amateur groups working through amsat. The 18-kg (40-lb) satellite would receive at 145.9 mhz and transmit at 29.5 mhz. Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) program was joint effort of NASA and Dept, of Commerce under Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for design and development of spacecraft and ground systems, for launch, and for checkout and evaluation. ness was responsible for operating spacecraft and processing data. First series of spacecraft included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9— of which 8 and 9 were still in routine use and 2, 6, and 7 still functional and available for backup coverage. In second series—Improved tos (itos)—prototype had been Itos 1 and first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970, to observe globe twice daily. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 10/31/72; noaa Release 72-135; A&A 1970)
NASA and Air Force had initiated program and developed contract with Lockheed-Georgia Co. to design and install composite-reinforced center wing boxes in two usaf C-130E aircraft, NASA announced. Objective of program was to evaluate concept of selective composite reinforcement of primary aircraft structures. Concept would increase strength and stiffness of metal structures by bonding composite materials to metal. (nasa Release 72-84)
Air Force System Command successfully launched 1.4-million-cu-m (47.8million-cu-ft) research balloon, world’s largest, from Chico, Calif. Balloon, developed by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 113-kg (250-lb) payload to unofficial record altitude of 51 800 m (170 000 ft). Previous record of 49 400 m (162 000 ft) had been established in 1969 by afcrl balloon. Purpose of flight was to determine feasibility of flying large thin-film balloons and to study very-high-altitude parachute deployment characteristics, (afsc Release 121.72)
Delegation from Federation of American Scientists (fas), nongovernment organization, left for People’s Republic of China to explore means of improving contacts between Chinese and American scientists. (Science, 5/19/72, 783) May 14:	Physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp said in Washington Post article that NASA followed “cart-before-the-horse” or “rocket-before-payload policy” in figuring shuttle costs. Question to be debated was not shuttle transportation “but the basic purpose and worth of payloads.” NASA was “sorely perplexed as a federal agency whose basic mission was accomplished when men landed on the moon.” Skylab mission in 1973, “when a temporary, makeshift station is placed in orbit,” would end NASA manned space flight “unless the shuttle project goes ahead. In a sense, it’s a shuttle to nowhere unless a permanent space station is also approved. This project, last costed at $10 billion, was once the basic rationale of the shuttle, but its price tag scared off congressmen. Now NASA downplays the space station, but the Jan. 31, 1972, Mathe-matica study includes 62 shuttle trips to space stations in one scenario.” (W Post, 5/14/72, B3)
British press correspondent Arthur Smith presented British view of U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs since Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists: “Two major events in space marked 1971—both of them signs that America’s formidable lead in space exploration is being whittled away by the incredibly dynamic program” of U.S.S.R.: launch of Soyuz 11, which put U.S.S.R. ahead of U.S. in total launches for first time since 1958, and U.S.S.R.’s landing of Mars 3 capsule on Mars—“relatively unproductive from the scientific point of view,” but impressive. “These two events demonstrate that the Soviet space program is now making great strides after many years of relatively minor achievement in both manned and unmanned exploration and application. The characteristic pattern was a Soviet achievement announced to a surprised world, followed some months later by a more sophisticated and more useful U.S. version of the same mission, yielding far more scientific data, but little prestige.” U.S.S.R. program was characterized by excessive secrecy because, according to Soviet officials, rockets used in space program were similar to those used in military program. Smith said genuine reason for secrecy “is the desire to guard against a failure in the full blaze of world publicity.” U.S.S.R. “guards against ever having to admit failure by announcing launches only post facto. If there is a launch pad failure there is no announcement at all. If orbit is reached by the spacecraft, but it does not function as planned, no mention is made of this in the curt bulletin.” If lunar or planetary probe failed to enter planned trajectory, mission objective “is not mentioned, and the spacecraft is merely allocated a number in the catch-all Cosmos series. ... It is impossible to be absolutely certain how many of these escape stage failures there have been, but there may have been as many as 10 or 15 aimed at Venus and Mars alone.” Soviet program had “little ... of the technical virtuosity of the American approach,” but had more impetus and would “obviously continue on a growing scale. Apart from the progress in individual projects, the ever increasing number of Soviet launches demonstrates that the Russian equivalent of NASA is financially more secure. And the speed with which the Soviet space establishment can respond to a failure is also a pointer to the massive scale of the back-up precautions which are taken.” Soviet program, by its nature, was ensured greater financial security. “By their very success in being able to reach an unparalleled level of technology in their spacecraft, the American engineers have been working against their own best interests.” {Bull Atom Sci, 4/72, 18-24)
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
NASA held 14th Annual Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C. Guest speaker Caspar W. Weinberger, Director of Office of Management and Budget, said: “A country needs—even a country as great as America— to be reminded of its greatness from time to time. And that is the thing of overwhelming importance that NASA has done .... They have reminded us, at a time when we desperately need it, of our greatness. They have taken us out of the aura of self-criticism and of doubt . . . and given us a set of accomplishments that will be not only very hard to match, but a set of accomplishments in which every one of us . . . should take enormous pride.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Outstanding Leadership Medal to Leonard Jaffe, Acting Director of Earth Observation Programs, for management of Earth Resources Survey program. He presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. William R. Lucas, Marshall Space Flight Center Deputy Director, for exceptional contributions to Apollo program; to Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, and Dr. Hans Mark, Ames Research Center Director, for management achievements; and to Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., for Apollo science achievements. Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton presented posthumous medal for Dr. William T. Pecora, late Under Secretary of the Interior, to Mrs. Pecora. Award was in recognition of work on Earth Resources Observation Systems (eros) program. Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., for work on cosmic rays and to Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, Cal Tech physicist, for work on lunar samples. Third awardee, Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist on NASA Space Program Advisory Council, was unable to be present. Group Achievement Award was presented to Atlas Centaur Project Team, Hq., Lewis Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center; Deep Space Maser Development Group, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; Digital Fly-by-Wire Project Team, Flight Research Center; Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project Team, Goddard Space Flight Center; Oao 3 Project Team, arc, gsfc, ksc, and jpl; Pioneer 6-9 Project Team, Hq.; Quiet Engine Team, LeRC; and Space Shuttle Technology Project Team, Hq. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 41 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 20. (Program; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 245; NASA Hist Off; Huntsville Times, 11/9/72)
NASA launched Black Brant VB sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test rocket configuration that would be used in support of Skylab mission. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test flight performance. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced appointment of Dr. George H. Ludwig as Director of System Integration. Dr. Ludwig, who had assumed position in early September, had been Associate Director for Data Operations at Goddard Space Flight Center since 1971. (noaa Release 72-120)
Award of $95 219 456 contract to Boeing Co. and $85 901 510 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to begin design and development of advanced, medium, short takeoff and landing transport (amst) aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, (dod Release 773—72)
New York Times, in editorial on Apollo 16's technical problems, praised entire Apollo effort: “Whatever the outcome of the present Apollo expedition . . . enough has already been accomplished by these vehicles to assure them an imperishable place in the history of technology and science. Each Apollo rocket . . . has been the most complex and complicated machine ever made by man. Each has been composed of millions of parts, all or almost all of which have had to work perfectly for the voyage to succeed.” Apollo was “most impressive example of what American engineering can do at its best, and an implicit rebuke to the more routine areas of technology where far lower standards are too frequently the rule.” (NYT, 4/18/72)
Air Force announced award of $1.7-million letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for repair and modification of attack radar and inertial navigation components of Mark II avionics system of F-lll aircraft, (dod Release 697—72)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said he hoped to obtain SI billion worth of subcontracts in space shuttle program. New York Times said later that this was more than three times as much as North American Rockwell, winner of $2.6-billion prime contract, had tentatively allocated to all of New York State. (Witkin, NYT, 7/29/72)
NASA Space Shuttle Technology Conference was held in San Antonio, Tex., in conjunction with 13th Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers. Topics discussed included aeroelasticity and loads, structure and liquid interactions, vehicle dynamics test and analysis, thermal protection systems, and structural design. Apollo 8 Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., was member of panel for high school students that discussed benefits to be derived in space shuttle use. (aiaa Release)
Pan American World Airways’ waiting list for reservations on first commercial flight to moon contained names of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong—first man to walk on moon during July 16-24, 1969, mission—Edwin A. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. List had been closed after 90 000 reservations had been accepted. Pan Am spokesman had said flight would not be possible before 21st century, but most applicants had paid $10 or $25 as reservation fee. (M Her, 11/30/72)
John N. Wilford contrasted U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in New York Times article: “As American astronauts prepare for another Apollo voyage to the moon . . . their counterparts in the Soviet Union are training for long-duration flights in earth-orbiting laboratories, leaving their own lunar exploration to automatic probes. As the American Pioneer 10 heads for Jupiter, a Soviet spacecraft, Venus 8 is traveling toward a planned softlanding on Venus. As American engineers design a reusable shuttle for ferrying men and satellites into space, the Russians apparently are still trying to develop a giant rocket to give them lifting power as great or greater than the Saturn V. As American launchings run about 30 a year and the space budget is under public attack, the Russians are launching nearly three times as many spacecraft and, if anything, are expanding their space program.” Contrasts had been highlighted in interviews with space officials during Wilford’s month-long visit to U.S.S.R. during March. According to Dr. Boris N. Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences Intercosmos Branch, “the priorities of the Soviet space program will remain the systematic research of near-earth space with the help of automatic stations, manned spaceships and orbital stations. For the moon and the nearest planets, the priority will continue to be research with the help of automated means.” (NYT, 4/14/72, 10)
President Nixon and Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir exchanged remarks in telephone call inaugurating communications satellite TV service for Israel via ground station at Emeq Ha’ela. White House later made available text of letter written by President to Prime Minister Meir July 20: “As your nation inaugurates its station connecting Israel with the Intelsat system, you have the best wishes of the American people. Clear and effective communication is basic to building the generation of peace we so earnestly seek, and to ensure the kind of sound relationships among nations which will enahle that peace to endure.” (PD, 7/31/72,1175-6)
Award of $400 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Bell Aerospace Corp. for space shuttle orbiter reaction control system (rcs) was announced by Manned Spacecraft Center. Bell would supply Air Force Minute-man III post-boost propulsion system technology to rcs requirements. (msc Release 72-109)
Experiment to plot evolution of sun and earth over aeons was described in Science by Cornell Univ. astronomers Dr. Carl E. Sagan and Dr. George Mullen. Findings had indicated that sun’s energy emission had increased 40% over last 4.5 aeons and would continue to increase until earth temperature reached boiling point, in about 4.5 more aeons. Infrared characteristics of atmospheres of other planets would determine whether life on them, if any, would survive. Mars atmosphere should be approaching required conditions for emergence of life at about same time earth temperature accelerated upward. (Science, 7/7/72, 52-5)
New York Times editorial praising Verms 8 achievement [see July 22] said planetary exploration would be “ideal area” for U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperation, “since it poses none of the political or human problems involved in cooperation in manned space ventures such as the docking maneuver now scheduled for 1975. Both Soviet and American planetary probes would be better if the two nations pooled information and experience on the design and construction of these vehicles. Such pooling would seem to be a natural step in the evolution of Moscow-Washington space cooperation. The sooner it is realized the more effective and less expensive both nations’ space exploratory efforts are likely to be.” (NYT, 7/26/72,34)	_
First avionics testbed aircraft for Air Force Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs)— modified Boeing 707-320 topped by 9-m (30-ft) rotodome—was rolled out at Boeing Co. facility in Renton, Wash. AWACS would detect and track aircraft at high and low altitudes over land and water and track low-altitude aircraft over extended areas, (usaf memo for correspondents)
President Nixon, arriving in Hawaii for meeting with Japanese Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka, recalled previous visit “at the time of the Apollo 13 flight, when we welcomed back brave men who hadn’t succeeded but who came hack, and it was one of those epics in American bravery which all of us wanted to pay tribute to.” {PD, 9/4/82, 1314)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union address before joint session of Congress and sent written message to Congress. He said in speech: “In reaching the moon, we demonstrated what miracles American technology is capable of achieving. Now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth, of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man.” He would propose new “Federal partnership” in technological research and development “with Federal incentives to increase private research, federally supported research on projects ... to improve our everyday lives.” In written message President said dealings with U.S.S.R. had “advanced the prospects for limiting strategic armaments. We have moved toward greater cooperation in space research and toward improving our economic relationships.” President said he would request Dept, of Defense budget increase “to preserve the sufficiency of our strategic nuclear deterrent, including an allocation of over $900 million to improve our sea-based deterrent force.” He had instructed dod “to develop a program to build additional missile launching submarines, carrying a new and far more effective missile.” Space program had been reoriented to produce increased domestic benefits: “In recent years, America has focused a large share of the technological energy on projects for defense and for space. These projects have had great value. Defense technology has helped us preserve our freedom and protect the peace. Space technology has enabled us to share unparalleled adventures and to lift our sights beyond earth’s bounds. The daily life of the average man has also been improved by much of our defense and space research—for example, by work on radar, jet engines, nuclear reactors, communications and weather satellites, and computers. Defense and space projects have also enabled us to build and maintain our general technological capacity, which—as a result—can now be more readily applied to civilian purposes. “America must continue with strong and sensible programs of research and development for defense and for space. I have felt for some time, however, that we should also be doing more to apply our scientific and technological genius directly to domestic opportunities. Toward this end, I have already increased our civilian research and development budget by more than 40 percent since 1969 and have directed the National Science Foundation to give more attention to this area .... “I recently announced support for the development of a new earth orbital vehicle that promises to introduce a new era in space research.” Reusable space shuttle would lower cost and risk of space operations and open new opportunities in weather forecasting, communications, monitoring natural resources, and air traffic safety. “The space shuttle is a wise national investment.” Proposals included increase of $700 million in civilian R&D, 15% increase over previous year. And technically oriented agencies like NASA and Atomic Energy Commission would work more closely with agencies with primary social mission like Dept, of Transportation. {PD, 1/24/72, 74-92)
Senate passed and sent to House H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, after amending it to restrict authority to sell land at Kennedy Space Center for chapel to two years after act’s enactment date. {CR, 2/3/72, S1097-8)
Los Angeles Times editorial criticized Jet Propulsion Laboratory name change: “While the alteration may meet with some approval in parts of the 20th Congressional District, it has gone over with a thud at the laboratory and on the Pasadena campus of Caltech.” Scientists and teachers were asking “why the nonpolitical space lab has to be saddled with the name of a retiring congressman, especially one with no distinction in the technology of space .... Congress could reconsider; it should.” (LA Times, 11/8/72) Under contract between NASA and Telesat Canada, NASA mission objective was to place Anik 1 in orbit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place spacecraft in stationary synchronous orbit while retaining sufficient station-keeping propulsion to meet mission lifetime requirements. Objectivie was met; mission was adjudged successful Nov. 15. Launch was first on Thor-Delta “straight eight” launch vehicle, so called because diameter was eight feet for all three stages including fairing. Previous Thor-Deltas had been tapered at joint of first and second stage. New design allowed Delta to launch new generation of larger volume spacecraft. Flight was also first with nine solid-fuel thrust-augmentation rockets from Cape Kennedy. Third stage was TE-364-4 solid-fueled motor. Anik 1—first of two—was built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under contract with Telesat and designed to provide transmission of TV, voice, and data throughout Canada for seven years. It would provide 10 color TV channels or up to 9600 telephone circuits. System could distribute analog or digital signals with overall performance comparable to that of terrestrial methods. Spacecraft, 1.8 m in diameter and 3.4 m high (6 by 11 ft), weighed 540 kg (1200 lhs) at launch and 270 kg (600 lhs) in orbit. Electronics system was powered by 23 000 solar cells, with onboard battery capacity to maintain service during sun eclipse. Telesat Canada would reimburse NASA for cost of launch vehicle and services. Goddard Space Flight Center managed project for NASA Office of Space Science, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-206; GSFC Operations Center Br) November 9:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Thor-Burner II into orbit with 879-km (546-mi) apogee, 824-km (512-mi) perigee, 101.5-min period, and 98.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 11/16/70, 70)
During five-day visit to Poland Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, informed Polish government in Warsaw that U.S. would name oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory for Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. Launch of oao-c, scheduled for August, would inaugurate U.S. contribution to worldwide Copernican celebration feting 500th anniversary of Feb. 14, 1473, birth of Copernicus, oao-c would carry 81-cm (32-in) reflecting ultraviolet telescope developed by Princeton Univ. and battery of smaller x-ray telescope developed by Univ. College, Univ. of London, to study uv and x-ray emissions of celestial bodies, oao—c would weigh 2200 kg (4900 lbs) and would be launched into earth orbit with 740-km (460-mi) altitude by Atlas-Centaur booster, (nasa Release 72-141)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of U.S. Air Force. First Secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington had been sworn in Sept. 18, 1947, effective date of transfer of Army air activities to Dept, of the Air Force established by Armed Forces Unification Act of July 26, 1947. Publications during September commemorated Silver Anniversary. Airman editorial noted it has been more than 50 yrs since advent of military aviation “and it is virtually impossible to divide the technological achievements and amazing advances over that span of years into categories like ‘pre-autonomy’ or ‘post-autonomy.’ ” It was spirit that counted—“that indomitable, driving, probing, questioning, seeking perseverance, and sheer genius that has taken man from Kittyhawk to the moon in what is really an incredibly short period of time.” Air Force System Command’s Newsreview traced historical highlights of its bases and organizations. Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) near Tullahoma, Tenn., had been established in 1953 at recommendation of aeronautical scientist Dr. Theodore von Karman. Center currently consisted of 40 test units that provided “simulated flight-test capability ranging in speed to more than 20 times the speed of sound and to altitudes around 1,000 miles [1600 kilometers].” Center’s replacement value was $840 million. Patrick Air Force Base, Fla,, had grown with space program. Launch of V—2 from Eastern Test Range at Patrick in 1950 “was the first step to the moon. That goal, now accomplished five times, leaves the future of space exploration on the threshold of a dream.” Future of the Air Force was discussed by Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) in Armed Forces Journal issue dedicated to Air Force Silver Anniversary. “It would be very easy ... to take off on rhetorical flights of overcoming the unlimited challenges of aerospace. The challenges do exist; and they could conceivably mean that the future of the Air Force will include the use of remotely piloted vehicles, hypersonic aircraft, and the laser. But if these, and anything else man can envision and produce, do exist in the future, they will only be the means for Air Force people to do their basic job of providing this country with the aerospace power required for defense and security. As in the past 25 years, success in the future depends heavily on the dedication and quality of Air Force people.” (Airman, 9/72, 25; AFSC Newsreview, 9/72, 6, 9; AFJ, 9/72; Dept of AF, A Chronology of American Air Space Events, 1/3/61)
Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of $175 183 costplusfixedfee contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., to conduct simulations of space shuttle orbiter approach and landing. Simulations would enable engineers to establish more accurately aft location of orbiter’s center of gravity and systems for vehicle aerodynamic control. Contract would end July 31. (msc Release 72-31)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., received Distinguished Service Medal from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge from Gen. John D. Ryan, Air Force Chief of Staff, in Washington, D.C., ceremony, dsm was for “exceptionally meritorious achievement in a duty of great responsibility.” Badge identified Duke, Apollo 16 lunar module pilot, as one of 37 Americans who had piloted powered vehicles more than 80 km (50 mi) above earth’s surface. Duke gave Dr. Seamans and Gen. Ryan lunar sample and silver medallion in recognition of Air Force role in space program and as NASA salute to Air Force’s Silver Anniversary. (President Truman signed Armed Forces Unification Act creating Dept, of Air Force July 26, 1947.) (dod Release 509-72)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Central Switzerland Cultural Foundation awarded annual cultural prize to Alfred Waldis, Director of Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne. (Swiss Trans Museum Announcement, 11/72) September 11:	NASA released prints from infrared photos of New York area taken by Erts 1 (launched July 23). Black-and-white photo of New York City taken from 915-km (569-mi) altitude covering area 185 km (115 mi) square was covered by clouds, but was valuable as a general test of Erts 1 instrumentation. Images of infrared radiation from which prints had been made clearly showed distribution of vegetation in New Jersey. Dr. Paul D. Lowman of Goddard Space Flight Center said in interview that pictures of other areas had been of higher quality. “Our first discovery from erts is that all our maps, topographic as well as geologic, are out of date.” In California’s Monterey Bay area, scientists had discovered “a whole series of unsuspected faults” in earth’s crust. While major earthquake faults ran northwest and southeast, newly discovered faults ran at right angles to mountains, northeast and southeast. About 15 faults, each extending about 16 km (10 mi), had been discovered in Monterey region and about 12 faults had been discovered near Lake Tahoe, Calif. Satellite picture of Dallas-Fort Worth area showed many new roads, reservoirs, suburbs, and airports that were not on area’s most recent map, made three years before. (nasa Photos 72-HC-711, 72-4^241; Wilford, NYT, 9/12/72, 26)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of supersonic flight. On Oct. 14, 1947, Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew Bell Aircraft Corp. X-l experimental jet aircraft—launched from B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, Calif.—to speed of 1078 km per hr (670 mph) in first flight to break sound barrier. Aircraft, designed by Bell chief designer Robert J. Woods, had been developed under Army Air Force contract with cooperation of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) . (CR, 10/17/72, E8806-7)
Russian-born aviation pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, who invented first successful helicopter in U.S., died at age 83 in Easton, Conn., after heart attack. Born in Kiev, he had come to U.S. in 1919 with only $600. In 1922 he established Sikorsky Aero Engineering Corp. in small shed. Firm produced amphibian aircraft in 1928, four-engine clipper in 1931 with which Pan American World Airways inaugurated first commercial route to Hawaii and to Asia, and first successful helicopter, which Sikorsky flew in 1939. Firm later became Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky retired as engineering manager in 1957 but had remained consultant. His honors included National Defense Transportation Award in 1953, first Dr. Alexander Klemin Award of American Helicopter Society, and National Medal of Science. (Hailey, W Post, 10/27/72)
President Nixon signed H.R. 11487, Chapel of the Astronauts bill, which authorized sale of land near Kennedy Space Center Visitor Bureau to private corporation for construction of chapel. Bill became P.L. 92-227. (PD, 2/21/72, 448)
nasa and European Space Research Organization (esro) were jointly soliciting proposals from scientists for planning experiments that could be carried on Explorer-class spacecraft in late 1970s. Scientists whose proposals were chosen would work in teams to aid in planning mission and help NASA and esro decide whether to conduct missions. Current plans called for one Explorer spacecraft to fly in circular, solar orbit with 2-million-km (1.2-million-mi) radius while dual mother-daughter spacecraft flew close together in elliptical earth orbit. Three spacecraft would be launched by Thor-Delta booster from Kennedy Space Center between 1976 and 1978. Mother-daughter spacecraft would make repeated passes through earth’s magnetic field to measure fine-scale space and time variations while interplanetary spacecraft recorded simultaneous variations of incoming solar wind. (NASA Release 72-100)
New York Times editorial commented on data returned by Soviet Venus 8 probe, which had landed capsule on Venus July 22: “Since the first Sputnik went into orbit a decade and a half ago, the world has seen so many major accomplishments in space by both the Soviet Union and the United States that the original sense of wonder has been largely lost. Yet even in today’s jaded atmosphere, it must be recognized that what the Soviet scientists accomplished with Venus 8 was one of the great technological accomplishments of the age. The scientists and technicians responsible for this great feat deserve the world’s congratulations. It is self-evident that this work needs to be continued with respect to other planets . . . and that it can be done by international cooperation.” (NYT, 9/13/72, 42) September 13—15:	First national conference on remotely manned systems was held at- Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Stanley Deutsch of NASA Office of Life Sciences said in keynote address that usefulness of remotely controlled machines was “virtually limitless” both in space and on earth. “Using a remote system to scout Mars in advance of manned missions will enhance the safety of the man when we do send him to Mars.” Remotely controlled systems also could be used in future to rescue and return an incapacitated astronaut and provide a method for capturing unstable satellites. Remotely controlled systems technology developed for space was also being applied to nonspace applications such as Navy undersea manipulators, Air Force and Army remotely piloted aircraft, handling material in radiation laboratories, industrial safety, mining, medicine and hospitals, police work, and fire fighting. Dr. Ewald Heer of Jpl’s Advanced Technical Studies Div. said “intelligence” of automated systems would have to be increased greatly to ensure success of future earth orbital and planetary satellites. “Remotely manned systems are man-machine system® that augment and extend man’s sensory, manipulative and intellectual capabilities to remote places. However while machines may have superior strength and endurance and resistance to hostile environments, they still depend on human intelligence for decision-making in the performance of complicated tasks. Advanced engineering automation is essential in space station and shuttle operations and scientific data gathering must be microminiaturized for sustained interplanetary operations of two or more years.” (jpl Releases 625, 626; Swain, Pasadena Star-News, 9/14/72) September 14:	Senate approved U.S.-U.S.S.R. Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms by vote of 88 to 2. Agreement was passed after adoption of amendment proposed by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) that urged President Nixon to seek future treaty which would not limit U.S. to levels of intercontinental strategic forces inferior to limits provided to U.S.S.R. (CR, 9/14/72, S14859, S14868-14913)
Attorney for widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, said Mrs. Betty Grissom had agreed to $350 000 out-of-court settlement of her $20-million suit against North American Rockwell Corp. and three subsidiaries for negligence in construction of spacecraft. (AP, W Post, 3/9/72, A17)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1971 was presented by National Aeronautic Assn, to Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden and former Manned Spacecraft Center Director, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, during Washington, D.C., ceremony. (Abrams, W Post, 6/1/72, Dl)
Cutbacks in NASA budget would necessitate dismissal of some 40 civil service employees at Kennedy Space Center during March, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, announced. Cutback was part of NASA-wide work force reduction. Similar reduction might be required in 1973. {Today, 3/2/72)
NASA announced award of 90-day, $9 800 000 letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. to begin work on development and production of engine for space shuttle orbiter stage. Rocket-dyne would begin work immediately, while negotiating $450 000 000, cost-plus-award-fee contract with NASA for engine, (nasa Release 72—73)
U.S.S.R., “in apparent attempt to display restraint,” had “suspended space maneuvers with its fearsome SS-9 Scarp rocket,” Washington Post reported. The United Nations “international space log shows that the Soviet Union has desisted from the SS-9 maneuvers in space so far this year, in contrast to earlier years.” Since U.S. had not flight-tested any space systems comparable to U.S.S.R.’s fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs), “the Russians might have reasoned it would have been impolite of them to stage maneuvers this year when the salt [Strategic Arms Limitation Talks] agreement appeared in reach.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/6/12, A2) Communique on results of July 6-18 meetings was signed by msc Director, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., July 17. Agreements had been reached on launching Soyuz before Apollo, acceptable launch windows, necessary communications equipment, and development of technical requirements for compatible docking system. Areas for further study included possible emergency extravehicular activity, possible adjustment of cabin pressures, use of TV as docking aid, attitude control after docking, specific launch date, and development of public information plan that considered obligations and practices of both countries. [See also press conferences July 13 and 17.] Senior members of Soviet delegation were Chairman Boris N. Petrov of Soviet Intercosmos Council and Konstantin D. Bushuyev, astp Director for U.S.S.R. NASA delegation was headed by Dr. Kraft and Glynn S. Lunney, astp Director, (nasa Release 72-134; Marshall Star, 7/12/72, 1; Text) July 7:	Air Force launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single Titan HID booster. First satellite entered orbit with 257-km (160-mi) apogee, 173-km (108-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.8° inclination and reentered Sept. 13. Second entered orbit with 501-km (311-mi) apogee, 499-km (310-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 96.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 7/13/72, 57; 7/18/72, 78)
Assignment by President Nixon of Gen. Horace M. Wade, Chief of Staff, Supreme Hq. Allied Powers Europe, as Vice Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, (dod Release 195-72)
NASA announced award of $16 794 556 contract extension to North American Rockwell Corp. for testing, checkout, and launch operations in Skylab program. Cost-plus-fixed-fee supplement agreement with Kennedy Space Center covered third year of work under Nov. 29, 1970, contract, (nasa Release 72—243)
Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with 391-km (243-mi) apogee, 138-km (86-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 110.5° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 23, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 12/26/72, 245; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23): “erts gives every sign of being an achievement of enormous potential. It is a demonstration of the value of the U.S. space program in applying technology both to extending the frontiers of knowledge, and in contributing to the improvement of life on earth.” {LA Times, 7/25/72) July 26:	NASA selected North American Rockwell Corp. (NR) Space Div. for negotiation of six-year, $2.6-billion cost-plus-fixed-and-award-fee contract as prime contractor to begin developing space shuttle orbiter. Increment covering first two years was $540 million. NR—selected from four firms submitting proposals—would be responsible for design, development, and production of orbiter vehicle and for integration of all shuttle elements. Shuttle main engine was being developed by NR Rocketdyne Div. under earlier contract. External tank and solid-fueled rocket boosters would be procured by NASA after system engineering for orbiter had progressed sufficiently. Shuttle, first reusable space vehicle, would have delta-winged, airplane-like orbiter able to land on conventional runways. It would have cargo compartment 18 m (60 ft) long and 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter and would be able to place 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) into 185-km (115mi) due-east orbit. Reusable solid-propellant booster rockets and orbiter high-pressure, liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen main engines would boost orbiter into space and booster rockets would detach at 40-km (25-mi) altitude and splash down in ocean for recovery and reuse. Orbiter, under own power, would continue into low earth orbit. Shuttle would be able to place satellites in orbit, return satellites from orbit, permit in-orbit repair and servicing of satellites, deliver propulsive stages and satellites to low earth orbit, and make short-duration science and applications missions with self-contained experiments in low earth orbit. Shuttle development schedule called for horizontal test flights beginning in 1976 and manned orbital test flights beginning in 1978, with complete system operational by 1980. Employment generated by orbiter development and shuttle integration was expected to reach 15 000 by 1975-1976 and then would gradually decrease, (nasa Release 72153)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to study ion composition of D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily except for short tone-ranging data dropout which was not expected to affect scientific results. Good data were obtained. Launch was made under April 21, 1972, modification of July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) for cooperative sounding rocket project to study ionosphere, (nasa Rpt srl)
Skylab crew press conference, with prime and backup crewmen, was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., said preparations were on schedule for April 1973 launch. Contractor checkouts and tests of hardware were expected to be completed for delivery to Kennedy Space Center in July. Skylab would carry some 20 000 pieces of stowage equipment on board to provide life support for nine men for 140 days. “So it all goes up at one time, and we’ve got a great deal of work to do, not only to learn how to operate this vehicle but also all the experiments in it. It became apparent that we could not be 100 percent cross-trained as we had been in Apollo, so we’ve . . . defined some areas for each guy to become expert in ... . That allowed us to balance out the training hours. Right now ... we have some 2000 training hours per man defined. We’ve been working on the basic training for the past year.” Training hardware would be available about February 1. Commander would have overall responsibility for mission and would be command and service module expert. Science pilot would be expert in all medical equipment and in Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) and its associated hardware. Pilot would be expert in Orbital Workshop systems and electrical systems. Remaining experiments would be divided among crewmembers according to availability and choice. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said photographic data returned from Skylab would be “far superior” to previous data because actual film would be returned to earth. To return film, crews would conduct two extravehicular activities (eyas) on first mission, three on second, and two on third. “We’re going to be moving . . . 240 pounds [109 kg] worth of film, in canisters, magazines, in and out of the cameras. We’ll have to remove the used exposed film and replace it with new film. It’s going to take about 3 hours.” Experiments were described by Astronaut Gerald P. Carr. They included EREP earth resources experiment containing five sensors to calibrate earth’s atmosphere, corollary experiments submitted by high school students, engineering experiments to study effects of zero g on metal alloys and flammability of certain items, habitability experiments to study noise levels and atmospheric composition, and scientific experiments. Scientific experiments would include studies of effect of zero g on single human cells, studies of circadian rhythm of pocket mice and vinegar gnats, ultraviolet stellar astronomy and x-ray astronomy. Technological experiments would include crew vehicle disturbances, manual navigation sightings, and “a study of the little contamination cloud that we carry around with us . . . kind of like Pigpen in Peanuts.” In response to question on illness during missions, Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin said NASA would provide equipment and training on board to take care of most illnesses and injuries that could be handled in a doctor’s office. Science pilot would be able to provide emergency care for illnesses “up to and including quite severe. We have quite a package of drugs on board, administrable by all routes; we have tracheotomy equipment and equipment for maintaining an airway for stopping bleeding. We are attempting to develop in time for the flight intravenous fluids. We feel that, almost regardless of the severity of the injury, we will at least be able to stabilize the patient.” (Transcript)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans passed final four-hour physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, Dr. W. Royce Hawkins, told press astronauts were “well rested, in good spirits, and physically in excellent shape.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/2/72, 58)
Families of Astronauts Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chaffee—who lost lives in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire—received awards totaling $300 000 from spacecraft manufacturers. North American Rockwell Corp. and former North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell-Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. had been charged with negligence in suits filed by Chaffee’s widow Nov. 6 and White’s widow Nov. 7. In out-of-court settlement, Mrs. Patricia White Davis would receive $50 000 for herself and $50 000 for each of two children; Mrs. Martha Chaffee Canfield would receive $70 000 and $40 000 for each of two children. Widow of Virgil I. Grissom, third astronaut killed in fire, had won $350 000 settlement from NR March 8. (W Star & News, 11/8/72, A4; AP, NYT, 11/11/72, 7)
Collection of 28 paintings by artist-architect-astronomer Chesley Bonestell and 3 original drawings by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on exhibition at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York for indefinite period. Bonestell paintings of early 1950s depicted future space explorations. Von Braun paintings suggested suit for astronaut extravehicular activity on moon. (Am Mus Release)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
Atomic Energy Commission published Global Inventory and Distribution of Pu-238 from SNAP-9 A, report on study of plutonium accidently injected into stratosphere when U.S. Navy Transit satellite failed to reach orbit after launch from Vandenberg afb April 21, 1964. Accident had caused threefold increase in global fallout of plutonium isotope over that usually injected into atmosphere by atmospheric nuclear weapon tests. SNAP-9A nuclear generator, designed to convert heat from Pu-238 into electrical energy, had burned up during reentry and had ablated into small particles at 46-km (28.6-mi) altitude. Concentrations of Pu-238 in stratosphere had been measured through end of 1970 and soil samples had been collected at more than 60 sites to estimate global distribution of fallout from the accident. Of the 17 kilo-curies of Pu-238 originally in the generator, 13.4 plus or minus 2.2 kilocuries had been deposited, with 3.1 plus or minus 0.8 in northern hemisphere and 10.3 plus or minus 2.1 in southern hemisphere. Although plutonium was one of most enduring and deadly radioactive poisons known, amounts inhaled when Pu-238 settled to earth were so small they were not considered hazardous. (Text)
NASA announced signing of $64-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee award-fee contract with North American Rockwell Corp. for design, development, and test of docking module, docking system, and modification of Apollo command and service module (csm) for Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Hardware would be used in joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for summer of 1975. (nasa Release 72-218)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, issued statement in Washington, D.C., on President Nixon’s Jan. 5 decision to proceed with development of space shuttle. Decision “initiates a program which holds great promise for scientific and technological advances in the interests of the nation and all mankind. We are also interested in its potential as a means for performing our military mission more efficiently and economically. The Air Force role in the program is to provide NASA data to help assure that the Shuttle will be of maximum utility to the dod and we are pleased that the proposed vehicle is configured to meet potential DOD needs. We will continue our close coordination with NASA as their development program proceeds.’-’ (Text)
Chicago Tribune editorial said there was still “a lot of studying to be done” on U.S. conversion to metric system [see Aug. 18]. Question of financing was “sticky” one. “Many of the countries which have gone or are going metric have provided some sort of government help to finance the changeover.” U.S. estimated conversion cost at between $10 billion and $40 billion. “Both labor and industry—especially small business—have been leery of undertaking this expense without government help. But the government is in no position at the moment to give much help; and if it were to convert its purchases to the metric system quickly, the result would be favorable to foreign manufacturers already on the metric system and detrimental to our own.” (C Trib, 8/21/72) August 22:	NASA announced preliminary timeline for Apollo 17 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt—would be launched from Kennedy Space Center at 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. Lunar module would land on moon’s Taurus-Littrow region at 2:55 pm est Dec. 11 and two crewmen would explore lunar surface for three extravehicular activity periods before lm lifted off moon at 5:56 pm est Dec. 14. Spacecraft would splash down in Pacific at 2:24 pm est Dec. 19, after 304-hr 31-min mission, (nasa Release 72-169)
Goddard Space Flight Center was awarding $100 000 contract to rand Corp. to plan and coordinate study for Broadcasting Satellite System. RAND would provide improved analytical tools for technical guidance and support of broadcasting satellite services development, (gsfc PAO; SBD, 4/20/72, 273)
President Nixon and party left Andrews Air Force Base, Md., for Salzburg, Austria, first stop on scheduled 13-day visit to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland. Visit would include summit meetings with Soviet officials in Moscow to discuss possible cooperation in joint manned space flight mission, strategic arms limitation, environmental and health problems, reducing risk of incidents at sea, international trade, and other ventures in “peaceful coexistence.” {PD, 6/5/72, 912; Marder, W Post, 5/21/72, Al)
Newspaper editorials commented on decision to develop space shuttle. Kansas City Star:	“The next great step in space for the United States seems assured. President Nixon has pressed the go-ahead button and apparently it will be largely a matter of adequate funding by Congress. In view of the record of space accomplishments, there is not much doubt that the planned space shuttle program will be fruitful both from the standpoint of technological success and long-range scientific benefits.” (KC Star, 1/7/72)	" St. Louis Globe-Democrat:	“There are so many potentialities for the shuttle that it is bard to envision all of them. But there is no doubt that if it is completed space travel for the average citizen may become a distinct possibility in the 1980s.” (St Louis G-D, 1/7/72) Christian Science Monitor said “space discovery versus human needs argument should not be seen as an either/or issue. This is so even leaving aside the jobs creation or economic return arguments.” Monitor believed that “a space shuttle program, because it is so practically linked to fulfilling man’s age-old vision of mastering the heavens, will unleash more constructive human energy than it will consume. And this excess will make meeting earthside demands the easier.” (CSM, 1/7/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution:	“The program . . . has the almost immediate benefit of employing some 50,000 highly trained aerospace workers who have faced a dismal job picture as the Apollo program has phased out. And, again, the proposal demonstrates that imagination and vision and a willingness to dare are still part of the American way of doing things.” (Atlanta JC, 1/7/72) Milwaukee Journal:	“The shuttle offers the opportunity to make space flight fairly routine, of taking large numbers of people and supplies in and out of space, of manning earth resource space stations continuously, of monitoring and repairing communications and resource satellites. It is a worthwhile program.” (MJ, 1/7/72) Los Angeles Times said military aspect of space shuttle needed clarification. “Most taxpayers welcomed the decision to end the wasteful competition between NASA and the Air Force on the shuttle and orbiting space station.” NASA had not explained how shuttle’s civil and military functions would be kept separate. “No American wants the Soviet Union to tip the balance of power with its own space program. But it might help avert a new confrontation if the military applications were enumerated along with a statement of whether the American government thinks shuttles are bound by the international agreement barring nuclear weapons from outer space.” (LA Times, 1/7/72) Seattle Times:	“The history of warfare shows that victory usually goes to the one who occupies the high ground. Near-earth space is the ‘high ground’ of modern military planning. In approving a full go-ahead for . . . space shuttle program, President Nixon this week served notice that this nation intends to occupy the ‘high ground.’ ” (Seattle Times, 1/7/72)
Apollo 17 astronauts began final week of training at Kennedy Space Center for Dec. 6 mission. NASA spokesman said countdown test begun Nov. 15 had proceeded so smoothly that launch pad technicians had “only to monitor the systems.” Other technicians installed batteries and water in lunar landing vehicle and checked backup flight systems. (Wil-ford, NYT, 11/28/72)
Two-man crew of Air Force F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft bailed out safely after explosion in aircraft during flight from Mountain Home Air Force Base, Idaho. Aircraft crashed in Nevada. Accident was being investigated. (W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
Air Force Systems Command announced award of $142 000 to North American Rockwell Corp. and $53 000 to Sperry Univac Systems Div. for study of man-machine relationships in remotely piloted vehicles (rpv) designed for air-to-ground missions. Study would define advantages and disadvantages of man’s presence in rpv concept, (afsc Release 252.72)
New York Times editorial commented on space cooperation: “These past few years astronomy has probably advanced further than in any previous century since the invention of the telescope. Fantastic progress has been made through American and Soviet exploration of the moon, Mars and Venus.” Need was “to build on this new base of knowledge with a program of further manned and unmanned space exploration conducted under a system of international cooperation which combines the resources, manpower and knowledge of many nations. No generation has ever faced a nobler challenge than space now poses before all humanity.” (NYT, 4/16/72, 5:12)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of Dept, of Commerce released The World Weather Program for Fiscal Year' 1973. Major U.S. contributions to World Weather Watch in FY 1973 would include improvement of existing operational satellite system, development of next-generation system, establishment of expanded atmospheric-monitoring capability, increase in computer-processing capacity, and assistance to weather services of developing nations. NOAA-sponsored polar-orbiting tiros satellites would be launched by NASA to provide temperature soundings and day and night cloud-cover images. NASA would launch Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms) for 24-hr viewing of severe storms and cloud cover by spacecraft that was prototype of noaa’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) system. First Arctic baseline station for atmospheric measurement would be established at Barrow, Alaska, by noaa; National Science Foundation would support expansion of Antarctic monitoring program; and Atomic Energy Commission would begin measurement of tropospheric radionuclides on Pacific island. U.S. would provide ground-receiving equipment for acquiring weather satellite photos to developing nations and establish regional telecommunications networks linking several South American cities with Washington, D.C., and national networks within six other nations, (noaa Release 72-94)
More than 70 students from six continents would witness Apollo 17 launch and visit major U.S. science centers during Dec. 4-17 tour sponsored by NASA in cooperation with Dept, of State, NASA announced. Students 15 to 17 yrs old with top academic ratings had been selected by their governments on NASA invitation. U.S. tour would give students broad view of work in science and space. Tour would include Washington, D.C.; Tennessee Valley Authority; Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Marshall Space Flight Center; Manned Spacecraft Center; Ames Research Center; Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and facilities of National Bureau of Standards, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and United Nations. Project also was supported by U.S. Information Agency and National Science Teachers Assn, (nasa Release 72-219)
President Nixon met with delegation of physicians from People’s Republic of China at White House. Delegation was beginning three-week tour of U.S. as guests of National Academy of Sciences Institute of Medicine and American Medical Assn. (PD, 10/16/72, 1518)
NASA published Physics of the Space Environment (NASA SP-305). Series of lectures, presented originally in colloquia at Univ. of Alabama 1970-1971, had been sponsored by Marshall Space Flight Center’s Aero-Astrodynamics Laboratory. Major topics covered were dynamics and transient state of upper atmosphere, chemical composition of upper atmosphere, and solar flare forecasting. Flare forecasting “fiasco” was described by Frederick W. Ward, Jr., Air Force Cambridge Laboratories physicist: Forecasters dreamed of discovering cause, energy source, and antecedent conditions for solar flares. “This ‘tunnel vision’ has had a profound and deleterious effect on the state-of-the-art. It has diverted attention from many promising approaches and relegated them to limbo. More importantly, it has actually inhibited the scientific search for the underlying physical mechanisms.” Examples of neglected aspects ranged from observing techniques and equipment to availability and accuracy of archived data. Inspection of available data “leads to an obvious conclusion: there are at least two suns up there.” (Text)
Spokesman for Columbia Broadcasting System said in New York that CBS, American Broadcasting Co., and National Broadcasting Co. had dissolved plans for three-network-pool coverage of Dec. 6 Apollo 17 launch. Action would avoid problems that might develop because of 28-day-old strike against CBS by 1200 cameramen, technicians, and engineers. CBS would cover launch with cameras manned by supervisory personnel. ABC and NBC spokesmen said they would restore two-network pooled coverage. (AP, B Sun, 12/1/72, A5)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, was promoted by Air Force to rank of brigadier general. At 42 he was youngest officer of flag rank in any U.S. service and third astronaut to attain flag rank. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been promoted to rear admiral by Navy in December 1971 and James A. McDivitt to brigadier general by Air Force in March. Stafford had been Apollo 10 commander and Gemini 6 pilot. (nasa Release 72-235)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service published United, States and Soviet Progress in Space: Summary Data Through 1971 and a Forward Look (72-17 SP). Report—prepared by Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—updated Senate Document 92-51 released Jan. 6 and discussed future directions and significant aspects of space programs. Soviet planetary probes Mars 2 (launched May 19, 1971) and Mars 3 (launched May 28, 1971) were studying temperatures, density, and constituents of Martian ionosphere, atmosphere, and surface. Joint experiment with France on Mars 3 had been studying solar wind. With Soviet start in planetary exploration during 1971, U.S. should continue to feel competition in planetary program until NASA Viking landed on Mars in 1976. nasa future plans gave prominent priority to space shuttle. While Soviet plans for reusable space vehicle had not been divulged, “it is hard to imagine their attainment of announced goals . . . without use of a shuttle.” U.S.S.R. talked of putting up space station in five years. “It may be that the long awaited new large launch vehicle will find use in lifting major components for such a station. Using this vehicle, the U.S.S.R. could put up its equivalent of the U.S. Skylab any time from 1972 on.” U.S.S.R. had recorded “wide variety of commitments ... to conduct wide-ranging program” of solar system exploration and of earth applications. They had discussed possibility of Grand Tour flights and of manned planetary missions. In space cooperation, “although no firm commitment has been made and no real timetable set, the possibility has been opened that some of the surplus Saturn IB and Apollo hardware might be used to send an American crew to dock with a future Soviet space station. Then perhaps later if a remaining Saturn V is used to put up a Skylab 2 ... a Soviet Soyuz might send a crew to dock with it. More joint planning and more funds will be required to accomplish these suggestions.” (Text)
Grumman Corp. officials said layoff of 300 employees, from top engineers to maintenance and security personnel, would begin Aug. 4 as direct result of NASA’s award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp. (Andelman, NYT, 8/2/72)
Tenth anniversary of start of Saturn V project at Marshall Space Flight Center. Since inauguration of Advanced Saturn development Jan. 25, 1962, Saturn V launch vehicles had been used successfully to launch eight manned space flights. Apollo 16 Saturn V booster would be 26th Saturn launch vehicle flown from Kennedy Space Center since firing of first Saturn I Oct. 27, 1961. (msfc Release 72-3)
Huntsville (Ala.) Times editorial criticized attitude of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) toward U.S. space program: “The McGovern space-budget figure of $2 billion may not seem a paltry sum to many taxpayers and voters. But it becomes a piddling figure . . . when compared Avith massive governmental outlays for farm price-supports and other questionable multibillion-dollar expenditures. And even in endorsing this minimal space effort, Senator McGovern stresses the negative aspect of not wanting to see additional thousands of aerospace employees thrown out of work, rather than emphasizing the positive contributions of space to the expansion of man’s scientific knowledge, to the strengthening of the technological know-how of American industry, and to the enhancement of the nation’s image throughout the world.” (Huntsville Times, 9/11/72) September 11—13:	American Society of Mechanical Engineers held annual Aerospace Div. Conference at Anaheim, Calif. Application of aerospace technology to societal problems and future of space exploration were discussed by officials of NASA; National Science Foundation; Depts. of Commerce, Transportation, and Interior; state and local governments; industry; and education. Aviation’s role in earth resources surveys was described in paper by Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson and Airborne Science Office Chief Donald R. Mulholland of Ames Research Center: “At the present time, 275 companies are engaged in aerial surveys, but less than 50 of these are equipped for nonphotographic remote sensing. New sensor technology growing from and stimulated by the space program has made it possible to obtain vastly improved data.” Federal Aviation Administration data showed that in 1971 “some 230 aircraft were used for aerial surveys and another 31 for patrolling.” ARC used general-aviation, high-altitude research, and four-engine jet transportation craft. Remote sensing from aircraft provided data to improve environment, conserve natural resources, and contribute to economic growth. “The sensors required . . . are evolving rapidly, in part from well-established aerial reconnaissance technology, and in part from technology developed for the space program.” asme Spirit of St. Louis Award was presented to Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man on moon, for “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics.” (asme Release 7/18/72; NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 207-10) September 11-October 1:	Series of six stratospheric balloons were launched to altitudes from 58 000 to 41000 m (125 000 to 135 000 ft) from Cape Girardeau Municipal Airport, Mo., in project directed by Navy’s Office of Naval Research and Raven Industries, Inc., in cooperation with four universities and NASA. Balloons, with volumes from 310 000 to 937 000 cu m (11 000 000 to 33 100 000 cu ft), achieved all flight objectives. Sept. 11 flight carried instruments from Univ. of New Hampshire to study charge and isotopical composition of cosmic radiation particles and two ionization chambers from Atomic Energy Commission and Rice Univ. Sept. 14 flight carried Washington Univ., St. Louis, experiments, including one to measure isotopic abundances of silicon, sulfur, calcium, and iron nuclei. On Sept. 14 and 24, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago Univ., counter experiments were launched to measure nuclear composition of very-high-energy cosmic rays. Univ. of California, at Riverside experiment was launched Sept. 19 to measure albedo neutrons from earth and solar neutrons from solar flares and quiet sun. Sixth flight, Oct. 1, carried Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to measure flux of very-high-energy cosmic rays. (Navy, onr Field Representative [Navy Balloon Proj])
Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial by Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences, urged support of space shuttle program because it was “natural development of the nasa mission to advance space technology,” which “takes advantage of the high competence in technical and operational management of large space-oriented systems now fully developed within NASA.” Program provided launch capability for nearly all manned and unmanned space programs, would eliminate “patchwork, disparate stable of boosters and facilities,” and was “one of only a few national programs that will continue growth in the various fields of high technology.” (A&A, 6/72, 20-1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew scored Senate critics of President Nixon’s decision to proceed with development of space shuttle in speech before Florida Jaycees state convention in Daytona Beach: “They would, in effect, bring to a virtual halt this country’s technological progress in a field which has already proved of enormous benefit to mankind and holds even greater promise for the future. Worse, they would have us abandon our hard-won leadership in an area where United States ingenuity and creativity visibly overcame the lead of our principal world competitor and proved the American free enterprise system is still Number One when the chips are down.” (Text)
Kennedy Space Center announced two contract awards. McDonnell Douglas Corp. was awarded $15 945 000, one-year contract modification for prelaunch, launch, and postlaunch operations of Skylab airlock module, Orbital Workshop, associated ground support equipment, special test devices, and facilities. Modification brought total value of contract to $60 599 698. Boeing Co. Field Operations and Support Div. was awarded $22 904 790, one-year contract extension for base support services at KSC and Cape Kennedy Air Force Station. Extension brought total value of contract to $42 122 790. (ksc Releases 24r-72, 25—72)
Appointment of William H. Rock, Assistant Program Manager for Apollo-Skylab Programs, as Manager of new Sciences and Applications Office at Kennedy Space Center was announced by Ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus. New office would become KSC’s interface with NASA’s Office of Applications, (ksc Release 279-72)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
Air Force was sponsoring “fly-off” of new attack aircraft prototypes at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., to determine best aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. Competition was “essential element” of Air Force A-X (attack-aircraft, experimental) program designed to produce new aircraft for supporting ground troops in battle at lowest possible cost. (Levine, WSJ, 11/27/72, 10)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., passed final physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said results showed astronauts “in good shape and ready to fly.” (AP, W Star, 4/11/72, A3)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 16 mission as astronauts conducted second extravehicular activity (eva) on lunar surface. New York Times commented on April 20 decision to continue Apollo 16 mission despite technical problems: “Thursday’s dilemma and its solution were particularly useful in reminding all concerned that there are two kinds of errors that can be made in situations of this type.” There was possibility of mission directors “deciding to continue the journey in the face of a danger that brings disaster. Against that is the alternate risk of being overly cautious and aborting a mission unnecessarily, at huge financial and scientific loss.” It was “delicate dilemma” and “tribute to the Project Apollo leadership and organization that to date these voyages have foundered on neither rock.” (NYT, 4/22/72, 30)	' Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Science has been well served. Mankind has made its giant steps. The pure, fresh enthusiasm of Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., with his ‘Yahoo!’ and his ‘Fantastic!’ is infectious, but it cannot waken again the public’s wonder over the first moonwalk.” Everyone wished Apollo 16 well but “they have seen this show before. What refinements have been added in this latest version are obscurely technical. The Apollo program is aging, and the American public ... is quite willing to see it come to a close.” (Cl PD, 4/22/72)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Man’s lunar theories were undergoing major revision because of Apollo 17, Wall Street Journal said. Observations by astronauts of orange soil on moon—clue to past volcanic activity—had promoted review of Apollo 14 color photos. Review had disclosed brown and orange discolorations on dome in crater Langrenus. Orange soil meant there might be other relatively young volcanic features. Discovery could result in major revision of thermal theories of moon. {WSJ, 12/19/72) December 20:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Atlas-Agena booster from Eastern Test Range. Satellite entered orbit with 40 728km (25 307-mi) apogee, 31 012-km (19 270-mi) perigee, 1440.4-min period, and 9.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 1973; Sheldon, Sci Policy Research Div, Library Congress; SBD, 12/26/72, 245)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
Leading figures in Federal Government monopoly suit against International Business Machines Corp. would visit Kennedy Space Center during Apollo 17 mission to examine computer operations, Washington Post reported. U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein, with lawyers from IBM and Dept, of Justice, would fly from New York. Similar trip had been proposed for April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission but NASA had opposed visit on grounds that it could lead to breach or relaxation of security and safety regulations. Visit was to educate court on nature of IBM equipment used during launch. (Mintz, W Post, 11/23/72, A29)
Air Force would develop data-relay satellite to enable early warning satellites stationed over Indian Ocean to flash warning of missile attack directly to continental U.S., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. At present, signals were received by ground stations in Guam or Australia and were then relayed by comsat. New data-relay satellites also would make possible transmission of search-and-find reconnaissance-satellite photos directly to U.S. for speedy analysis and transmission of commands back to satellite to take close-look pictures of targets of opportunity discovered in earlier photos. Air Force had reportedly requested $23 million in FY 1973—up from $17.8 million in FY 1972 and $13.3 million in FY 1971—to continue system’s development. “Closely guarded and heavily censored references to the . . . system and its intended functions” had appeared in recently released congressional testimony in which Air Force official was questioned about $21.7 million requested for continued research and development of early warning satellites and $128.9 million estimated to be required for them through FY 1978. (Klass, Av Wk, 6/19/72, 12)
Air Force Systems Command successfully completed two subsystem tests of new high-altitude supersonic target (hast) missile at its Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla. Tests over Gulf of Mexico used lightweight prototype target. First test was aerial recovery of HAST recovery test vehicle; payload test vehicle was towed by F-4 Phantom aircraft in second test, hast was highly maneuverable target missile with mach 4 speed and 10 000- to 30 000-m (35 000- to 100 000-ft) altitude. First powered missile would be delivered to adtc in December, (afsc Newsreview, 12/72, 3) November 7:	Annual Revolution Day parade in Moscow featured only muted display of military power. One of leading floats reproduced Pravda headline requesting public support for U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during year. Politburo members, led by Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev, reviewed display but only speaker was Defense Minister Andrey Grechko, who called for “peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems.” No new weapons were shown. (Seeger, LA Times, 11/8/72, 19)
Air Force F-lll swing-wing jet bomber aircraft was lost over Vietnam on first day of F-llls’ return to combat in Indochina since 1968. North Vietnam later claimed it had shot aircraft down but Dept, of Defense said it was unable to explain disappearance. (W Post, 10/3/72, A25)
NASA Convair 990 aircraft was being used for scientific probe of high-altitude cloud formations up to 14 000 m (45 000 ft) in attempt to identify and measure ice and water particles with remote sensing devices, Ames Research Center announced. Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. Warren A. Hovis and team of scientists from NASA, Univ. of Arizona, and Arthur D. Little Co. were conducting experiment to improve short-term weather forecasting and to transfer technology to weather satellites. (NASA Release 72-14)
Group of 49 industrialists and educators from England, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, France, Italy, Holland, and Belgium visited Kennedy Space Center during week-long orientation arranged by London Financial Times. Group also visited NASA Hq., Goddard Space Flight Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Manned Spacecraft Center. (ksc Release 40-72)
Former astronaut James A. McDivitt—Special Assistant to Manned Spacecraft Center Director for Organizational Affairs since May—announced his resignation from NASA and Air Force, effective Sept. 1, when he would become Senior Vice President of Consumer Power Co. in Jackson, Mich. He would be on terminal leave from July 1 until Sept. 1. McDivitt, Air Force brigadier general, had commanded Gemini 4 (June 3-7, 1965) and Apollo 9 (March 3-13, 1969) and had left Astronaut Office in June 1969 to become Manager for Lunar Landing Operations in Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA Release 72-131)
Crowd estimated at more than half million would witness nighttime launch of Apollo 17, which experts believed would be visible within 800-km (500-mi) radius, Associated Press reported. Lester T. Keene of Kennedy Space Center Data Systems Div. had said exhaust from Saturn V rocket would be equivalent to brilliance of sunlight. Peak visibility would be reached about 2 min 30 sec after launch, when Saturn V was at 68-km (42-mi) altitude and 90 km (56 mi) northeast of Cape Kennedy, and before shutdown of lst-stage engines that burned fuel producing orange flame. Pale blue flame of 2nd stage would not be seen for as great distance. (B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
Aviation pioneers to be enshrined in Aviation Hall of Fame at Dayton, Ohio, Dec. 15 were listed by Aviation Week & Space Technology: l/g Claire L. Chennault of World War II Flying Tigers; Leroy,R. Grumman, aircraft designer and manufacturer; James H. Kindelberger, aircraft executive; and Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 11)
New York Times science editor Walter S. Sullivan had been named one of three winners of 1972 science writing awards sponsored by American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and Westinghouse Education Foundation, New York Times reported. Sullivan had won award for third time. Award was for his series “The Einstein Papers.” Other winners were Dennis L. Meredith, science editor at Univ. of Rhode Island, and Eugene Kinkead, associate editor of New Yorker. (NYT, 12/14/72)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), campaigning for Presidential nomination, told street crowd in Titusville, Fla., that U.S. should be first in space and science. “We can’t afford to have the Soviet Union first in space.” Later, rival Democratic candidate Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) told Orlando, Fla., crowd that Humphrey had never been recorded on space shuttle issue “until he entered the Florida primary.” (C Trib, 3/14/72) March, 13—14: American Astronautical Society (aas) sponsored 1972 Goddard Symposium, “Transfer of Space Technology to Community and Industrial Activities,” in Washington, D.C. Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in keynote address stressed importance of high technology development to U.S. standard of living. He compared favorable balance of trade in high-technology aerospace products with unfavorable balance in low-technology products. Annual U.S. exports in aerospace products were valued at $3.6 billion over imports; computers, $1.1 billion; and machinery, $1 billion. Motor vehicle imports were $3.3 billion over exports, clothing and textiles, $1.9 billion, and iron and steel, $1.9 billion. (NASA Release 72-56) National Space Club awards were presented at Goddard Memorial Dinner at Space Club on evening of March 14. Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, NSC’s highest award, was presented to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, by former NASA Administrator James E. Webb. Citation read: “His deep knowledge of the space program and his effective leadership in the Senate and the Nation have been invaluable in fostering Congressional understanding of and support for this program. The benefits to mankind from the U.S. space program flow in large measure from the dedicated efforts of this great American.” Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineer Dan Schneiderman. Citation read: “For his management of the Mariner Venus ’67 and Mariner Mars ’71 missions. His perception, decisiveness, and inspiration have made it possible for man to place a measuring device in orbit around another planet for the first time in the history of the world.” Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship was presented to C. Thomas Snyder of Ames Research Center “so that he may continue to seek and maintain pre-eminence in outer space for the United States.” Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award for 1971 competition was given Albert B. Christman of Naval Weapons Center for “Robert H. Goddard and the Military.” National Space Club Press Award was presented to Howard Benedict of Associated Press for “giving the public authoritative yet highly readable chronicles of the unfolding Space Age.”	. Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award was presented to Boeing Co. by Apollo 15 Astronaut David R. Scott. Citation read: “In recognition of great mobility provided by the ingenious Lunar Roving Vehicle. . . . Exploration of the moon by the Apollo 15 crew, its cameras, and its equipment, covering 28 kilometers [17.3 miles] over the rough terrain, was made possible by this masterful 500-pound [227-kilogram] stowable vehicle.” (Program) March 14:	President Nixon transmitted to Congress Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1971 Activities. In transmission message President said: “Aided by the improvements we have made in mobility, our explorers on the moon last summer produced new, exciting and useful evidence on the structure and origin of the moon. Several phenomena which they uncovered are now under study. Our unmanned nearby observation of Mars is similarly valuable and significant for the advancement of science. During 1971, we gave added emphasis to aeronautics activities which contribute substantially to improved travel conditions, safety and security, and we gained increasing recognition that space and aeronautical research serves in many ways to keep us in the forefront of man’s technological achievements. There can be little doubt that the investments we are now making in exploration of the unknown are but a prelude to the accomplishments of mankind in future generations.” Report said U.S. was “proceeding into this decade with clearly defined goals and objectives for its civilian space program.” U.S. continued to invest “substantial resources” in space activities because of “national thrust to explore the unknown, the desire to acquire new knowledge, and the realization that space activity has practical and widely beneficial applications. Space is increasingly coming to be seen as an arena of human activity, rather than national activity, and therefore a particularly congenial focus for cooperative undertakings that bring the people of the world together.” {CR, 3/14/72, S3885; Text)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) April 2:	Interview of Roris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, on U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint space mission was published in New York Times. Interview, described as “first full public discussion of the negotiations from the Soviet point of view,” had been obtained in Moscow by Times science writer John N. Wilford. Petrov had emphasized that “tangible progress” had been achieved and he was “optimistic” about prospects of joint space flight, technically feasible in “the middle of the nineteen-seventies.” Government approval would “depend much” on April meetings in Moscow between NASA and Soviet Academy officials and May meeting in Moscow of Working Groups on rendezvous and docking. Petrov said compatible docking system would allow “docking of spaceships of our countries with the humane aim of rendering help to crews of spaceships and space stations in distress. These systems would also allow joint experiments during the flights in space.” Petrov said negotiations had occurred in “atmosphere of mutual understanding and businesslike discussion” that “gives us the hope that all the difficulties connected with . . . such a sophisticated scientific and technological undertaking could be overcome.” (NYT, 4/2/72)
Apollo 7 Astronaut Donn F. Eisele was sworn in as a Peace Corps director. He would supervise 315 volunteers and 14 paid staff members in Bangkok, Thailand, beginning assignment in mid-June while on terminal leave from Air Force. His retirement from Air Force, after 20 yrs service, would be effective July 1. (W News, 5/23/72; NYT, 5/23/72, 27) had said that “decade ended with an adventure so fantastic as almost to overshadow and redeem all the turmoil that had scarred it.” Redeeming adventure had been Apollo 11 moon landing, which Dr. Fletcher called “the one great event of the decade that gave the American people renewed faith in their destiny.” William M. Magruder, special consultant on technology to President Nixon, said U.S. had lost any chance of competing for first airline supersonic transport orders. He predicted U.S. would produce “second generation” SST that would begin carrying passengers in a decade. l/g Otto J. Glasser (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff, Research and Development, said in speech that U.S. aerospace industry had become “overbuilt, overmanned, and overmanaged. Not only are there too many companies, but collectively they have more production capacity than we have any conceivable future need for. The passing of relatively ineffective . . . DC-3s and P—51s has gradually rendered obsolete and archaic our production oriented industry.” Gen. Glasser recommended that U.S. firms follow European approach of “very small, tightly integrated design teams manned by top-of-their-graduating-class engineers.” (Texts; NYT, 5/23/72) May 23:	Scientists	at Manned Spacecraft Center detonated by radio command three of four explosive mortar charges left on moon by Apollo 16 astronauts. Fourth grenade was not detonated because data indicated attitude sensor might have been knocked out of position by previous firings. Analysis of data on pitch sensor was under way to determine if sensor had failed or if mortar package had shifted its position. First grenade contained 270 g (0.6 lb) of explosive with predicted range of 910 m (3000 ft). Second had 45 g (0.1 lb) and 150-m (500-ft) predicted range. Third had 140-g (0.3-lb) charge and 300-m (1000-ft) predicted range. Signals from three explosions, recorded by geophones left on lunar surface, indicated that moon’s surface layer was at least 50 m (164 ft) thick, (msc Release 72—112; O’Toole, W Post, 5/24/72, A3; upi, C Trib, 5/24/72)
White House announced exchange of diplomatic notes on bilateral agreements between U.S. and Mexico in scientific and technological fields during state visit of Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez to Washington, D.C. Remote Sensing Agreement extended until July 1, 1974, a 1968 agreement covering cooperative research in remote sensing for earth surveys. Agreement also modified 1968 agreement by providing that NASA acquire and process Earth Resources Technology Satellite data over Mexico and train qualified Mexican technicians in sensing techniques. Agreement for Scientific and Technological Cooperation called for commission for formulation, orientation, and review of programs to strengthen economic and social development, intensify relations between scientists and technicians, and facilitate and increase exchange of persons, ideas, skills, experience, and information between U.S. and Mexico. (PD, 6/19/72, 1054)
Discovery through infrared measurements that Titan, largest of Saturn’s six moons, had minimum temperature of 205 K (—90°F), same as atmosphere in which life originated on earth 2 billion yrs ago, was discussed by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan in interview published by Washington Post. Discovery had been made by Cornell Univ. and Univ. of Minnesota astronomers using infrared measurements. Titan was about 1.5 billion km (900 million mi) from sun and received only one percent of sunlight that earth received. “We have to ask ourselves what kind of a planet would make this atmosphere so far from sun. The only answer we have been able to come up with is something identical to our primeval earth. Possible life form on Titan would not be earthlike, “but it would be earth chauvinism to think that no form of life whatever could survive so far off in the solar system.” Dr. Sagan believed Titan was made up of chemical ice, except for small molten core of radioactive rock. Core melted ice far below surface, forcing volcanic ice to surface, where it burst into brilliant red on contact with sun’s ultraviolet light. “We see Titan as a red disc through the telescopes, which is exactly what we get in the laboratory when we react methane, hydrogen, water ice, and ammonia with ultraviolet rays.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/24/72, Al)
Adelbert 0. Tischler, Director of Shuttle Technologies Office in NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast), testified on progress of shuttle transportation system before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology during NASA FY 1973 authorization hearings: “Methods for rapidly assessing the aero-heating and flight handling characteristics of the shuttle are being developed. A base for applying new design methods and for use of new materials in the sensitive problem of structural mass has been laid. Thermal protection systems, some comprising materials which were virtually unknown at the start of the program, will be brought to . . . technological readiness. The questions of long-lived propulsive and power equipment, suitable for repeated re-use, will be answered.” Computerized index and search procedure for access to all published shuttle technology was nearing completion. “While technology issues remain, the continuing progress of the technology program conducted by . . . NASA centers and industrial contractors is building a technological base that is far deeper and stronger than that which has heretofore underlain new development programs. This base . . . will assure successful Shuttle development.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, described NASA-funded electrophysics research program conducted by Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Program was concerned “with understanding and, ultimately, using electrons, nuclei, atoms and molecules. Such work is of central importance to future sciences, for example, to laser beam generation, transmission and conversion; superconductivity; or plasma power devices.” In FY 1972, research had been completed on continuous-flow plasma accelerator to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions accurately, new contributions to understanding plasma turbulence had been made, knowledge of uranium plasma properties had been improved, and carbon monoxide lasers had been demonstrated to be highly efficient. New superconductor made up of thin films of vanadium and silicon had been discovered. For FY 1973 $3.4 million had been requested for programs in plasma dynamics, lasers, superconductivity, and nuclear physics. Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified that “clearly the space shuttle orbiter, a rather sophisticated piece of machinery, is not only a launch vehicle and a spacecraft but also a high speed airplane, with all the attendant considerations of aircraft-type control and landing. It offers NASA an opportunity to apply aerodynamic, structural, and materials technology that has been developing over the past 10 or 15 years for high performance aircraft. Reciprocally the shuttle work offers much to benefit aircraft in the next 10 to 15 years.” NASA had also capitalized on early Air Force technology oriented toward manned high-speed flight in the atmosphere as well as reentry into the atmosphere, such as Dyna-Soar and X-15 projects. Francis J. Sullivan—Director of Guidance, Control, and Information Systems in oast—testified on nuclear electric power system research for spacecraft: Nuclear electric power systems offered “attractive alternatives” to batteries for long-life orbiting systems, “in terms of minimizing structural constraints and the economic considerations of supplying several kilowatts of power. Current research is directed primarily toward two types of nuclear systems, isotope systems for low power levels of about 1 kilowatt, and the intermediate reactor power systems for levels in the range of several kilowatts up to 10-20 kilowatts.” Isotope systems were radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). Intermediate reactor power system consisted of zirconium hydride reactor to generate heat and thermoelectric power-conversion components to convert this heat into electricity. Program was directed toward reactor test in 1976-1977 period to demonstrate long-life capability. Stable performance had been achieved on thermoelectric converter test modules. Effort in FY 1973 would concentrate on verifying this performance. Conversion system would be developed for testing with the reactor to verify the integrated system performance. (Transcript)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of grants to Florida Technical Univ (ftu) in Orlando and Florida Institute of Technology (fit) in Melbourne for ecological studies of spaceport area, much of which was a wildlife refuge. Grants, each totaling $90 000, were for one year. FIT would study living processes in ecosystem which could be used as indicators of significant changes in environment. FTU would divide land areas and associated waters at KSC into geographical zones that would be intensively sampled for life forms for comparative academic studies, (ksc Release 80-72)
NASA held separate Headquarters debriefings for three losing aerospace firms in $2.6-billion space shuttle contract competition. North American Rockwell had won contract July 26. Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., told press after Grumman debriefing that his firm was unsuccessful largely because its shuttle design was more “conservative” than that of NR. Gavin said NASA officials had considered “mission suitability” and not management problems as weakness in Grumman bid. Grumman design had more complex swing arms to hold shuttle stationary before launch and lacked “background with large cryogenic tanking” used in shuttle’s fuel supply. Grumman design had also been more expensive than NR version. Spokesmen for other losers, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., declined to comment after debriefings. [See also Oct. 4.] (Andelitnan, NYT, 8/8/72)
Mariner 9 project scientists were pondering past and future of planet Mars as spacecraft (launched May 30, 1971) began final weeks of Mars probe, New York Times said. Questions of existence of water on Mars, Martian atmosphere, and possible future use of planet as refuge for man when earth became uninhabitable had “no clear answers.” Dr. Bruce C. Murray of Cal Tech believed Mars was currently evolving, had never had any vast bodies of water, and might be facing atmospheric dead end.” Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey had said presence of river-like channels on Mars indicated existence of liquid water in recent past. Dr. Carl E. SagAn of Cornell Univ. had suggested that periodic changes in Mars’ angle of rotation could make Martian climate unstable, alternating between present ice age and warm, earthlike areas that could support “thriving biology.” Mars controversy centered on Mariner 9 photos that showed many channels on Mars seemingly carved out by flowing water. (Wilford, NYT, 10/8/72, 68)
Importance of high technology to U.S. future was discussed by Dr. Karl G.	Harr, Jr., President of Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., in speech before Aero Club of Washington, D.C.: “If we as a nation are to continue to base our national security on modern forces-in-being, relying on qualitatively superior weaponry, then we must adequately fund both research & development and procurement.” In space exploration “our national willingness or unwillingness to proceed with this effort so rich in demonstrated benefits of all kinds, will foretell our spiritual strength to face the future.” (Text)
NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska. First rocket carried Goddard Space Flight Center grenade payload to 110.2-km (68.5-mi) altitude to provide temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in support of closely coordinated ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All 31 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 84.6-km (52.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere in Arctic after spring wind reversal and in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite. Payload deployed properly and on time and descended by parachute. Excellent ozone data were acquired. Third rocket carried experiment developed by Univ. of Michigan and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to 127-km (78.9-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure atomic oxygen distribution in mesosphere in proximity to ozone and grenade flights. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good atomic oxygen data were acquired. Fourth rocket carried 31-grenade gsfc payload to collect atmospheric data in support of ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound returns were recorded on ground. (NASA proj off)
Dept, of Transportation would begin priority program to establish quiet, short-haul air transportation system to relieve airport congestion and noise, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said in speech before Air Line Pilots Assn, in Washington, D.C. Federal Aviation Administration would designate certain existing U.S. airports as short-haul airports and develop strict standards on noise and pollution compatible with the community, (dot Release 49-72)
Federal District in Washington, D.C., issued temporary order restraining NASA from reducing staff at Marshall Space Flight Center on petition of American Federation of Government Employees, msfc reduction in force had been scheduled for June 29. Judge Joseph C. Waddy scheduled hearing for July 10 to determine if restraining order would become permanent injunction, (msfc Release 72-80)
First complete monitoring by Navy satellite of effects on earth’s atmosphere of major, long-duration solar flare was reported by Office of Naval Research’s Naval Research Reviews. Preliminary data from experiment aboard Dept, of Defense Space Test Program satellite Sesp 1971—2 (launched by Air Force Oct. 17, 1971) had shown Aug. 2—7 solar flare had produced more intense bombardment of earth by plasma showers than any previously watched by satellites. Data would aid Navy scientists in understanding effects of solar storms on polar radio communications and auroral and polar cap phenomena. (ONR Naval Research Reviews, 10/72, 30-31)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said in interview that 1500 employees might lose jobs because of award of NASA space shuttle contract to competitor, North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 26]. First layoffs at Bethpage, N.Y., plant might come in three weeks, with 200 employees affected. Labor officials later noted that action could affect as many as 8000 workers, including fringe concerns. (Andelman, NYT, 7/28/72)
U.S. Comptroller General Elmer B. Staats said in letter to NASA Administrator, Dr. James C. Fletcher, that General Accounting Office had determined July 13, 1971, NASA award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. had been fair. “We believe the procurement was conducted in a manner which was consistent with applicable law and regulations and was fair to all proposers.” Award had been challenged by competing firm, United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. (Text)
NASA announced selection of Xerox Data Systems for contract negotiations to provide central data-handling facility and remote terminals for Atmosphere Explorer (ae) C, D, and E program. Atmosphere Explorers, 450-kg (100-lb) spacecraft, were to be launched by Thor-Delta rockets into elliptical earth orbit between autumn 1973 and summer 1976 to study chemical processes and energy transfer mechanisms that controlled structure and behavior of earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. Project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of Office of Space Science, (nasa Release 72-212)
Future need for public administrators who understood science and technology was forecast by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in speech before American Society of Public Administrators in New York. Sociological and technological components of world problems raised problems to “new level of complexity.” Management and public administration teams were examining “successful conduct of the Apollo program—the most complicated and difficult technical task ever undertaken by man.” However, “in Apollo we were carrying out a highly complex, but basically technical program. Essentially we were dealing with machines, not people.” Asked if U.S. should use Apollo program approach to solve environmental problems, Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman had told interviewer: “I don’t think that I would care to live in a country that solved its social problems in the same way we solved the Apollo problems.” Dr. Fletcher agreed “our Science-Administrator needs for the future should not he equated with needs for better technical program managers, although this too will become increasingly important. In developing and formulating wise and sound policies and programs to tackle our emerging problems, it will be essential to have individuals within all governmental levels who are capable of understanding the potentials of science and technology . . . and who are alert to their ultimate purposes and consequences. ... It is in this role that I conceive of the new Science-Administrator. (Text)
Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Telegraph Co. announced formation of new company, as yet unnamed, to enter domestic satellite field. Spokesman for Fairchild and Western (which had no connection with Western Union Telegraph Co.) said new company would use Fairchild’s satellite systems and development and manufacturing capabilities. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/72) August 4:	Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 159-km (98.8-mi) altitude. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily but telemetry signal was sporadic after 150 sec. Payload landed on ground and was recovered. Launch was first of two; second would be Aug. 5. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC-513), scheduled to boost Skylab into earth orbit in 1973, left Michoud Assembly Facility on board NASA barge Orion. It would arrive at Kennedy Space Center July 26. Stage had been turned over to NASA by Boeing Co. at Michoud ceremony. (msfc Release 72-91)
Designation of two new, lightweight, fighter prototype aircraft as YF-16 and YF-17 was announced by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. YF-16, powered by one Pratt & Whitney F100 turbofan engine, had swept-wing, under-fuselage inlet, single vertical tail, and forebody strakes. YF-17, powered by two General Electric YJ101 turbojet engines, had twin tail, highly-swept-wing leading-edge extensions, and underwing side fuselage inlets. Both aircraft were expected to fly in early 1974. Air Force had no commitment to production. (dod Release 763—72)
Soviet delegation headed home after meeting with officials of North American Rockwell Corp. Aviation Services Div. at Bethany, Okla. Purpose of meeting was to discuss Soviet Yak-40 commuter aircraft. NR was considering purchase of Yak-40s for U.S. distribution. (AP, W Post, 10/28/72, A7)
Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt retired from Air Force and received Air Force Distinguished Service Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster during ceremony at Bolling Air Force Base, D.C. McDivitt, who held rank of brigadier general, had announced retirement from NASA effective Sept. 1 [see June 7]. (Boldt, W Post, 9/1/72, Cl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload, was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instrumentation performance was not satisfactory. Radar beam malfunctioned at liftoff, telemetry signal was lost after 128 sec, 2nd stage apparently failed to ignite, and payload was not recovered. Launch was second of two; first had been Aug. 4. (nasa Rpt srl) August 6:	Erts 1 return-beam-vidicon (rbv) camera system was shut down after unexpected power surge, rbv system was second experiment to be shut down because of power surge; first had been No. 2 tape recorder Aug. 3. Although both systems could be operated, shutdowns were necessary to determine whether operation would damage experiments and to identify exact cause of problem. Erts 1 (launched July 23) was providing excellent images from multispectral scanner (mss) system and No. 1 tape recorder was being used as required, (gsfc Release 16-72)
Plans for jointly owned communications satellite system were announced by Communications Satellite Corp. and MCI—Lockheed Satellite Corp., formed by Microwave Communications, Inc., and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. ComSatCorp had conditioned agreement on Federal Communications Commission permission to its entry into long-term contract with American Telephone & Telegraph Corp. ComSatCorp would then cancel its application for separate, multipurpose satellite system and joint MCl-Lockheed Corp. Each of the three companies would own part of system, with each member having less than 50% ownership. (W Star & News, 9/7/72, C8)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on July 26 award of space shuttle contract to North American Rockwell Corp.: Argument over shuttle economics continued but “decision has already been made, as a practical matter, in favor of the shuttle. That is good news for the California economy in general, and aerospace workers in particular. But, more than that, it signals the country’s decision to continue the exploration of space.” (LA Times, 7/28/72)
NASA launched four-stage Trailblazer II reentry vehicle from Wallops Station to test chemical-injection method of eliminating radio blackout during reentry. Vehicle, launched for Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 34-kg (75-lb) payload to 322-km (200-mi) altitude over Atlantic. Payload injected chemical into plasma surrounding vehicle during reentry and measured effectiveness of injection in eliminating blackout. Objective of AFCRL Trailblazer II program was to study techniques for improving transmission and reception of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. (WS Release 72-8)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
X-24B experimental lifting body was delivered to Air Force and NASA by builder, Martin Marietta Corp., during ceremonies at Littleton, Colo. Lifting body could be used in joint NASA—Air Force research program at Flight Research Center and at Air Force System Command’s Air Force Flight Test Center to test its handling qualities for conventional runway approach and landing and for extended nearearth flight. About 30 flights were planned in program starting April 1973. X-24B would be flown to maximum speed of mach 1.5 to obtain performance data from 1450 km per hr (900 mph) down to landing speed. Lifting body arrived at FRC Oct. 22. (frc pao; UPl, W Post, 10/13/72; asfc Newsreview, 11/72, 3)
Apollo 17 launch date postmarks would be available from Kennedy Space Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, Washington Sunday Star & Daily News reported. Deadline for obtaining splashdown postmarks from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga had passed. Titusville, Fla., Post Office would accept covers to be postmarked at KSC for 18-hr period beginning 8 am Dec. 6. (Fairies, W Star & News, 12/3/72)
