Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, received the gold medal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers at its annual winter meeting honors assembly in Houston. Faget had been responsible for design and testing of the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft and the Skylab space station, as well as of the Space Shuttle scheduled for flight in the late 1970s. Previous JSC recipients of the ASME gold medal had been JSC Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., in 1973 and former JSC Director Robert R. Gilruth in 1970. (JSC Release 75—98)
NASA launched Cos-B scientific satellite for the European Space Agency at 3:48 pm PDT from Western Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Launch had been delayed for 2 days because a telemetry aircraft was grounded with hydraulic-valve failure. The satellite entered the planned highly elliptical polar orbit with a 99 886-km apogee, 344-km perigee, 36.7-hr period, and 90.13° inclination. NASA’s objective for the launch was to place Cos-B into a highly elliptical near-polar orbit with sufficient accuracy to allow the satellite to conduct its planned scientific experiments. Purpose of the Cos-B mission was to study extraterrestrial gamma radiation in the energy range 25 mev to 1 gev in order to establish the intensity of the average gamma-ray flux; examine large-scale anisotropy of the radiation over angular regions corresponding to galactic features; study quasars, x-ray, and radio sources of small angular size in supernova remnants; measure energy spectra of various galactic radiations; and study time variations of radiation from pulsars, x-ray, and radio sources. On 11 August, ground controllers sent low-voltage commands from ESA’s space operations center (ESOC) in West Germany to check out spacecraft and experiment performance. After a second switch-on at high voltage, a series of inflight tests further validated all onboard systems and experiment performance. On 15 Aug. a complete review of spacecraft operational status showed all air and ground systems were operating normally; by 19 Aug., the first data had been returned to earth. Cos-B, first satellite launched for the newly organized ESA, was the eighth developed by ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization [see 30—31 May]. Under the direction of the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) and prime contractor Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, Cos-B had been designed and built by organizations in 7 of the 10 ESA member countries. The single experiment—a 115-kg spark chamber—had been assembled from five primary and two subsidiary experiment units supplied by six institutes in four European countries. After separating from the launch vehicle, Cos-B transmitted data in real time to ground stations of the European Space Tracking Network with central control at the European Space Research Operations Center in West Germany. For NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center had the responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle under the direction of the Office of Space Science. GSFC also had responsibility for limited tracking support. (NASA MOR S-492 -301 -75 -01, 22 July 75, 10 Sept. 75; NASA Release 75—214; Releases 7—19 Aug 75)
Sea Satellite (SEASAT)—a new program, approved in the FY 1975 NASA authorization, to monitor the oceans and provide continuous weather and sea condition reports—was announced by NASA. SEASAT-A, a proof-of-concept mission scheduled for 1978 launch, would carry sensors to measure wave heights, current directions, surface wind directions, and surface temperatures. Objectives of the initial mission were to disseminate these data to users concerned about weather predictions; to route shipping to avoid storms, adverse currents, and ice fields; and to provide coastal disaster warnings. SEASAT—A would also accumulate scientific data on the curvature of the oceans; ocean circulation; transport of mass, heat, and nutrients by surface currents; and the interaction between air and sea. SEASAT would be managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory with Langley Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Center, and JPL each having responsibility for one of the four sensors-off-the-shelf NASA or Air Force spacecraft to which a sensor module would be attached. Existing tracking facilities and support hardware would also be used. Cost of the SEASAT—A mission, as currently planned, was $58.2 million. (NASA Release 75—1)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
Landsat 2, launched 22 Jan. 75, had successfully completed more than 10 mos of orbital operations during which it had acquired more than 53 000 frames of imagery. Nearly 300 000 messages from data-collection platforms had been received, processed, and sent to users; imagery from more than 2600 sample sites for the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) had been processed and shipped to Johnson Space Center. About 62% of domestic investigations and 43% of foreign investigations had been supplied enough Landsat 2 data to meet the major objectives. Primary mission objectives had been declared satisfied, as well as all secondary objectives that were not time-dependent. (MOR E—641—75— 02, 4 Dec 75)
Equipment aboard U.S. reconnaissance satellites could photograph a pack of cigarettes or monitor a radio conversation between foreign pilots from an orbit of 130 km, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported. Satellites could also instantly detect the launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile and determine where it was going. Early reconnaissance satellites were of two types: SAMOS (satellite and missile observation system) satellites carried wide-area cameras to determine ground targets of interest; film was processed on board and imagery radioed to ground. Discoverer satellites from lower orbits used high-resolution cameras for closeups; the satellite ejected its film, which parachuted down for midair recovery by Air Force aircraft. These satellites were replaced, in the 1970s, by the 11 340-kg “Big Bird” spacecraft. The Inquirer reported that technical experts believed that Big Birds carried TV cameras which allowed human monitors to maintain continuous watch on ground; if they saw something of interest, they could order immediate photographs by the satellite’s high-resolution cameras. The experts also believed that Big Bird carried side-looking radar to penetrate cloudcover and equipment sensitive enough to distinguish between old and new grass. Resolution was no longer measured in meters but in centimeters. The Inquirer also reported that other satellites carrying infrared and other detectors were used to monitor missile launches, detect hidden heat sources such as underground powerplants, and spot the warmth of buried missile silos. (Coughlin, P Inq, 18 May 75, 5E)
More than 1000 instrumented platforms—either floating buoys or balloons—were being used to provide information on tropical and polar weather and ocean and ice conditions, NASA announced. The platforms would transmit data from their sites to NASA’s Nimbus 6 meteorological research satellite, launched 12 June 1975, which would record and play back the data on command to ground stations around the world. The stations would then disseminate the information to investigators in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Norway, South Africa, and the U.S. Platforms would be located in such remote areas as the South Pole, Indian Ocean, Africa, Samoa, and the Arctic. The National Center for Atmospheric Research was releasing more than 400 balloons to altitudes up to 14 km from American Samoa, Ghana, and Ascension I. to study the atmosphere in the tropics. About 50 low-level balloons were being released to an altitude of 750 m from the Seychelles island group, just north of the Malagasy Republic, by the Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique in Paris to study the air-sea interface to determine its effect on monsoons in India. About 30 ice buoys were being placed in the Arctic and Antarctic, one only 45 m from the South Pole, as part of a major U.S. government project to understand ice packs, icebergs, and weather patterns near the poles. Scientists from the Norsk Polarinstitut in Norway were deploying four drifting buoys to help chart ice drift in the Greenland area. (NASA Release 75—271)
Viking 1 was successfully launched at 5:22 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range’s Launch Pad 41 on a Titan Ill-Centaur launch vehicle. The launch, first scheduled for 11 Aug., had been postponed until 14 Aug. to replace a faulty thrust-vector control valve on the launch vehicle [see 11 Aug.]. A second delay had occurred when the spacecraft’s internal batteries had discharged to 9 volts, well below safe limits [see 13 Aug.]. The spacecraft, Viking A, had been removed from the launch vehicle and replaced by Viking B. The range safety officer had issued a waiver of standard procedures and permitted removal and installation of the spacecraft without detanking and depressurizing the launch vehicle, thus allowing the launch to be rescheduled for 20 Aug. Viking 1, consisting of a 2360-kg orbiter attached to an 1180-kg lander, was placed in a trajectory to Mars within the designed 3-sigma limits. Nearly 35 min after trajectory insertion, the Centaur stage separated from the spacecraft. The solar panels were deployed and oriented toward the sun, and the biocap—a container used to hermetically seal the lander while in earth’s atmosphere—was jettisoned. On 27 Aug. at 2:30 pm EDT a trajectory-correction maneuver targeted the spacecraft to its Mars orbital insertion point. By 28 Aug. all systems aboard the spacecraft were operating normally and in a cruise mode. Travel time to Mars was estimated at 10 mo, with a possible Mars landing on 4 July 1976, the height of the U.S. Bicentennial. A second spacecraft, Viking B, had been scheduled for a 1 Sept, launch to arrive at Mars in 12 mos. The Viking missions supported NASA’s planetary program goals of exploring the solar system and gaining knowledge of its origin and evolution, and of the origin and evolution of life and of the dynamic processes that shaped man’s terrestrial environment. Specific purpose of the two Viking missions was to increase knowledge of Mars by making observations from Mars orbit and by direct measurements in the atmosphere and on the surface, with particular emphasis on biological, chemical, and environmental data on past or present existence of life on the planet. Viking 1 was targeted to land in the Martian equatorial region, in a very low area resembling the fluvial plain of a dry river bed—an ideal site to search for organic material. Alternate sites for both Viking landers had been selected and there would be some flexibility until insertion into Mars orbit, after which the available band of landing sites would be narrowed by orbital geometry. Once in orbit, the orbiter would survey prospective landing sites; when the decision on where to land had been made, retrorockets would separate the lander from the orbiter and the lander would descend to the surface, sequentially braked by its aeroshell’s drag, by a parachute, and finally by its retrorockets. After landing, the science instrumentation would be activated and exploration would begin; data would be transmitted back to earth by the lander radio or through a radio-relay link with the orbiter. The orbiter’s main body, an octagonal ring 46 cm high with alternating 140- and 51-cm sides, consisted of 16 modular compartments. The entire structure was 10 m across the tips of the extended solar panels and 3.3 m high from the lander attachment points to the launch vehicle. Besides propulsion, navigation and control, communications, power, computer, and data-storage subsystems, the orbiter carried its science instrumentation mounted on a scan platform that could move with 2 degrees of freedom. The three science instruments were twin high-resolution, slow-scan TV cameras; an infrared atmospheric water detector; and a high-resolution infrared thermal mapper for detecting surface-temperature variations. The lander was a six-sided aluminum and titanium box 46.2 cm deep and enclosed top and bottom by cover plates; it measured 3 m wide and 2 m high from the footpads to the top of the S-band antenna. The six sides measured 109 cm and 56 cm alternately, with the three landing legs attached to the three narrower sides. The three retrorockets were mounted at 120° intervals on the lander; generating up to 2838 newtons (638 lbs) thrust, they would be ignited at an altitude of 1220 m to slow the lander’s descent from 222 kph to 9 kph at landing. Four small engines provided attitude control. In addition to subsystems for thermal control, power, and communications, the lander carried six instruments: twin scanning TV cameras, a sophisticated biology laboratory, a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer, a meteorology instrument, and a seismometer. Used with numerous temperature, pressure, and magnetic sensors, the instruments would perform entry, landed, and radio experiments. NASA’s investigation of Mars had begun in 1964 with the launch of Mariner 4. That spacecraft’s flyby on 15 July 1965 had revealed the planet to be moonlike with a dry, barren, cratered surface showing little evidence of wind or water erosion and no magnetic field. The better instrumented Mariners 6 and 7 that flew by the planet during the summer of 1969 reported a chaotic view of jumbled ridges and valleys unlike anything found on the earth or moon. The spacecraft also showed wide featureless expanses where craters had been somehow eroded, suggesting that Mars had been geologically active. Mariner 6 and 7 photographs showed a thin layer of snow—probably carbon dioxide—and instruments measured a thin atmosphere of mostly carbon dioxide. High-quality photographs from Mariner 9, placed in Martian orbit on 13 Nov. 1971, provided evidence of fluid erosion, glacial action, and volcanoes. The Viking missions had continued the Mariner explorations of Mars. Viking was managed by Langley Research Center under overall direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science; LaRC also had management responsibility for the lander system designed and built by Martin Marietta Corp. Jet Propulsion Laboratory designed and built the orbiter system. The Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was the responsibility of Lewis Research Center; LaRC managed launch and flight operations executed by Martin Marietta, Kennedy Space Center, and JPL. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for tracking and data systems, and JPL managed the mission control and computing-center system. (NASA MORs S—815—75—01/02, 1 Aug 75, 28 Aug 75, 16 Sept 75; NASA Release 75—183; LaRC Launch and Mission Operations Status Bulletins Nos 9—11; Viking: Mission to Mars (NASA SP—334); W Post, 18-22 Aug 75; NYT, 18-22 Aug 75)
Boeing Co. scientists were studying a way to cut aircraft fuel consumption as much as 40%, according to the Baltimore Sun. The technique involved cutting many tiny holes in the aircraft wings and applying suction from within. This would control the laminar flow of the airstream, preventing drag-producing turbulence from being created by the change in pressure as the air flows over the wing surface. In the 1960s Northrop Corp. had built the Air Force a plane incorporating the concept but technical problems had discouraged further development. Rising fuel costs and recent improvements in structural materials and manufacturing techniques had sparked new interest in the method. (AP, B Sun, 31 March 75, A7) During March: NASA’s Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974) was the means for coordinating long-distance emergency operations of ships near the Azores Islands during search and rescue tests conducted by Goddard Space Flight Center. The tests evaluated the effectiveness of Ats 6 functioning as a communications relay between a ship in distress and a coordination center thousands of kilometers away. In the tests, a “stricken” ship dropped a buoy equipped with a position-indicating radio beacon into the ocean. Ats 6 picked up the signals and transmitted the ship’s identification and position to a NASA ground station, which relayed them to the Coast Guard’s New York Rescue Coordination Center. The rescue center then sent the information to rescue aircraft and ships. As they neared the area, they could home in on the buoy’s signals. Within 2 hr of the time the buoy was dropped, the ship and the buoy were located. The search and rescue communications tests were part of continuing joint L-band experiments using Ats 6 and conducted by GSFC and the Depts. of Commerce and Transportation, as well as by the European Space Agency and the Canadian Dept, of Communications and Ministry of Transport. (GSFC Goddard News, Oct 75, 3)
NASA announced the development of an improved inorganic paint, a potassium silicate zinc-rich coating with a silicon additive that could provide long-term protection from salt spray, fog, heat, and rapid temperature changes. Produced at Goddard Space Flight Center as an anticorrosion coating for use in the space program, the paint had shown no deterioration after 5300 hr of continuous exposure to a 3% brine spray. The paint had also been applied to a 2-m panel mounted under the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco for further testing. (NASA Release 75-213; Newsweek (int’l ed), 18 Aug 75)
The Air Force had formally entered into an agreement with NASA on development of an experimental hypersonic research aircraft capable of mach 6 flight. The two agencies had agreed after a joint 1974— 75 study that “the combined objective and the national interest” would be best served by a joint hypersonic flight-test program. The agreement provided that the report of the joint study would be the baseline document for program development; that technology development and experimental tests would be completed in 1976 so preliminary design study could begin in FY1977; that personnel from both agencies would participate in all phases to the maximum extent practicable; and that an ad hoc steering committee would be established to prepare a project plan for use in vehicle procurement. (Memo of understanding, 10 Dec 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and New York City mayor Abraham D. Beame met in New York to review NASA-developed safety standards for handling liquefied natural gas. Following a 1973 gas storage tank fire that killed 40 persons, New York officials had asked NASA to use its experience in handling highly volatile rocket fuels to help the city establish a comprehensive risk-management plan to design, construct, and operate natural gas facilities. The plan, developed at Kennedy Space Center and incorporated into New York City Fire Department operating procedures, identified liquid gas risks, controlled the risks through redundant fail-safe techniques, and set up criteria for discussions to eliminate or accept certain risks. Also discussed was the new fiberglass and aluminum breathing system developed at Johnson Space Center and being tested by firefighters in New York, Houston, and Los Angeles. Results to date indicated that the new unit—which was 30% lighter than conventional systems and featured a high-pressure, longer duration air tank and a face mask allowing better vision—was superior to old-style units. The new system was expected to be introduced commercially later in the year. (NASA Release 75—25)
NASA launched Nimbus 6 on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster from the Western Test Range at 1:12 am PDT after a 6-min delay to clear a ship from the jettison trajectory of the Delta’s solid rockets. The spacecraft entered sun-synchronous polar orbit with a 1103-km apogee, 1094-km perigee, 107-min period, and 99.96° inclination. Separation of the spacecraft from the launch vehicle was normal, at 59 min into the flight. The solar panels were deployed and the attitude-control system quickly acquired earth. A wheel control provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of the power system, telemetry, command links, and tape recorder was completed on the first day of operation. At 7 hr after launch, a cryogenic vent valve associated with the limb-radiance inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically actuated as planned. This caused unexpected high torques and excessive control-gas usage. Nimbus 6 was put into a safe wideband gravity-gradient mode to conserve gas, and an investigation was begun to find the cause of the problem and determine possible remedies. By 24 June the 9 experiments and all spacecraft systems had been checked out and all instrumentation, except for 2 tape recorders, was working normally. The primary objective of the Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) by refining and extending the capability of vertically sounding the temperature and moisture of the atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolution and interference effects of clouds. GARP, a cooperative worldwide weather program, was established to improve understanding of meteorological atmospheric processes in the tropics and to improve observation and computing systems for weather prediction and analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environmental conditions such as sea ice and rainfall and would measure the earth’s radiation budget with a precision never before attained. Secondary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the ability to track and relay data from a low-altitude polar-orbiting spacecraft using a geosynchronous satellite as a communications relay. Ats 6, the Applications Technology Satellite launched on 30 May 1974, would be the relay comsat. A data-collection, processing, and relay-to-earth system was also on board to collect data from approximately 300 balloon-borne platforms, designed to float at an altitude of 20 km, and a large number of earth- and sea-based data platforms. Nimbus 6, unlike previous spacecraft, could receive and process up to eight incoming signals at a time. The satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements of atmospheric parameters to significantly higher altitudes than had previously been possible: the tracking and data-relay (T&DR) experiment; a high-resolution temperature sounder (HIRS) and a scanning microwave spectrometer (SCAMS) to take temperature soundings in the atmosphere outside the tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion and reference level experiment (TWERLE) to provide data on tropical areas; a limb-radiance inversion radiometer (LRIR) and a pressure-modulated radiometer (PMR) to provide high-altitude temperature soundings; an earth radiation budget (ERR) experiment to establish the earth’s atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning microwave radiometer (ESMR) to map the liquid-water content of the clouds, ocean rainfall,, and distribution and variation of sea-ice cover; and a temperature/humidity infrared radiometer (THIR) to provide data on cloud cover, ground temperatures, and water-vapor distribution. Nimbus 6 was next to last in a planned series of seven experimental meteorological satellites. Nimbus 1 (launched 28 Aug. 1964) and Nimbus 2 (launched 15 May 1966) achieved all their objectives. Launch of the third Nimbus, on 19 May 1968, failed when the launch vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 successfully functioned as Nimbus 3. Nimbus 4 and 5 (launched 8 April 1970 and 10 Dec. 1972) had both completed all mission objectives and were still operating. General Electric Co. was the prime contractor responsible for Nimbus 6 integration and test, stabilization control, control-subsystem integration, and spacecraft structures and antennas. Seven U.S. and two British companies, in addition to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provided the nine instruments. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the Nimbus program under the direction of the NASA Office of Applications and was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs 21 May 74,12 June 75, 24 June 75; NASA Release 75-145)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
The Univ. of Chile would build and operate a ground station to receive earth-resources data directly from NASA’s Landsatsl and 2 spacecraft launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975, NASA announced. A memorandum of understanding between NASA and the university provided for Chile’s use of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network station at Santiago until the ground station becomes operational. The station would aid South American investigators conducting research in cooperation with NASA and the United Nations. The Univ. of Chile station would be the tenth Landsat station worldwide. Three stations were located in the U.S. Brazil, Canada, and Italy each had stations in operation, and Iran and Zaire were constructing facilities for data acquisition. In addition, Canada was planning a second station. The Univ. of Chile station would be able to acquire data directly from the satellite as it passed over Bolivia, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, and sections of Peru and Brazil. (NASA Release 75-265)
Vanguard 1, oldest satellite still in orbit, completed its 17th year in space. The 1.5-kg 16.5-cm solar-powered spacecraft, which had revealed that the earth was slightly pear-shaped, had circled the earth more than 67 000 times since its launch in 1958. The satellite, fourth to orbit earth following two Soviet sputniks and Explorer 1, was one of 3304 man-made objects tracked by the North American Air Defense Command. (A&A 1915-1960; A&A 1968; Miles, LA Times, 18 March 75)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
NASA announced the selection of Goodyear Aerospace Corp. for negotiations leading to a $1 000 000 contract to provide a special-purpose processor to support the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) at Johnson Space Center. (JSC Release 75—17)
Lee R. Scherer assumed the duties of Director of Kennedy Space Center, succeeding Dr. Kurt H. Debus, who retired in October 1974. Scherer had been Flight Research Center Director since 1971 and, before that, Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and manager of the Lunar Orbiter program at NASA Hq. (KSC Release 17—75)
McDonnell Douglas Corp., working under contract to NASA, began flight and static tests of the refanned engine to demonstrate NASA-developed noise-reduction techniques. More than 2 yr of work at Lewis Research Center; Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp.; Boeing Co.; United Air Lines, Inc.; and American Airlines, Inc., had been spent in modifying a JT8D engine to reduce irritating high-frequency noise. When installed on the McDonnell DC—9, the new engine was expected to reduce by 60% the ground area exposed to excessive noise levels. Similar results were expected with the engine instaUed on Boeing’s 727 and 737 aircraft. During the initial test phase, McDonnell Douglas would fly for 90 hr a DC—9 outfitted with the modified engine, to evaluate noise characteristics and flight performance. The second phase of testing would begin in mid-January when Boeing would flight-test it in a 727. (NASA Release 75—4; LeRC Release 75—2)
The Air Force System Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was developing a technique to study, under flight conditions, the physical behavior of the spray-on insulating material proposed for the Space Shuttle, AFSC announced. Using procedures similar to those used in analyzing aerial photographs, a series of reference lines was projected onto the original surface and photographed before wind-tunnel testing. The same pattern was then projected onto the surface during the testing. The shift in the apparent position of the projected lines as the surface eroded from the position shown on the original photograph allowed analysis of the behavior of the materials. (AFSC Release OIP 157.75) 24 —25 June: At its first meeting, the council of the European Space Agency (ESA) elected Wolfgang Finke (West Germany) as chairman for 1 yr. General Luis de Azcarraga (Spain) and Jan Stiernstedt (Sweden) were elected vice chairmen. (ESA Release, 27 June 75)
A fleet satellite communications-system simulator developed for the Air Force by TRW Systems Group had been delivered for testing, Air Force Systems Command announced. The simulator would be a low-cost means of testing compatibility between FLTSATC'OM—an operational near-global satellite communications system for Air Force and Navy Communications—and preproduction terminals for the Air Force Satellite Communications (AFSATCOM) system, which provided reliable worldwide satellite communications for command and control of all DOD forces. The simulator contained all the communications channels that the actual satellites would have, but used cheaper off-the-shelf components instead of high-reliability electronic parts. (AFSC Release OIP 022.75)
Private industry and government agencies in the U.S. and in Europe were investing money in designs and prototypes of giant dirigibles that could carry cargo and passengers more cheaply than conventional aircraft, Newsweek reported. In May a 9-m-wide helium-filled prototype dirigible named Skyship, shaped like a flying saucer, had been flight-tested at a Royal Air Force station in England; a flight model was expected to go into commercial operation within 3 yr. Shell Oil Co. had spent more than $1 million studying the possibility of developing dirigibles to transport natural gas, Newsweek said. The U.S. Air Force was investigating dirigibles as a means of ferrying missiles from silo to silo, and the Navy was studying their ability to track submarines. A reason for the resurgence of interest in lighter-than-air craft was the energy crisis. Airships require hardly any fuel to get aloft and use very little for propulsion, and they also produce less noise and less atmospheric pollution. New designs for dirigibles included the substitution of inert helium for highly flammable hydrogen as the lifting gas, and the replacement of the familiar cigar shape with other configurations to do away with the problem of bistability near the ground. (Newsweek, 2 June 75)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Explorer 49—Radio Astronomy Explorer B, launched 10 June 1973 into lunar orbit to measure galactic and solar radio noise at frequencies below ionospheric cutoffs and beyond terrestrial background interference by using the moon for o'ccultation, focusing, or aperture blocking for increased resolution and discrimination—had completed nearly 2 yr of successful operation and was adjudged successful. Explorer 49's lunar orbit, away from the noisy environment of earth, had increased the effectiveness of the instrumentation. The spacecraft had been able to detect very weak solar-noise bursts up to 13 mhz and as low as 25 khz. Its predecessor, Explorer 38—Radio Astronomy Explorer A, launched 4 July 1968—had been able to observe relatively intense solar-noise bursts only in the 200 khz to 9 mhz range because of its orbit within the earth’s magnetosphere. Explorer 49 also was able to observe and follow solar bursts out of the ecliptic plane. Data from Explorer 49 had verified two major magneto spheric noise regions, one on the morning side of the earth and the other on the evening side. In addition, spacecraft data showed that intense noise occurred in the 8 to 12 pm time zone with less intense noise in midmoming. The intense late-evening noise was generated within 10 000 to 12 000 km of the earth’s surface, and the dayside emission seemed to come from an altitude of less than 4000 km. (NASA MOR, 3 June 75) 3- 6 June: A Kennedy Space Center team tested a parachute system designed to lower an instrumented probe through the dense atmosphere of Venus to its surface. The tests—made for Ames Research Center in preparation for a Pioneer mission to Venus in 1978—were conducted in KSC’s Vehicle Assembly Building, an ideal wind-free testing facility. Full-scale 3.7-m parachutes with simulated pressure vessels weighing 204 kg were dropped 13 times from heights of up to 137 m to the floor of the VAB with impact cushioned by a honeycomb cardboard impact arrester. The performance of the parachute system was monitored photographically during the drop to determine the aerodynamic trim characteristics of the parachute. The 1978 Pioneer—Venus.mission would include the launch of two separate spacecraft toward Venus. The first would orbit the planet collecting data for about 250 days; the second would carry one large probe, which would use the parachute to descend to the surface, and three small probes decelerated by aerodynamic drag only. The parachute on the largest probe would be used to separate an instrumentbearing pressure vessel and stabilize it for a series of critical scientific measurements as it passed through the Venusian cloud layer. None of the probes was designed to communicate with earth after impact. (KSC Release 98 — 75; Lockyer, Public Affairs Office, interview, 6 Oct 75) FY 1976 NASA Budget Authorization Congressional Adjustments Program Budget Request House Changes Senate Chauges Conference Changes Total Conference Recommendation Research & Development Space Shuttle 1206.0 0 0 0 1206.0 Space Flight Operations 207.1 -4.0 -4.0 -4.0 203.1 Advanced Missions 1.5 + 1.5 -1.5 +0.5 2.0 Physics & Astronomy 155.8 + 1.0 +7.0 +7.0 162.8 Lunar & Planetary 259.9 -1.0 0 0 259.9 Launch Vehicle 166.9 0 0 0 166.9 Space Applications 175.0 +6.5 +8.9 +6.5 181.5 Aeronautical R&D 175.4 0 0 0 175.4 Space & Nuclear R&D 74.9 +2.0 0 0 74.9 Energy Technology 5.9 0 0 0 5.9 Tracking & Data 243.0 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 240.8 Technology Utilization 7.0 +2.0 0 +1.0 8.0 R&D Totals 2678.4 +5.8 +8.2 +8.8 2687.2 Research and Program Management Basic Submission* 776.0 0 0 0 776.0 R&PM Totals* 776.0 0 0 0 776.0 Construction of Facilities Modification of 11- by 2.7 0 0 0 2.7 11-ft Transonic Tunnel (ARC) Modification of 40- by 0 +12.5 0 +12.5 12.5 80-ft Transonic Tunnel Addition to Lunar 2.5 -2.5 -2.5 -2.5 0 Sample Facility (JSC) Addition to Composite 1.9 0 0 0 1.9 Model & Metal Shop (LaRC) Construction of Transonic 0 +27.5 0 0 0 Tunnel (LaRC) Space Shuttle Facilities 47.2 -0.9 0 0 47.2 Rehabilitation of 16.0 0 0 0 16.0 Minor Construction 5.0 0 0 0 5.0 Facility Planning & 9.3 +4.5 0 +4.5 13.8 Design — — ■—* — C of F Totals 84.6 +41.1 -2.5 +14.5 99.1 “Grand Totals* 3539.0 +46.9 +5.7 +23.3 3562.3
NASA awarded a $5.5 million cost-reimbursable contract to the Univ. of . Hawaii for construction of an infrared telescope facility on the summit of Mauna Kea, an extinct volcano on Hawaii Island. The contract covered the second part of a $6-million two-phase project covering design, construction, installation, and assembly of the facility. The 3-m infrared telescope, scheduled for 1977 completion, would be the world’s largest. The Univ. of Hawaii would operate it in support of NASA’s planetary exploration programs, particularly the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn. The facility would provide a national capability of observing interstellar dust, exploding galaxies, and galactic nuclei in the middle and far infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. (NASA Release 75— 209)
The Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory and NASA Lewis Research Center had begun a joint research program to determine the feasibility of using synthetic fuels to power military and commercial jet aircraft, the Air Force Systems Command announced. As part of the 10-yr $ 8-million study, Exxon Corp. had been awarded a contract to study the refining processes like hydrogenation required to produce fuels from coal and oil-shale synthetic crudes, and to compare the chemical and physical properties of these fuels with those of petroleum derivatives. Costs of processing the synthetics would depend on definition of engine and fuel-system needs. The decision to begin research on synthetic fuels was part of an Air Force conservation effort. U.S. aircraft, military and commercial, accounted for 8% of U.S. petroleum consumption; fuel costs for military jets alone had more than tripled in the previous 18 mo. The cost of fueling a C — 5 cargo aircraft had risen from $6780 in April 1973 to $22 400 in April 1975. (AFSC Release OIP 070.75)
A new satellite-fed printing plant that would speed delivery of the Wall Street Journal to its readers in the southeastern United States had been introduced to Orlando, Fla., area business leaders and dedicated by the Journal’s publishers, Dow Jones and Co. The $2-million plant could print 70 000 copies of the newspaper per hour, and would serve readers in Ga. and Fla. at first, with distribution into five other southeastern states coming later. The paper would be printed in Orlando on the date of publication in Chicopee, Mass., by the use of Westar 1 facilities provided by American Satellite Corp. Fullsize facsimiles of pages would be put under a high-intensity scanner that would convert the images to electronic impulses beamed to Westar 1. The satellite would relay the impulses to the Orlando plant where they would be received on page-size photo film; sending and receipt of data for a full page had been clocked at 3.5 min. The film would be used to make photolithographic plates for the Orlando press. The Orlando plant would be the tenth regional printing plant for the Journal. The eastern edition previously delivered to 60 000 subscribers in Fla. and Ga. had been airmailed from Silver Spring, Md., arriving a day late. (Orlando Sentinel-Star, 20 Nov 75, 20A)
An Italian launch crew launched Explorer 53 (SAS—C) Small Astronomy Satellite for NASA from San Marco launch platform, located in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Kenya, at 6:45 pm EDT (1:45 am local time 8 May) on a Scout launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered near-equatorial orbit with a 523.35-km apogee, 502.18-km perigee, 94.88-min period, and 2.995° inclination. Primary objectives of the Explorer 53 mission were to measure the x-ray emission of discrete extragalactic sources, to monitor the intensity and spectra of galactic x-ray sources from 1.0 kev to 50 kev, and to monitor the x-ray intensity of the star Sco X— 1. During a preliminary in-orbit checkout, controllers noticed that a stuck nutation damper was causing the spacecraft nutation, or coning, angle to be 4° rather than the planned 0.2°. Energizing the z-axis coil reduced the coning angle to 0.5°. Although the damper could not be freed despite repeated attempts, the nutation could be kept within reasonable limits so that scientific objectives could be achieved. A committee would evaluate the problem. Other spacecraft anomalies included intermittent operation of the spinning digital solar-aspect detector, and irregular and noisy operation of the spacecraft star sensor. Neither problem was expected to seriously degrade the mission. The 195-kg satellite was designed to extend and complement the capabilities of Explorer 42 (Uhuru, launched 12 Dec. 1970 as the first satellite dedicated entirely to the study of x-ray sources in space) and Explorer 48 (launched 16 Nov. 1970 to study galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation). Explorer 53, with its broad spectral range, provided higher energy resolution than previous satellites and permitted a study of physical conditions near an x-ray source. The spacecraft’s quasi-three-axis stabilization system allowed much longer continuous observation of sources. Data from Explorer 53 would provide the basis for the more detailed x-ray studies to be made by High Energy Astronomy Observatories A and B scheduled for launch in 1977 and 1978. The experiment aboard Explorer 53 was designed and built by the Center for Space Research of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The spacecraft control section was designed by the Applied Physics Laboratory of the Johns Hopkins Univ. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program for the Office of Space Science. Langley Research Center was responsible for the Scout launch vehicle. Italy was responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the Scout on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASAMORs 6 May 75, 15 May 75; NASA Releases 75—101, 75—121)
Walter Cronkite, U.S. broadcaster who had covered the space program from its beginnings to date, reminisced about the space program during an interview with Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News. Cronkite recalled that news coverage in the early 1950s was done from the beach with very little official information. “All we had were tips from engineers and others we met in bars.” By Alan B. Shepard’s 5 May 1961 launch, things had improved only slightly; coverage took place from the back of a station wagon with a microphone, monitor, and very little incoming information. Later launches had seen drastic changes. “We’ve got so much information today that it’s the traffic cops’ job to take care of the flow, whereas before it was more imagination and fill-in-the-blanks.” Asked if he would be interested in riding aboard the Space Shuttle, Cronkite said, “I think newsmen will go on the Shuttle. . . . Just as soon as we prove out the equipment. ... I would guess that somehow or other we’re going to see that a pool man gets aboard, and I hope it’s Regarding the apparent apathy of the American public toward the space program, Cronkite stated that it would be difficult in this age to sustain the “high intensity of feeling about the space program, the race to the moon, [and] landing on the moon. ... We don’t have an attention span in the modern world, with so much going on, that permits us to remain at that high level of excitement.” (Spaceport News, 24 July 75, 6)
A 25-member delegation from the Soviet Union, headed by Professor K. D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R. technical director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July, had begun work at the Johnson Space Center on a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. report on the mission. Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, who had been U.S.S.R. flight director for ASTP, was a member of the delegation, which had been scheduled to remain at JSC until November 21. Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, who had been U.S. technical director for ASTP, headed the NASA group working with the Soviet specialists. (JSC Release 75— 95)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1 279 000 contract to George A. Fuller Co., a division of Northrop Corp. of Chicago, for fabrication and erection of a structure for mating and demating the Space Shuttle Orbiter and its Boeing 747 carrier aircraft at NASA’s Flight Research Center in Calif. KSC had been given responsibility for Space Shuttle launch operations and for Orbiter ground operations and support equipment both at KSC in Fla. and at FRC, which was to be Orbiter landing site for the first four missions. The contractor was to complete the structure—including hoist system, access platforms, and utility systems—within 328 days after notice to proceed. (KSC Release 290-75)
National Science Foundation held in Chicago the first of 7 meetings scheduled nationwide to obtain public views on a Federal program for greater public involvement in science policy issues. Subsequent meetings would be held during Dec. in Atlanta, Dallas, Denver, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., and Boston. Oral and written statements presented at the meetings would be included in an NSF report to Congress. (SBD, 3 Dec 75, 173)
NASA had decided to eliminate all expendable launch vehicles except Scout after the Space Shuttle became operational, NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yardley told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, but the Air Force wanted to play it safe. AF officials wanted extra vehicles on hand after Shuttle in case problems developed, he said. NASA had planned about 20 launches of expendable vehicles a year through 1980—4 Scouts, 10 Deltas, 3 or 4 Atlas-Centaurs, and 1 or 2 Titan-Centaurs—with 17 launches in FY 1977 and 27 in FY 1978. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 899)
One of the most highly detailed and instrumented models of the Space Shuttle ever constructed had been wind-tunnel-tested at the Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Located throughout the 92-cm model were 835 temperature sensors to measure heat levels of major components at jettison of the two expended solid-propellant boosters. Two other Shuttle tests also had been completed for NASA at AEDC: A smaller model and computer-controlled systems were used to study aerodynamic forces during the separation of the expended solid boosters. During the test the Orbiter and external fuel-tank models were attached to the tunnel supports and a solid booster model was attached to the computer-controlled support. Measurements were recorded with a single booster model at various points below, beside, and behind the Orbiter-tank combination and with the booster and Orbiter-tank at various pitch and yaw angles. In the third test, heating data were obtained on an Orbiter model positioned at a high angle of attack at mach 8. Special paints that changed from a solid to a liquid at specified temperatures were used to record heating histories on the surface of the model, and oilcoating techniques were used to examine airflow. (AFSC Release OIP
The National Science Foundation marked the 25th anniversary of its establishment at a dinner at the Dept, of State in Washington, D.C. Dr. Norman Hackerman, chairman of the National Science Board, presided at the dinner hosted by the 25-member board, the policy-making body of NSF. Among those present were many former board members, including the six charter members appointed by President Truman in 1950, and representatives of the scientific community, industry, and the executive and legislative branches of government. President Ford sent a message saluting NSF: “In the last quarter century the National Science Foundation has become the Nation’s principal agency for the support of basic research and education in all fields of scientific endeavor. The creation of the National Science Foundation represented a culmination of our national understanding of the role of science in our society. In the last two and a half decades, the Foundation has built a prestigious reputation for sound scientific exploration to improve the quality of life for all.” Dr. H. Guyford Stever, NSF Director, announced plans to establish an Alan T. Waterman Award for research and advanced study in the mathematical, physical, medical, biological, engineering, social, and other sciences. Dr. Waterman had been the first NSF Director. (NSF Release PR75—47)
The Air Force had announced operational concepts for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Construction, planned to begin in mid-1978, would cost $50 million less than original estimates through maximum use of existing facilities such as Space Launch Complex No. 6—constructed in the 1960s for the Air Force’s manned orbiting laboratory cancelled in June 1969—and existing roadways and railroad tracks. An “integrate on the pad” concept and modification of surplus Saturn IB rocket transporters to move the Orbiter and external tanks to the launch pad had eliminated the need for a new highway and railroad system. A study coordinated with the Navy showed that the solid-rocket booster that dropped off the main tank into the ocean could be successfully recovered with a minimum of new facilities by using an existing Navy dock and large stationary crane. Operations facility requirements would be programmed in two phases: Phase one, construction of a complete ground-support system, would allow the DOD to operate Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg by December 1982. Phase two called for completion of a second launch pad in late 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 16)
A group of 28 scientists, engineers, sociologists, and economists concluded a 10-wk (16 June— 22 Aug.) NASA— Stanford University study at Ames Research Center by recommending that the U.S. adopt a space colonization program using available technology. The “city in space” envisioned by the study group could be a 1.5-km-wide wheel-shaped habitat for 10 000 persons positioned on the moon’s orbit at a point 385 000 km from both earth and moon. Costing an estimated $100 billion, the 454-million-kg wheel, or torus, would rotate around its hub at 1 rpm to simulate earth’s gravity. The rim would house inhabitants as well as shops, schools, light industry, and closed-loop agriculture; heavy industry could be located outside to take advantage of weightlessness and high vacuum in space. A major commercial activity of the first colony would be to construct solar-power satellites. Placed in geosynchronous orbit above the earth, the satellites would collect and convert sunlight into energy and beam it to earth as low-density microwaves. The space colony would have several advantages that might make it self-supporting: weightlessness for manufacturing and transportation, massive use of lunar minerals, and continuous natural sunlight for increased agricultural productivity. The study group had considered social, cultural, safety, and ecological difficulties of a space colony, but had found “no unsurmountable problems that would prevent humans from living in space.” (NASA Releases 75—229, 75—249; ARC Release 75—41; Dunstan, W Post, 23 Aug 75)
NASA issued a request for proposals from industry on a space-station systems analysis study. The proposals would be due 26 Jan. 1976. Two $700 000 contracts would be issued in April for parallel 18-mo concept studies, one to be managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, the other by Johnson Space Center. Contractors would study low-orbit and synchronous-orbit facilities, to begin module construction in the mid-1980s. The space station would be used as a test facility and construction base to support the manufacture and assembly in space of various kinds of space structures—e.g., generation of electric power by large solar collectors and transmission to earth by microwave antennas. Other uses would be the retrieval and repair of automated spacecraft, or storage and transfer of fuel and other expendables. Elements of the station would be compatible with the Shuttle cargo bay, 18.3 m long by 4.6 m in diameter. (NASA Release 75-310; MSFC Release 75 -262; JSC Release 75 -99)
The Mass. Inst, of Technology Lincoln Laboratory, under contract to the Air Force, was developing an experimental ground electro-optical deep-space surveillance (GEODSS) system to scan nighttime skies for orbiting and geosynchronous satellites. The system was being installed at White Sands Missile Range, first of a proposed five-site GEODSS worldwide surveillance network. The network would augment the Air Force’s Aerospace Defense Command’s spacetrack coverage which maintained a day-by-day count of all satellites and debris circling the earth. GEODSS combined two sophisticated telescopes with electro-optics, a TV camera, and a digital computer, as well as system-related equipment. Mounted at the focal plane of the larger telescope was a TV camera to transmit the signal to the observatory control room for instant screening and analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 14)
Kennedy Space Center had awarded a $265 700 contract to Charter Industries of Raleigh, N.C., for rental of 14 geodesic domes to house displays at a bicentennial exposition of science and technology to be sponsored by the government next summer at the spaceport. KSC would be host for the exposition, which would consist of exhibits from government and industry showing applications of science and technology to improve living conditions during the next 200 years. (NASA Release 75—313)
NASA had awarded a $1 388 498 firm-fixed-price contract to Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to produce a special-purpose processor to augment existing computing capability for NASA’s Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE), Johnson Space Center announced. The contract included design, fabrication, delivery, and installation of the processor and any associated system software. LACIE, a cooperative program shared by U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and NASA, aimed at improving wheat-production forecasts by use of satellite earth-resources data. (JSC Release 75— 20)
A red-tide detection program had been approved by Goddard Space Flight Center and the Florida Department of Natural Resources (FDNR). Caused by an ocean-borne phytoplankton, Gymnodinium breve, “red tide” had left thousands of dead fish rotting on beaches in coastal estuaries. Ocean-color scanners—mounted on Landsat 1 and 2 (launched 23 July 1972 and 22 Jan. 1975) and on NASA’s U-2 research aircraft—could detect subtle color variations in coastal waters, to warn of changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton populations and indicate possible red-tide invasions. Research vessels would verify the findings by on-site sampling. Program managers hoped the data would lead to the development of an early warning system that would allow crews to combat effects of the red tide. (NASA Release 75— 242)
Dale D. Myers, president of Rockwell International Corp.’s North American Aircraft Operations, announced appointment of Bastian Hello as president of Rockwell’s B —1 Bomber Div. Hello, who had been vice president of the division since 1973, was succeeding Robert E. Greer, who was retiring. Before joining the B—1 Div., Hello was vice president and general manager of Rockwell’s Space Div.’s Apollo launch operations organization at Kennedy Space Center. (RI Release LA—2)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had developed a new remote-sensing technique to “see” nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, permitting scientists for the first time to calculate the actual rate at which the nitrogen compounds destroy stratospheric ozone. Much of the work on the ozone cycle had been theoretical, based on computer models and laboratory tests; seasonal variations in the stratosphere at high latitudes, revealed by spectrometers on jet aircraft, had not been predicted by theory, which meant that the computer models had not provided close simulation. The new technique, using a spectrometer to measure the light spectrum and isolate that portion caused by nitrogen dioxides, would permit routine checks on daily, seasonal, and latitudinal variations in the content of the stratosphere. The method would be applied by small automated instruments run by minicomputers at NOAA stations in Alaska, Samoa, Hawaii, and the South Pole, and at the Air Force base in Greenland. (NOAA Release 75—220)
Inflation and procurement reforms had hiked NASA’s charge for a Delta launch by about 20% for the average customer, Aerospace Daily said. Prospective users 2 yr ago had been quoted less than $10 million per launch; current cost had risen to $11—12 million, and those wanting 1978 launches had been quoted $13—14 million. The Delta had been the NASA launcher most in demand because of its size and price, most widely applicable among government and commercial users; the Kennedy Space Center, capable of one launch every 5 wk, had been booked solid for the foreseeable future. NASA had been renegotiating payment schedules, but no launch schedules had been changed except for technical reasons not related to cost. (Aero Daily, 4 Nov 75, 11) _
Marshall Space Flight Center was seeking industry proposals for procurement of parallel definition studies of the atmospheric, magnetospheric, and plasmas in space (AMPS) payload, a reusable research facility to be integrated with Spacelab. The proposed 12-mo studies were to define an overall AMPS program with special emphasis on ground- and flight-support systems and subsystems, systems engineering and integration, and ground/orbital operations with the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. AMPS, a single laboratory system flown with the Space Shuttle, would perform experiments and observations in atmospheric science, magnetospheric physics, and plasma physics. (MSFC Release 75—172) 4—6 August: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at its 1975 aircraft systems and technology meeting in Los Angeles, Calif., presented the following aerospace awards. Award Recipient (affiliation) Purpose Aircraft Design Walter E. Fellers (Northrop Corp.) For 30 yr of outstanding achievement in design and development of fighter aircraft to meet rapidly changing requirements Octave Chanute Alan L. Bean Jack R. Lousma Dr. Owen K. Garriott (NASA Skylab 3 astronauts) For outstanding contributions to manned space flight and scientific research. Using the most sophisticated instruments ever flown in space, crew performed scores of scientific experiments and observations vastly expanding man’s knowledge and enhancing quality of life on earth 38th Annual Wright Brothers Lecture Henri Ziegler (Airbus, France) Topic: International Cooperation in Aerospace Projects: cooperation between European industries and between Europe and United States (AIAA Release, 22 July 75)
Three high-speed F—104G aircraft formerly belonging to the German Air Force arrived at Flight Research Center to be used for research purposes. FRC had been flying F—104As, an early version of the same aircraft, but replacement parts were becoming scarce. Parts for the F—104G would be available through the 1980s. The three aircraft left Jever Air Force Base in West Germany on 27 June and made stops in Scotland, Iceland, Greenland, and Labrador before arriving at FRC. (X-Press, 18 July 75, 4)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
Design and fabrication of the first Space Shuttle Orbiter was progressing well, with all major structural elements—forward fuselage, tail, wings, mid fuselage—scheduled for final assembly in mid-1975, NASA Deputy Director of the Space Shuttle LeRoy E. Day told the Canadian Science Writers Association in Toronto, Canada. The main rocket engine, the most difficult development item, was being built on a 10-yr technology base in which government and industry had invested nearly $100 million. During 1974, initial component engine firings had been made, and firings of the first integrated subsystems test bed engine were scheduled for July. The emphasis for the expendable external tank had been on simplified low-cost production. An inexpensive spray-on insulation had been developed to protect the aluminum skin from excessive temperatures during ascent. ' In summary, NASA and its contractors were making steady progress, holding within cost and schedule commitments. The first Orbiter would be rolled out in 1976, with its first captive flight on the back of the Boeing 747 aircraft scheduled for the second quarter of 1977. The first approach and landing tests, in 1977, would be made by separating the Orbiter from the 747 at about 8500 m, permitting the Orbiter to glide down and land on the runway at Edwards Air Force Base. The second Orbiter would be used for the first orbital flight in 1979, with six developmental flights scheduled before the Space Shuttle became operational in 1980. (Transcript)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Limitations imposed by the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) agreements had made the development of the B-l bomber essential, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger as telling Rep. Richard Bolling in an interview. Because the U.S. would be limited in megaton strike capability and approximately 60% of U.S. megatonnage was carried by bombers, it was essential to maintain a significant and highly effective bomber force. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 2)
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)
Final joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. simulations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crews and flight controllers began at Johnson Space Center and at the Moscow Mission Control Center at 6:30 am CDT. The simulations picked up the count at 47 hrs 10 min into the mission and continued for 56 hrs, covering the joint portion of the mission including rendezvous, docking, crew transfers and joint activities, and undocking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. U.S. and Soviet crewmen participated in simulators in their respective countries while both flight-control centers were fully staffed. The U.S. crew would also participate in the countdown demonstration test at Kennedy Space Center on 3 July. (JSC Release 75—61; Ezell eta/., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Preparations continued at Kennedy Space Center for the launch of two Viking spacecraft to Mars. Lander 1 was mated with its Orbiter on 8 March to test compatibility. The Lander and Orbiter were mated with the Centaur launch vehicle shroud and moved to Launch Complex 41 on 27 March to undergo a flight-events demonstration, Orbiter and Lander precountdown tests, and terminal countdown demonstration with the complete vehicle. During a complete 18-hr plugs-out test of Lander 2 on 13 March, data were transmitted to Jet Propulsion Laboratory to provide training for the Viking flight-control team. (KSC Spaceport News, 6 March 75, 6; 20 March 75, 5) April 1975
The Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported that the Air Force had awarded an estimated $17 649 042 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Aircraft Co. for the development, manufacture, and testing of a wide-body cargo aircraft fuselage segment using adhesive bonding instead of conventional riveting of the primary structures. Either the YC—14 or the YC—15, advanced medium-short-takeoff-and-landing transport prototypes, would be used as the engineering baseline against which the technology could be developed and evaluated. The contract was AFSC’s primary adhesively bonded structure (PABST) portion of the advanced metallic structures (AMS) program to improve structured integrity and durability of future aircraft while minimizing weight and costs of acquisition and maintenance. (AFSC Newsreview, May 75, 4)
Employees of McDonnell Douglas Corp. ratified a new contract by a 4609 to 2796 vote, ending a 13-wk strike [see 10 Feb.]. The contract agreement called for a 31% across-the-board wage increase during the first year and 3% boosts during the second and third years. The strike of 19 000 McDonnell aerospace workers, including 200 at Kennedy Space Center, had delayed all NASA’s scheduled Thor-Delta launches. (IF Post, 12 May 75, A16)
Soviet cosmonauts Valery Kubasov and Gen. Aleksey Leonov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin a 2-wk tour of the U.S. by visiting President Ford at the White House and touring the capital. The American crew of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and their wives would accompany the cosmonauts on the tour, which would also visit Chicago, Omaha, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Reno, Lake Tahoe, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Nashville, and New York City. The cosmonauts were accompanied by their wives and three of their children, as well ' as the director of cosmonaut training, Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, plus a support staff and Soviet journalists. The Apollo-Soyuz crews had completed a 2-wk tour of the Soviet Union 4 Oct. (NASA Release 75-276; SBD, 14 Oct 75, 216)
Jackson M. Balch, director of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)—formerly the Mississippi Test Facility—announced plans tO'retire. As bead of the test facility for 10 yrs, Balch managed testing of Saturn V rockets for both the Apollo and Skylab programs. (NASA anno, 22 July 75) 22 —23 July: Nearly 200 NASA managers, engineers, and scientists— headed by Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, and Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.—met at Kennedy Space Center for the Viking launch-readiness review. Those attending—including Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science—heard status reports on the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and launch and tracking preparations. Everything was “in excellent shape” for the 11 Aug. launch of the nation’s first mission to land unmanned spacecraft on Mars, said Martin. “We still have three weeks of work ahead, but time to do it in an orderly fashion, and no significant open items.” Viking—A would be mated with the Titan— Centaur launch vehicle on 28 July, followed by specialized tests, including an operational readiness test 6 Aug. during which the entire NASA and contractor Viking team would go through the countdown and several hours of simulated flight. Problems discussed during the review included the x-band radio on the Viking—B Orb iter in which a defective coaxial cable had been replaced. A leak discovered in the Viking—A gas chromatograph mass spectrometer after sterilization was found to be so small— 0.000864 cubic centimeters per day—that it would not affect the mission. (NASA Releases 75—210, 75—216; KSC Release 156—75)
Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug. on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Astronaut Donald K. Slayton revealed no evidence of malignancy, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. During the 2.5-hr surgery, doctors at the Texas Medical Center removed a triangular wedge that included the 4-mm nodule detected during postflight x-rays [see 20 Aug.] plus a small amount of normal surrounding tissue. Adjacent lymph nodes were biopsied and found normal; doctors found no signs of any other lesions. Slayton would remain in the hospital for 7 to 10 more days. (JSC Roundup, 29 Aug. 75,1)
Goddard Space Flight Center had awarded a $45.8-million contract to RCA Astro-Electronics Division for design and production of eight third-generation Tiros-N spacecraft, the company announced. Scheduled for launch in 1978, the 635-kg spacecraft would forecast weather 2 days in advance with accuracy equal to that of present 1-day predictions. RCA earlier had received a $16.6 million NASA contract for long lead-time items for the Tiros-N series, bringing the total cost of the satellites to $62.4 million. (SBD, 21 Oct 75, 259)
NASA announced the selection of Sperry Rand Corp. for the negotiation of a fixed-price $8-million contract for a Space Shuttle mission-simulator computer complex at Johnson Space Center. Sperry would design, develop, fabricate, test, and deliver a computing complex and all associated hardware for the Shuttle mission simulator. (JSC Release 75—37)
Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite arrived at its new operating station at 35° east longitude over equatorial East Africa where it would relay communications from the docked Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft during the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Upon completion of ASTP, Ats 6 would be used by India to transmit educational TV programs to several thousand remote villages. The satellite had experienced a malfunction in a drive circuit of one of the three momentum wheels used to control spacecraft attitude. A group of hydrazine gas thrusters was being used as a backup system for stabilization while ground controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center were analyzing the problem and developing remedies. (NASA Release 75 — 194)
The earth’s ozone layer, a shield of heavy molecules of oxygen that prevents some harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth’s surface, might be in less danger from aerosol sprays than from the increasing worldwide use of chemical fertilizers. Michael B. McElroy, professor of atmospheric sciences at Harvard University, had predicted that a projected increase in the use of nitrogen fertilizers over the next 25 yr could reduce the ozone layer 20 to 25%. Theoretically, each 1% reduction in the ozone layer could lead to thousands—as many as 15 000—additional cases of skin cancer in the U.S. alone. All life needs nitrogen to make proteins, McElroy pointed out. The earth’s atmosphere would have lost all its nitrogen long ago except for the process by which bacteria “denitrify” decayed matter in the soil; most nitrogen returned to the atmosphere in the same inert pure form in which it was taken and converted to use by earth’s plant life, which then formed a source of nitrogen for other plants and animals; however, some nitrogen returned in a form that acted as a catalyst to destroy ozone. Man had recently been extracting nitrogen from the air and putting it into plant life in the form of fertilizer on a scale rivaling nature; by the year 2000, said McElroy, the amount of nitrogen extracted from the air would be double that removed by natural causes. With a sharp increase in the natural denitrification process, more nitrogen catalysts destructive to ozone would be released. Serious effects should be evident within the next 40 yr, McElroy said. Although aerosol sprays could be dispensed with, nitrogen fertilizers were a necessity for increased world food production. Increased incidence of skin cancer concerned light-skinned humans, who were unlikely to get much sympathy from darker-skinned inhabitants of areas where the fertilizers—and increased food production—are urgently needed. (WSJ, 13 Nov 75, 13)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a 10-mo $30 000 contract to the Univ. of Miami for preliminary design of a laser system capable of penetrating water to a depth of 100 m to measure factors affecting water quality. The use of lasers to provide remote sensing of the ocean depths had been proved feasible during a NASA contract awarded to the school in 1974. The system, which would provide continuous information on temperature, salinity, and backscatter turbidity, would be tested first in a laboratory, then from a ship, and finally from an aircraft. (KSC Release 35—75)
Rockwell International Corp. announced that its Electronics Research Div., under a contract awarded by NASA on 18 Feb. 1974, had developed a single-chip bubble-domain memory element with a capacity of 102 400 bits, believed to be the largest capacity memory device ever built. The new data recorder—a major milestone in NASA’s continuing program to develop an all-solid-state data recorder for future U. S. spacecraft—was one-third the size and one-half the weight of current equipment. It was expected to use half the power and have 10 times the life expectancy of present recorders. Objective of the effort was to demonstrate the feasibility of fabricating high-capacity memory elements with reasonable yield and operating margins. (Rockwell Int’l Release ERD-1; LaRC proj off, interview, 18 Jan 77) 22 May—7 June: The U.S. and Peru launched more than 40 sounding rockets and balloons in a joint project, called Antarqui for the Inca god of flight, to study the earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere from Chilca Launch Range in Peru, a location on the magnetic equator where the earth’s magnetic field is horizontal. Instruments aboard the rockets and balloons measured the composition of the neutral and ionized atmosphere, density and temperature, wind shear, and turbulence. The measurements would be compared with data from Explorer 51 (Atmosphere Explorer—C, launched 15 Dec. 1973) and the ground-based Jicamarca and Huancayo Observatories. Tbe overall mission included the launch of 4 Nike-Tomahawks, 8 Nike-Apaches, 7 Super Areas, and 10 Super Lokis, as well as two balloons measuring 36 m in diameter and 12 ozonesonde balloons. Project Antarqui was a continuation of a NASA sounding-rocket program conducted during the 1964— 65 International Quiet Sun Year when 77 sounding rockets had been launched during the first 4 mo of 1965 from a sea-going launch platform, the USNS Croatan. Wallops Flight Center managed the program for NASA; the Instituto Geofisico del Peru arranged for the use of the range, supplied range operation and logistics support in Peru, correlated ground-based measurements from Jicamarca and Huancayo, assisted in recovery operations, and performed some preliminary work at the range. In addition to WFC, Goddard Space Flight Center, Dudley Observatory, Univ. of Pittsburgh, Univ. of 111., Penn. State Univ., Univ. of Denver, and GCA Corp. supplied scientific payloads for the sounding rockets and balloons. (WFC Release 75—6; NASA Activities, June 75, 14; WFC proj mgr, interviews, 11—12 Jan 75) 24 May—26 July: Tne U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 18, carrying cosmonauts Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 7:58 pm local time (10:58 amEDT). According to the Tassnews agency, the spacecraft entered orbit with a 247-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the purpose of the mission was “to conduct further experiments with the orbital research station ‘Salyut—4,’ started on January 12, during the joint flight of the delivery spaceship ‘Soyuz—17’ and the station ‘Salyut—4’ as well as to test individual elements and systems of the spaceship in various modes of flight.” During the first day in orbit Klimuk and Sevastyanov checked out essential spacecraft and life-support systems and prepared for orbital maneuvering. The crew switched on the main engines twice on 25 May to raise the spacecraft’s orbit in preparation for rendezvous and docking with Salyut 4. On 26 May Soyuz 18 approached the station by an automatic control system. At a distance of 100 km the crew took over control and manually docked the spacecraft with the Salyut 4 station in pitch darkness. After docking, the crew switched on the station’s lights and began activation and checkout of the onboard systems. The crew transferred equipment and boarded the station where they found a “Welcome to our common home” sign left by the station’s previous tenants, Soyuz 17 cosmonauts Aleksey Gubarev and Georgy Grechko. The cosmonauts reported that all systems were operating normally and that they themselves were in good health. By 28 May the station and spacecraft were in an orbit with a 349-km apogee, 338-km perigee, 91.4-min period, and 51.6° inclination. During their 63 days in orbit, the cosmonauts studied the sun, planets, and stars in various bands of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation using several x-ray telescopes, including one called “Filin”; investigated geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, photographing the U.S.S.R. in the medium and southern latitudes; studied physical processes in the earth’s atmosphere and in space; performed medical and biological research with particular emphasis on the impact of weightlessness on the human organism; and tested the station’s design and onboard systems. The cosmonauts also raised a garden of onions and peas as a forerunner of providing self-sufficient food supplies in space. Tass reported that, for the first time during a space flight, the polar fights were investigated using integral photography and spectrography methods. Twice during the mission Klimuk and Sevastyanov spoke with cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov who were also in orbit participating in the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project begun 15 July. By 23 July the cosmonauts were preparing the space station for automatic operation. On 26 July at 3:56 pm Baykonur time (6:56 am EDT), Soyuz 18 and its crew undocked from Salyut 4. They softlanded 56 km northeast of Arkalyk in Kazakhstan at 7:18 pm Baykonur time (10:18 am EDT). ' Tass reported that by 27 July the cosmonauts’ slight pulse and blood pressure fluctuations noted immediately after landing had returned to normal. Decreases in erythrocytes and increases in leucocytes disappeared after a few days, and in 1 or 2 wk orthostatic stability and resistance to functional tests had almost reached preflight baselines. Both Klimuk and Sevastyanov had lost some weight—3.8 kilograms and 1.9 kilograms respectively—during the mission. The Soyuz 18 crew’s 62-day 23-hr 40-min mission broke the previous 29-day 13-hr 20-min Soviet record for time in space set by the Soyuz 17. The current world’s record for time in space was held by the Skylab 4 astronauts for their 84-day 1-hr 16-min mission, 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974. Salyut 4, which had been visited by the two crews of Soyuz 17 and 18, was the fourth space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew, launched on Soyuz 10, docked with the station on 24 April but returned to earth without entering. The Soyuz 11 crew, launched 6 June 1971, boarded the station and conducted experiments for 24 days but were killed during a reentry accident. Salyut 2 was launched 3 April 1973 but an explosion of wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable. Salyut 3 was orbited 25 June 1974 and a two-man crew, carried by Soyuz 14, lived and worked aboard the station from 3—19 July 1974. A second crew, launched 26 Aug. 1974, returned to earth in 48 hr after an unsuccessful attempt to dock with the station, which itself reentered the earth’s atmosphere 26 Sept. 1974. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 24 May— 28 July 75; GSFC WklySSR, 22—28 May 75; AP, B Sun, 27 July 75, A3; Lib of Congress, “S&T News Alert,” No 2600, 19 Sept 75) 27 May—14 June: A one-third-scale model of the Space Shuttle Orbiter was tested in Ames Research Center’s 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel, to gather low-speed flight data in support of approach and landing tests of the first full-scale Orbiter at Flight Research Center in 1977. In addition, data were gathered to calibrate the vehicle’s air data probes. The model, built by Shuttle prime contractor Rockwell International Corp., was 13.1 m long and weighed 20 400 kg. Additional wind-tunnel tests were scheduled for November 1975 and February 1976. (4-Strogram, 5 June 75, 1; Young, JSC aerodynamic subsystems mgr, interview, 21 April 77) In a speech, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Union M. Mili said ITU encouraged Europe’s intention to play an important role in the peaceful uses of outer space; the programs of ESRO—ESA offered a particularly well chosen range of satellites for research and applications. Y. Demerliac, Secretary General of Eurospace—Groupement In-dustriel Europeen D’Etudes Spatiales—reminded the audience that since 1962 Europe had developed 43 satellites, including four communications satellites. In addition, European industry had built 36 of the 104 ground stations or antennas in the network of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). More than two-thirds of these had been sold to non-European countries. Director General of ESRO Roy Gibson (United Kingdom) said the creation of ESA was of more significance than a mere change in name: the convention of the new agency gave it a specific mandate to work toward a rationalization of Europe’s space program which its predecessors ESRO and ELDO (European Launcher Development Organization) did not have. He hoped that the 3-day presentation of ESRO— ESA and other European programs would give the visitors an impression of the total competence and capability of Europe’s up-to-date, rather dispersed space effort. (ESRO Release 28 May 75)
The Washington Post reported that, after launch of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, more than 1800 persons would lose their jobs. With the liftoff came the end of the Apollo and Saturn programs which had begun 25 May 1961 with President Kennedy’s request for a national commitment to a lunar-landing program. Layoffs would cut the Kennedy Space Center workforce to less than 8500, down from a peak of28 000. Of those who would lose their jobs, 1100 worked for NASA contractors— Rocketdyne Division pf Rockwell, Boeing Co., Chrysler Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Corp.—who built and mated the stages of the Saturn launch vehicle to the Apollo spacecraft. Another 700 worked for contractors such as International Business Machines Inc., TRW Inc., Grumman Corp., Aerojet General Corp., and Rockwell International Corp. Only 100 launch-operations contract employees would remain to help plan the launches of the Space Shuttle. The Shuttle launch force would begin to increase in size in 1977, but would never reach the size of the Saturn team because of increased automation. (O’Toole, W Post, 15 July 75, A9)
The U.S.S.R. had turned down a U.S. invitation to participate in another joint manned space mission in 1976, Thomas O’Toole of the Washington Post reported a U.S. space official as saying. O’Toole reported that in 1974 NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. George M. Low had suggested to Soviet Academy of Sciences President Vladimir Kotelnikov that two Soviet cosmonauts and three American astronauts dock with a Soviet Salyut space station and work together in earth orbit for up to 2 wk. However, the Soviets had replied that they would undertake a repeat of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for 15 July launch) but could not prepare to fly an Apollo-Salyut in any reasonable length of time. The Post quoted Dr. Low as saying, “Any second American—Russian space flight will have to wait until the 1980s.” The Post also quoted Dr. Low as saying that NASA had suggested an Apollo-Salyut mission as early as 1971, but the Soviets had requested a change back to an Apollo-Soyuz mission during a presummit meeting in April 1972 just before President Nixon’s Moscow visit. Dr. Low said that the Soviets had said that it was too expensive to modify Salyut to accept both a Soyuz and an Apollo spacecraft at the same time. (O’Toole, W Post, 14 July 75, Al)
NASA had selected Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Tex., as the site for a remote storage facility for 10 to 20% of the 382 kg of lunar material brought back from the moon by the Apollo crews, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. All lunar material had previously been stored in JSC’s curatorial facility; the additional site would safeguard against any catastrophe that might affect the material at the main site. Samples at Brooks, a cross section of all lunar materials collected during the Apollo missions, would be held in “dead storage” to keep them in pristine condition for analysis by future generations. (JSC Roundup, 12 Sept 75)
NASA announced appointment of William H. Rock as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center, effective 9 Nov. Rock joined NASA in 1964 and had served at NASA Headquarters, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and since 1968 at Kennedy Space Center, where he was associated with various applications and manned flight programs. (NASA anno, 30 Oct 75)
NASA launched the first geostationary operational environmental satellite, GOES—A, at 6:40 pm EDT for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration aboard the 106th successful Delta from Kennedy Space Center. Transfer orbit elements were: apogee, 36 795 km; perigee, 200 km; inclination, 23.7°; period, 650.9 min. Apogee boost motor fired at 10:51 am EDT 17 Oct. had put the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit at 36 200 km altitude, where it would drift to its scheduled position approximately 5(FN. When the GOES—A had been moved to position and checked out, it would be designated Goes 1 and turned over to NOAA for operational use. GOES was the first operational version of the prototype synchronous meteorological satellites (Sms 1, launched 17 May 74 into geostationary orbit at 75°W, and Sms 2, launched 6 Feb. 75 and positioned at 115°W). Sms 1, originally stationed over the eastern Atlantic in support of the Global Atmospheric Research Program, had provided the first near-continuous daylight coverage of a major hurricane (Carmen) in Sept. 1974. The day-night time-lapse motion pictures produced from Sms 1 images had aided understanding of hurricanes and tropical storms, as well as the total weather pattern in the Atlantic. Sms 2, from its station over the equator, had viewed the western half of the U.S., including Hawaii. Other NOAA satellites in polar orbit (Essa 8, Noaa 3, and Noaa 4) had collected global data for transmission to ground stations in Alaska and eastern U.S. This information has been available worldwide to any individual or agency with equipment that could receive the transmissions. Goes 1 would provide NOAA scientists with images of a quarter of earth’s surface at 30-min intervals, day and night. The satellite would also collect and relay nonvisual environmental data transmitted from thousands of manned and unmanned remote-sensing facilities on land and sea. Its radiation sensors would monitor solar activity and transmit its findings to NOAA’s Environmental Research Laboratories in Boulder, Colo., for use in predicting solar storms that would affect radio communications on earth. Goes 1 would also transmit weather maps and other material from NOAA’s station at Wallops Island, Va., in a format suitable for use by-ground stations at regional forecast centers. (NASA Release 75—270; KSC Release 251 — 75; MORs E—608— 75 —03,22 Sept and 17 Oct 75; KSC Spaceport News, 31 Oct 75,1; NOAA Release 75—188)
At the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory’s 50 mw open-jet wind tunnel, engineers had been able to more precisely measure the material and shape endurance of model nosetips for spacecraft and missiles. Using a newly developed flared nozzle with a smoothly decreasing pressure field, and a new technique for reentry simulation, engineers could gradually bring the sample nosetip up to the nozzle mouth, simulating the transition from moderate to maximum temperature and pressure. Previous techniques could show only variations between distinctly different materials; use of the new nozzle could detect subtle differences between very similar materials. (AFSC Release OIP 172.75) During July: The world’s news media commented on the joint U.S.— U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—24 July]. A 15 July article in West Germany’s Frankfurter Allgemeine said that “technically the Apollo-Soyuz enterprise will show nothing much.” The reason for the mission had been political since it was agreed upon in 1972. It was “fully in line with the detente and rapprochement policy of the two superpowers.” The astronautic field was particularly useful for propaganda because it could mark the “beginning of an intellectual and scientific exchange of opinion of advantage to both sides.” However, “if one looks. . .at rapprochement in other fields, such as SALT. . . , one must remain skeptical regarding ‘atmospheric’ improvements to be achieved outside the atmosphere of the world.” Milika Sundic, a Yugoslavian commentator, said concerning ASTP, “Nobody doubts its success, or. . .the good intentions and will of the two superpowers.” The technical aspect of the mission was least important, and the political side “constitutes its essence.” The joint undertakings both on earth and in space reflected the superpowers’ belief in a “full equilibrium of forces rather than trust in one another.” This lack of trust was the consequence not only of different systems but different interests which went beyond national borders. The fact that the U.S. and U.S.S.R. were leaders of two military alliances could not lead to greater trust between them. But, “without blocs and without ambitions going beyond national borders, the situation would be. . .more favorable both for the superpowers and for the rest of the world.” One hoped that nobody intended to divide up space along bloc lines and that nobody would misuse it for solving this world’s problems. “Third World countries may not be present at today’s rendezvous in space, but they have a claim on the part played by science in the Soviet-American undertaking.” Regarding their rights on the earth, “the Third World has no intention of renouncing them, and even less of abandoning the fate of peace to the big powers, for peace is indivisible both on earth and in space.” Hungary’s 15 July issue of Nepszabadsag said the joint space flight was a scientific undertaking inseparable from “normalization” between the two states and reflecting the advance of peaceful coexistence. The joint cosmic attempt called attention to the vast possibilities inherent in dynamic scientific cooperation between the two countries in other, no less important, areas. Bulgaria’s 15 July Rabotnichesko said in an editorial that ASTP not only would mark “a new stage in the development of space research and will open up new prospects for cooperation between the U.S.S.R. and U.S.A. but will also be a telling example to be followed by all other states and peoples on the earth. . . .” A 26 July commentary by a Peking correspondent in the People’s Republic of China said that the U.S.-U.S.S.R. handshake in space—despite the show and till the money spent to advertise it— could not “cover up their fierce struggle on earth.” In fact, the two superpowers “regard each other as the enemy in space. They have been contending for military superiority in space ever since the first satellite was launched.” The handshake was but a contention with “each trying to cheat and outwit the other.” Finland’s Karjalaimen called the joint mission “historic” from the point of view of both space technology and world politics. The superpowers had found it necessary to begin together to regulate the world’s conflicts to prevent a world conflagration or wars that could endanger the interests of the superpowers. ASTP was one of the public symbols of this policy. (NCNA, FBIS-PRC, 28July 75, Al; FBIS—Bulgaria, 16 July 75, Cl; FBIS—Hungary, 16 July 75, FI; FBIS—Yugoslavia, 16 July 75, II; FBIS—Finland, 16 July 75, PI)
Canada’s Anik 3 (Telesat—3) domestic communications satellite was launched by NASA at 7:35 pmEDTfrom Eastern Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle. Originally scheduled for March, the launch had been postponed because of a strike by McDonnell Douglas Corp. workers [see 10 Feb.]. The satellite was placed in the planned highly elliptical transfer orbit with a 35 945-km apogee, 231.4-km perigee, 634.3-min period, and 24.75° inclination. Ground control fired the spacecraft’s apogee kick motor at 1:30 pm EDT on 10 May, circularizing the geosynchronous orbit at 38 000 km; the spacecraft was drifting toward its final operational location at approximately 104° west longitude. Anik (Eskimo word for brother) 3 was third in a series of Canadian domestic comsats; Anik 1 (launched 9 Nov. 1972) and Anik 2 (launched 20 April 1973) were operating at 114° and 109p west longitude, providing TV and telephone service to the most remote areas of Canada. Built by Hughes Aircraft Co., Anik 3 was 1.8 m in diameter and 3.3 m high, weighing 544 kg at launch and 272 kg in orbit. With power from 23 000 solar cells and enough battery capacity to maintain full service during a solar eclipse. Anik had 13 channels that could transmit up to 10 color TV transmissions or 9600 telephone circuits or analog or digital data. The NASA—Telesat Canada contract defined the NASA mission objective as the placement of the satellite in a synchronous transfer orhit of sufficient accuracy to allow onboard propulsion systems to place the spacecraft into a stationary orbit with enough residual stationkeeping propulsion to meet mission-lifetime requirements. This objective was met and the mission was adjudged successful on 20 May. NASA would be reimbursed for launch hardware, services, and DOD range support. The project was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA MORs, 25 April 75, 20 May 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 1—7 May 75; NASA Releases 75—113, 75—131)
A Viking Data Review Management Center had been established at Kennedy Space Center, the Spaceport News reported. The center would promptly disseminate data from the two Viking spacecraft to all concerned government agencies and contractors, and would aid in solving launch-related problems as quickly as possible. During the Viking 1 launch on 20 Aug., data and review teams of NASA and contractor personnel at KSC were responsible for rapidly analyzing incoming data for top management. Any anomaly that could affect the launch of Viking B had to be detected and resolved as quickly as possible. Center personnel had tracked some 20 problems from discovery to resolution. (KSC Spaceport News, 5 Sept 75, 2)
Cosmic rays—the most energetic particles in the universe—probably originated in supernovas within our own galaxy, Dr. Floyd W. Stecker, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, wrote in an article in Physical Review Letters. Dr. Stecker had based his conclusions on data from NASA’s Explorer 48 (Small Astronomy Satellite—B, launched 16 Nov. 1972). Scientists had been speculating on the source of cosmic radiation since its discovery at the turn of the century, when it was thought to be identical with gamma rays. With the advent of radio astronomy and the rapid development of new experimental techniques and instrumentation, supernovas had been considered a possible source of cosmic rays; however, other scientists believed cosmic radiation had extragalactic origins, such as quasars. Explorer 48, measuring cosmic-ray intensity without interference from earth’s atmosphere, had been able to obtain the gamma-ray information needed to complement ground-based radio-astronomy data. The SAS-B scientific team at GSFC had measured a large amount of gamma radiation coming from the Milky Way galaxy, the most intense coming from the center of the galaxy. As gamma rays resulted primarily from collisions of cosmic rays with interstellar gas, and the detailed Explorer 48 data had identified the direction from which most of the gamma rays came, Dr. Stecker could pinpoint an area of intense activity midway between the galactic center and the earth. The active area was a region containing numerous interstellar gas clouds—but not enough to account for all the gamma-ray production—as well as a large number of supernova remnants. Dr. Stecker deduced that cosmic rays were to be found in the same regions as supernova remnants and in proportion to their number. (Stecker, Physical Review Letters, 21 July 75, 188—90; NASA Release 75—221)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
A massive new power source for earth—transmission of solar energy by microwave frequency—had been under study by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the Goldstone station near Barstow, Calif. The dish antenna equipped with a 450-kw klystron tube for microwave transmission, represented a space station; the tower a mile away with an array of solar receivers to which the experimental power converted to microwave energy had been beamed represented a ground station. This research had been designed to lead to a network of space stations that would collect solar energy 24 hr a day and beam it to ground stations; the Goldstone tests had been the first high-power field trials of the system. Tiny rectifying dipole antennas—called rectennas— collect and convert the radio-frequency beam; the 17 panels in the tower receiver contain 4590 of the rectennas. The system had demonstrated a maximum output of 30.4 kw converting the microwave beam to usable electricity, an efficiency of 82.5%. A space-to-earth system would be 6 times more effective than a surface system, the Los Angeles Times commented, and could probably supply 15% to 20% of the earth’s energy needs in the next century. Development of a utility operating system delivering 10 000 mw of power would cost about $60 billion, as much as NASA has spent to date on space programs. A single equatorial space station carrying a 1-km-diameter antenna transmitting to a U.S. earth station 15 km long and 10 km wide could supply all the electrical needs of New York City or a third of the needs of the Los Angeles basin. (LA Times, 6 Oct 75, 1; NYT, 10 Oct 75, 2)
NASA had awarded Bendix Field Engineering Corp. a $104-million contract to operate and maintain portions of the worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network that serves the needs of NASA’s earth-orbital space programs, manned and unmanned. The 2-yr cost-plus-award-fee contract would permit negotiation of up to three additional 1-yr extensions, and would be supervised by Goddard Space Flight Center. The contractor would provide technical support for STDN stations and facilities as well as for the Laser Tracking Subnet and for the Magnetic Tape Certification Facility and the NASCOM facilities located at GSFC. (NASA Release 75—315)
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
A NASA Atlas-Centaur vehicle launched Intelsat-IVA F—l at 8:17 pm EDT from Eastern Test Range into the planned synchronous transfer orbit. The communications satellite had been launched for the Communications Satellite Corp. under a cost-reimbursable contract. At 11:18 pm EDT 26 Sept., ComSatCorp fired the apogee kick motor to put the satellite in a geosynchronous orbit with a 35 821km apogee, 35 294-km perigee, 23-hr 44-min period, and 0.1° inclination. NASA objectives for the mission were to review design, performance, and flight readiness for the Federal Communications Commission and to assure compatibility of the Intelsat spacecraft with NASA launch vehicles and launch environmental conditions, and to launch Intelsat-IVA F—l into a transfer orbit that would enable the spacecraft apogee boost motor to inject the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit. Objectives were completed and the mission adjudged successful 29 Jan. 1976. ComSatCorp objectives were to fire the apogee boost motor, position the satellite into the planned geostationary orbit, and operate and manage the system for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT). Intelsat-IVA F—l, built by Hughes Aircraft Co., was 698.5 cm high and 238.2 cm in diameter, with a liftoff weight of 1515 kg and orbital weight of 825.5 kg. The spin-stabilized satellite consisted of two main elements: A rotating section contained the power subsystem, a cylindrical solar array and two nickel-cadmium batteries; the anhydrous hydrazine-powered positioning and orientation system; the solid-fueled apogee motor; and the despin-control system. The despun earth-oriented platform section contained the communications repeater, antennas, and associated elements of the telemetry and command subsystems. All spacecraft antennas were supported by a single tubular mast. For 24 hr after apogee-motor firing, Intelsat-IVA F—l drifted eastward at a rate of Iff per day; then a velocity-correction maneuver slowed the spacecraft drift to 2.9P east per day. While the spacecraft was drifting, the Hawaii earth station checked out the spacecraft systems. Its final operating location, over the Atlantic Ocean at 335° east longitude, would be reached by mid-December. As primary Atlantic satellite in INTELSAT’s global commercial communications satellite system, it would serve more than 40 earth stations, offering users 6250 two-way voice circuits and two TV channels. Intelsat-IVA F—l was the first in the Intelsat IVA series; its communications capacity was two-thirds greater than satellites in the Intelsat IV series, seven of which were still operating. The Intelsat system began with the launch of Intelsat-I F—l (Early Bird, 1) on 6 April 1965; since then NASA had launched 16 successful comsats for ComSatCorp in the Intelsat II, III, and IV series. Although Intelsat IVA satellites had been designed primarily for use over the Atlantic with its heavy communications traffic, INTELSAT planned to launch as many as five additional IVAs, some to provide service for the Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. Intelsat IVAs had a design lifetime of 7 yr and a capacity sufficient to meet international communications requirements through 1979, when the system would be augmented with the even larger capacity Intelsat ^ comsats INTELSAT, created in August 1964 by adoption of the Interim Agreements for the Establishment of a Global Commercial Comsat System, now comprised 91 member nations; a 24-member board of governors exercised overall responsibility for design, development, construction, establishment, operation, and maintenance of the Intelsat space segment. ComSatCorp, a privately owned carrier company operating under a U.S. congressional mandate, had provided technical and operational management services to INTELSAT and the global system under a cost-plus-fixed-fee management services contract. NASA had been responsible for procuring the Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle, conducting preflight testing, and launching the spacecraft from the Eastern Test Range into a synchronous transfer orbit. ComSatCorp engineers in the INTELSAT Spacecraft Technical Control Center in Washington, D.C., then assumed responsibility for the mission. Overall management for the NASA portion of the mission was under the direction of the Office of Applications. Lewis Research Center was responsible for Atlas-Centaur development and operation. Kennedy Space Center was responsible for vehicle checkout and for launch. (NASAMORs E—491— 633— 75— 01,25 Sept 75, 30 Jan 76; NASA Release 75—231; INTELSAT Releases, 21 Sept 75, 1 Oct 75; Singer, Today, 26 Sept 75; NASAPIO, interview, 26 Sept 75; GSFC WklySSR, 25 Sept— 1 Oct 75)
The appearance of a supernova on 5 July 1054 had been recorded in primitive art by ancient Indians on the walls of a N. Mex. cave, the New York Times reported. Goddard Space Flight Center astronomer Dr. John C. Brandt, leader of the team of astronomers who had discovered the cave art, said that the date of the pictograph—a crescent moon with a nearby object variously described as a circle, cross, or asterisk—coincided with records of the Chinese Sung dynasty. The Chinese had reported that, on the morning of 5 July 1054, a minor star in the constellation Taurus appeared to explode into extraordinary brilliance. Ancient Chinese astronomers had described the event— which modem astronomers identified/as the supernova that had created the Crab Nebula—as visible in daylight for 23 days before fading and at night for another 633 days. Although the modern astronomers could not prove that the cave art depicted the Crab Nebula supernova, “What we have is circumstantial evidence that, to us, looks pretty good,” Dr. Brandt said. No other supernova of known date had been visible from North America near a crescent moon. The supernova pictographs were not the only evidence of astronomical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd rattles and sand paintings often depicted the Pleiades and Orion constellations, and Hopi designs included representations of the Milky Way, constellations, sun, moon, and stars. Heaps of stones strategically placed centuries ago in Wyo. hills could have been used by Indians to sight stars and to predict and confirm the summer solstice. (Rensberger, ATT, 10 Sept 75, 39)
The Federal Council for Science and Technology, a committee of officials representing major research and development agencies, released “Report on the Federal R&D Program—FY 1976,” a summary of 17 R&D agencies’ efforts in applying science and technology to national issues. The report stated that the FY 1976 budget included $21 billion for R&D programs, a 15% increase over the FY 1975 R&D budget of $18.8 billion. Of this, approximately $7.4 billion was planned for civilian programs including energy, health, education, agriculture, environment, urban problems, and transportation. Approximately one-fourth the civilian R&D budget was planned for energy, with the largest share of that—$1.55 million—going to the Energy Research and Development Administration. Nine other government agencies would receive increases in R&D budgets, with NASA’s FY 1976 budget estimate increasing to $3,539 billion, up from $3,231 billion in FY 1975, an increase of more than $300 million. Space R&D would continue with projects to explore Mars, Venus, and outer planets, as well as the sun. Satellites would continue to be used for earth resources assessment, weather prediction, and surveys of potential geothermal energy sources. The Federal Aviation Administration would receive increases for air traffic safety, and Dept, of Defense increases would support development of the B—1 manned strategic aircraft, Trident missile systems, and Navy and Air Force air combat fighters. (Text; OMB, Budget of the U.S. Govt., FY 1976)
A backup Skylab Orbital Workshop and an airlock module and multiple docking adapter would be shipped by barge to Washington, D.C., for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Stripped of all equipment that could be used for future programs, the workshop would be cut into three sections for transport; two doors would be added and the floor strengthened to accommodate the flow of tourists. The museum was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (MSFC Release 75-189)
The Air Force’s new B —1 bomber broke the sound barrier for the first time while making its sixth flight test, from Vandenberg Air Force Base. During the 6-hr 23-min mission, the B—1 also took on fuel from a KC—135 tanker for the first time and opened its weapons-bay doors. (AP, W Star, 11 April 75, 4)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the Energy Research and Development Administration announced selection of 16 organizations to negotiate contracts for the development of low-cost solar cells for residential and commercial use. Twenty-two contracts, totaling approximately $12 million, would be awarded as part of the Low Cost Silicon Array Project managed by JPL for ERDA. Objective of the project was to create by 1985 an industrial capability of producing silicon solar cells or arrays at a market price of less than $500/kw. Cost to date had been $20 000/kw. The demand for solar cells was expected to increase from 100 kw annually in 1975 to 500 000 kw annually by 1985. JPL negotiations included production of low-cost solar-grade silicon, economical production of silicon in large-area sheets suitable for use in solar cells, development of economical encapsulation materials and techniques for an array lifetime of 20 yr, and development of automated processes and facilities for low-cost production of arrays. Future contracts would be negotiated to procure array modules for a series of ERDA-funded tests of photovoltaic systems, in cooperation with the Department of Defense to determine the technical feasibility of using photovoltaics for military applications, and in cooperation with Lewis Research Center for a similar civilian effort. (NASA Release 75—280) The descent module of Venera 9 separated from the main spacecraft 20 Oct., 2 days before it reached the Venus atmosphere, which it entered at 11:58 pm EDT 21 Oct., landing on the surface at 1:13 am EDT Oct. 22. When the atmosphere had slowed the descent sufficiently, a parachute system had been deployed at about 50 km above the surface, and the lander studied the cloud layers and atmosphere during the rest of the descent. The lander modules had been built to withstand the hostile environment at the Venus surface, with temperatures that reach 500°C and pressures up to 100 times that of earth’s atmosphere. Before landing, the modules had been cooled to — KTC to provide a reserve of cold temperature that would permit operation for about an hour before overheating. Venera 10, launched 14 June and following the same procedure, had separated from its orbiter 23 Oct. and had landed on Venus at 1:17 am EDT 25 Oct. Venera9, launched 8 June from the Baykonur cosmodrome, was the third Soviet spacecraft to make a soft landing on Venus: Venera 7 and 8, which landed on Venus in Dec. 1970 and July 1972, respectively, had transmitted technical data for 23 and 50 min, respectively, but did not carry cameras. Pictures sent by the Venera 9 lander showed a rugged surface with sharp-angled and flat-surfaced rocks 30 to 35 cm across and some boulders. Pictures sent by the Venera 10 lander, which touched down 2200 km from the site of Venera 9, showed what seemed to be an older mountain formation with smooth rounded rocks. Soviet scientists had expressed amazement that both sites were bathed in light. The dense cloudcover that hides Venus from earth had been thought to keep the planet in perpetual shade. Dr. Arnold Selivanov, one of the TV system designers, said that they had “expected poor lighting conditions and built our instruments accordingly”; this is why they had received “good pictures. . .that can be used by newspapers without any preliminary processing.” The horizon of Venus discernible in a comer of the Venera photos did not appear concave (ends bent upward), as had been expected as a result of the theorized distortion resulting from the planet’s dense atmosphere. The apparent geological youth of the rocks on Venus “testifies to recent catastrophic processes like volcanic eruptions or earthquakes—we should say Venusquakes—which took place recently,” said Soviet mineralogist Dr. Aleksandr Basilevsky. “Venus apparently is internally active.” This conclusion had affirmed American theory that Venus resembled earth in having a liquid core, a mantle, and a rocky crust. Four Soviet scientists reviewing the Venera 9 and 10 program in an article in Pravda had summarized the descent-module findings: Temperature and pressure at the landing sites, 460°C and 90 atm, respectively; surface illumination, about 10 000 lux; local wind velocity at landing site, 0.4 to 0.7 meter per sec (Venera9) and 0.8 to 1.3 meter per sec (Venera 10); natural radioactive elements in Venus rock, 0.3% potassium, 0.0002% thorium, and 0.001% uranium. Orbiting module findings were: Temperature of Venus clouds at upper boundary, about — 35°C; cloud temperatures on nocturnal side, about 1(FC higher; atmospheric temperature decreased with altitude, but local temperature elevations were observable at the 66 to 55 km level; Venus ionosphere was thinner than the terrestrial and closer to the surface; and the electron concentration on the daytime side was significantly higher than on the nocturnal side but about 10 times smaller than in the terrestrial ionosphere. Much of the information relayed from Venus had still to be processed. Cameras in the orbiting spacecraft of Venera 9 and 10 had proceeded with photographing the dense cloudcover of Venus, their first pictures received 26 Oct. showing a panorama of more than 1500 km of the clouds circulating around the planet’s equator. Scientists at the Deep Space Communications Center in Moscow said the pictures “confirm the presence of powerful streams of circulating flows in the planet’s atmosphere, first detected on board the American probe Mariner 10 in February 1974.” There was no indication, the Baltimore Sun commented, how long the two Venus mother ships would continue in orbit. (NYT, 23 Oct 75,1; 26 Oct 75,1, sec. 4p 7; FBIS 208,210, 25 Oct 75; WStar, 23Oct 75, A3; BSun, 26 Oct 75, All; 27Oct 75, A4; Defense/Sp Bus Daily, 23 Oct 75, 272; 28 Oct 75, 289; 29 Oct 75, 301; Pravda, 21 Feb 76, 3—4) 23 October-. Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Integrated Systems Support, Inc. to negotiate a $2.8-million cost-plus-award-fee contract for computer support and facility operations at MSFC’s Slidell Computer Complex. The 1-yr contract had provisions for four additional 1-yr extensions. (MSFC Release 75—224)
Johnson Space Center announced the award to Martin Marietta Corp. of a 10-mo $373 000 study contract to investigate current technology and develop severed conceptual designs of a manned maneuvering unit. When the most promising concept was selected, Martin would execute a detailed design and high-fidelity mockup of the unit and its support station. The contract also called for Martin to design and build a prototype hand controller for the unit. Themaneuvering unit, a direct spinoff from the “Buck Rogers” unit that successfully demonstrated on 1973—74 Skylab missions the precision and control with which an astronaut could maneuver in zero-g, would allow Space Shuttle crew members to maneuver outside the Shuttle for maintenance, inspection, repair, retrieval, assembly, and photography. (JSC Release 75—24) All spacecraft subsystems were checked out 9—10 April with telemetry indicating normal performance. Gravity-gradient stabilization maneuvers were also begun with the firing of the squibs that released the end mass and extended the boom to 0.7 m. Additional boom extension and retraction maneuvers were carried out 11 April with the maximum extension of 6 m occurring that day. The momentum wheel was energized, providing additional three-axis stabilization; the desired pitch damping of ± 1° was achieved by 20 April. By 22 April ground controllers activated doppler and C-band transponders and began tracking. Solid acquisition of return-pulse data was occurring on all passes, and the radar altimeter had operated in the high-intensity mode twice over the Atlantic Ocean. Engineering tests of the Ats 6—Geos 3 satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment were completed. Calibration of radar altimetry began on 21 April and would continue until 20 May. First of its kind, the satellite-to-satellite tracking experiment by Geos 3 and Ats 6 was expected to provide orbit information more precise than that obtainable by ground observations. From its geosynchronous orbit Ats 6 tracked Geos 3 for more than half its orbit while Geos 3 radioed ranging signals through its S-band transponder to Ats 6, which relayed the signals to ground stations. Geos 3 carried an array of quartz reflectors that permitted laser ranging measurements accurate to 10 cm. A laser beam sent to the satellite would be reflected, and then received back at the originating ground site, one of a network of laser ranging stations which would track Geos 3 during its mission lifetime. Powered by 16 solar cell panels, the 340-kg, 8-sided spacecraft was the third in a series of GEOS spacecraft designed to gain knowledge of the earth’s shape and dynamic behavior as part of the National Geodetic Satellite Program (NGSP). The NASA-managed program, begun in 1964 with the cooperation of the Depts. of Defense and Commerce and several universities and international organizations, was initiated to generate a unified world-survey network and to develop a more precise mathematical model of the earth’s gravitational field. Geos 1 {Explorer29, launched 6 Nov. 1965) and Geos2 {Explorer 36, launched 11 Jan. 1968) had demonstrated that the U.S. could make most observations using one satellite and that errors in any system could be discovered and corrected by reference to other systems. Other missions in the NASA geodesy program included Explorer 22 (launched 10 Oct. 1964), Explorer27 (launched 29 April 1965), Pageos 1 (launched 1 July 1966), and the Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP, launched 15 May 1973 aboard Skylab 1). The Geos 3 program was managed by Wallops Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications at NASA Headquarters. Mission operations and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle were managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Applied Physics Laboratory of Johns Hopkins Univ., cost about $12.5 million. (NASA MORs, 8 April 75, 22 April 75; Wkly SSR, 3—9 April 75; NASA Release 75—88)
Johnson Space Center’s Roundup reported that Scott Aviation Co. would begin commercial production of a new lightweight breathing system for firefighters based on concepts and hardware developed by JSC engineers. Called the Scott Air-Pak 4.5, the new apparatus was the first major improvement in compressed-air breathing systems in more than 20 yrs. New features of the equipment included a 40% weight reduction; an improved pack frame and harness, with the unit’s weight carried on the hips rather than the shoulders; and a redesigned face mask for better vision. NASA’s part in developing the apparatus had begun in 1970 when a national meeting of municipal officials identified the need for an improved system as their highest priority, NASA’s effprt had been carried out at JSC as an engineering applications project under the Technology Utilization Program. After a design had been chosen from a number of candidates, prototype units were successfully field tested under actual firefighting conditions by the Houston, New York City, and Los Angeles fire departments. Scott Aviation was the first manufacturer to announce commercial production of an apparatus based on NASA effort. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 4)
NASA announced the appointment of Robert E. Smylie as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, effective immediately, and the return of J. Lloyd Jones, Jr., to Ames Research Center as Chief of the Planning and Analysis Office. Smylie had been Deputy Associate Administrator (Space), OAST, since July 1974. From October 1973 to July 1974 he had been Deputy Associate Administrator for Technology after serving as chief of the Crew Systems Div. at Johnson Space Center. Jones had come to Hq. in 1972 as director of the Aerodynamics and Vehicles Systems Div. in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, a position he held until appointed Deputy Associate Administrator (Aeronautics), OAST, in July 1974. (NASA anno, 21 May 75)
Plans had been completed for the first U.S. experiments to be flown on a Soviet spacecraft, Dr. David L. Winter, NASA Director of Life Sciences, announced. As a result of joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. working group meetings on space biology and medicine, 4 U.S. life-science experiments and 7 tissue investigations were to fly aboard a Soviet biological satellite scheduled for launch later in the year. The U.S. experiments—all passive and completely autonomous from spacecraft power, telemetry, and data recording—would be housed in 5 Soviet-built containers, each 17.8 cm long by 12.7 cm wide by 11.5 cm high. Maximum weight for each container, including experiments, would be 2.5 kg. Unique to this spacecraft was a Soviet-designed onboard centrifuge. U.S. experiments would be flown both on the centrifuge and on a stationary platform. The 4 flight experiments included a plant tumor-growth experiment to study the effects of weightlessness on sensitive plant systems; a carrot-cell-culture experiment to assess the effects of weightlessness on plant systems and on normal development of embryonic tissues; a heavy-particle radiation experiment to measure high-charge and high-energy particle radiation aboard the spacecraft; and a killifish or mummichog (minnows) embryogenesis experiment to evaluate the effect of weightlessness on development of the vestibular system during embryonic development in a vertebrate animal. Six of the tissue investigations would use rat tissue—and the seventh flies—supplied by the Soviets from their animal experiments. Soviet scientists would prepare the animal tissues for U.S. scientists to use in their investigations and would return the U.S. experiment packages upon completion of the flight. Ames Research Center was managing 3 of the life-science experiments and all tissue investigations. Johnson Space Center would manage the fish-egg development experiment. (NASA Release 75 — 264)
Contrary to the impression of peaceful cooperation created by the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking mission [see 15—26 July], both countries had increasingly emphasized the military potential of manned space flight, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported the Center for Defense Information as saying. The Center, a private organization critical of defense spending, charged that the 1967 United Nations treaty which reserved outer space for peaceful uses had not prevented either country from exploiting space for military purposes. Although the Pentagon had listed its space spending at $2.25 billion, it had acknowledged the existence of another $667 million in Air Force “miscellaneous” requests for secret space programs. The Center said that, although the Soviet Union’s space program was 15 yrs behind the U.S., frequent launches indicated that they were attempting to catch up. The Center concluded that, contrary to the spirit of the outer space treaty, space technology and systems were being developed that had the potential for new confrontations between the superpowers. (UPI, P Inq, 10 Aug 75)
NASA announced the appointment of Donald P. Hearth as Director of Langley Research Center, effective in September. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center since 1970, would replace Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who is leaving NASA to pursue other interests. Prior to being at GSFC, Hearth had served 3 yr as Director of Planetary Programs at NASA Hq. He came to NASA in 1962 from the Marquardt Corp. where he managed research on hypersonic propulsion and flight systems. Before that, he had been an aeronautical research scientist at Lewis Aeronautical Laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (NASA anno 11 July 75)
President Ford presented the Harmon Aviation Awards, given for outstanding feats of individual pilot skill, worthy of international recognition, and contributing to the art and science of flight. The 1974 Astronauts’ Trophy was awarded to the Skylab 2 crew who, during their 25 May to 23 June 1973 mission, became the first astronauts to successfully accomplish major repairs on a spacecraft in space. Skylab 2 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted the award on behalf of himself and crewmembers Paul J. Weitz and Joseph P. Kerwin. President Ford presented the 1974 Aeronauts’ Trophy to the son of Malcolm S. Forbes for the latter’s series of 21 flights in a hot-air balloon that took him 4000 km across the U.S. from Coos Bay, Ore., to Gwynn Island, Va. The 1974 Aviators’ Trophy went to Col. Edward J. Nash, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations of the 21st Air Force, for his 21 000-km round-trip airlift mission in a C —5 aircraft from the U.S. to Israel, and for his direction of continuous C—5 and C —141 operations from the U.S. to the Azores and on to Israel between 14 Oct. and 14 Nov. 1973. The 1973 Aviators’ Trophy was awarded to L/C Edgar L. Allison for piloting an HC—130H aircraft of the Air Force 57th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron nonstop on 20 Feb. 1972 from Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111., a distance of 14 053 km, without refueling. This established a record for the longest straight-line nonstop flight in a turboprop aircraft. (PD, 5 May 75, 480—481)
The testbed aircraft for the Air Force Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) was deployed to Europe for a series of exercises with North Atlantic Treaty Alliance (NATO) ground, air, and sea forces. The Air Force was developing AWACS as an airborne surveillance command and control center to detect and track airborne targets at any altitude, at long ranges, and over all types of terrain and water. During the test exercises the aircraft, topped by a 9-m-di-ameter rotating radome assembly, would work in the United Kingdom with British naval forces and with the U.S. Navy’s sixth fleet, and in West Germany with the NATO and U.S. air defense ground environment system and with Hawk defense missile batteries. NATO Hq in Brussels would provide ground static displays for NATO officials. During all exercises AWACS would coordinate with ground, sea, and air forces through a time-division multiple-access data link. This was the second deployment of AWACS to Europe. Since 1973, when the system had been demonstrated there, it had been equipped with additional major elements including communications, data-processing, navigation, display, and identification instrumentation. (AFSC Release OIP 99.75)
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, and Dr. James W. Smith, president of Greenbelt Homes, Inc., signed a cooperative agreement to install experimental solar heating units in four four-family housing units in Greenbelt, Md. During the first phase of the project, all four of the units would be instrumented to measure heat loss and fuel-consumption characteristics, and two of the four would be fully insulated. Based on the cost-effectiveness of the first phase, the two insulated buildings would be equipped with solar heating units designed to augment existing hot-water radiator systems. The remaining two units would serve as control for comparison. The solar units, which would be designed at GSFC, would be installed in time for the 1975—1976 heating season. (Goddard News, March 75, 1—2; GHI manager’s ofc, interview, 5 Oct 1976)
A group of 35 representatives from central Fla. planning agencies attended a 1-day workshop at Kennedy Space Center to assess the possibility of using satellite data for land-use planning. Edward J. Hecker of the KSC Office of Earth Resources told the group that the 4-cent-per-sq-mi cost of obtaining satellite data was one-third the cost of aircraft-obtained data. Data collected by “on foot” surveys cost $20 per sq mi, and the cost of using an automobile for this purpose ran about $2 per sq mi. Dr. Garland L. Thomas, coinvestigator for the earth-resources mission of Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) and employee of the Brevard County (Fla.) Planning and Zoning Dept., told the group that, using satellite data and photography, planners could determine which areas were developable and which were not, produce comprehensive land-use planning maps, monitor water quality, and trace the process of eutrophication in central Fla.’s many lakes. (KSC Release 181—75) 8, 9, and 17 September: Data collected by sounding rockets, satellites, instrumented balloons, and high-flying aircraft had supported the hypothesis that fluorocarbons such as those found in aerosol spray cans might be breaking down the earth’s ozone shield, scientists told hearings of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on the Upper Atmosphere. Ozone in the stratosphere screened the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation that might increase incidence of cancer and other skin diseases and prove lethal to many life forms as well as damage eyes, crops, and livestock. An increase in atmospheric fluorocarbons could also have a greenhouse effect, permitting sunlight to pass freely but inhibiting the escape of heat in the form of infrared radiation. This would warm the lower atmosphere and the earth, altering aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and environmental chemicals, and creating climate changes. An extreme greenhouse effect had been blamed for Venus’ oven-hot temperatures. Dr. Warren R. Muir, cochairman of the Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere, told the subcommittee, “Based on our preliminary assessment there seems to be a legitimate cause for concern.” If additional government research—with NASA coordinating—had proved more conclusively the danger to the environment, the government should take action for “prompt enactment of toxic substances legislation.” Dr. Wilson K. Talley of the Environmental Protection Agency agreed that fluorocarbons might pose a problem to the stratosphere, and that the total effect of releasing fluorocarbons and other halo carbon compounds into the atmosphere might not become apparent for 10 yrs. But, with evidence of public danger not strong enough to stand up to a court challenge by manufacturers, government regulation of the offending substances would be unenforceable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 10 Sept 75, 1)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $79 991 contract to the Univ. of Florida’s Institute of Food and Agriculture Sciences for research on ffeeze-teittperature prediction. Under the terms of the contract, a follow-on of a 1973 contract to study the feasibility of using remotesensing devices for temperature measurement and evaluation, the Univ. of Florida Would receive Satellite and aircraft data fro/n KSC and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that would provide actual measurements of leaf and ground temperatures at specific times and places. Following calibration, the data would be Combined into a temperature-prediction model. Then, using known variables such as current temperature, humidity, time, eloudeover, arid wind velocity, the user could accurately forecast where freezing temperatures would occur. (KSC Release 21 — 75)
President Ford signed Executive Order 11834 establishing the Energy Research and Development Administration—under Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.—and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission—under Chairman William A. Anders—effective 19 Jan. Establishment of the two new agencies was provided for in the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, signed into law on 11 Oct. 1974 by President Ford, which abolished the Atomic Energy Commission and reassigned its responsibilities. ERDA would take over AEC’s research and development programs including the development of fossil, nuclear, solar, and geothermal energy to meet present and future needs. ERDA would also take the lead in energy R&D programs transferred from the Dept, of the Interior, National Science Foundation, and Environmental Protection Agency. NRC was assigned AEC’s licensing and regulatory responsibilities. (PD, 20 Jan 75, 54; ERDA Release 75—1; ERDA Fact Sheet) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. NASTRAN to analyze Space Shuttle structures. Recipients of the awards included 12 NASA and 12 contractor employees. (NASA Release 75-13) 16 January—8 February: U.S. and U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project working groups held their last major meeting in the U.S. before the scheduled July launches. The five working groups included 80 Soviet aerospace specialists led by Academician Boris N. Petrov and ASTP Technical Director for the U.S.S.R. Konstantin D. Bushuyev. Working Group 3, Soviet specialists in docking systems, arrived 16 Jan. and went directly to Rockwell International Corp. in California for joint tests of the docking system alignment pin and socket. Following the tests, the group returned to JSC to review the results of those tests and others made earlier in Moscow. On 20 Jan. a portion of Working Group 1—for experiments, trajectories, and contingencies plans—arrived at JSC to prepare for joint simulations scheduled for March. Group 4, for communications systems, also arrived to review the results of independent U.S. and Soviet tests of the flight communications system. The latter group—accompanied by Dr. Glynn S. Lunney, U.S. ASTP Technical Director, and Prof. Bushuyev—then traveled to Kennedy Space Center 3 Feb. to make electromagnetic radio and TV compatibility tests. The remaining Soviet specialists arrived in the U.S. on 27 Jan. Working Group 2, for control systems and docking targets, prepared contingency-control modes for the mission, and Working Group 5 prepared the final report on the compatibility of ASTP life-support systems. Group 5 also certified the equipment to be transferred between the two spacecraft. Although a portion of Group 1 would remain in the U.S. through crew training scheduled for 11 Feb., most of the Soviet contingent returned to the Soviet Union 8 Feb. The next major meeting for the working groups was scheduled for mid-May in Moscow. (JSC Release 75—02; Spaceport News, 6 Feb 75, 3)
Kennedy Space Center had issued $7.5 million in awards and contracts to small businesses during the first 9 mo of FY 1975, bringing the total awarded to small businesses since FY 1970 to $61 million. The KSC set-aside program required that all procurement requests exceeding $2500 be reviewed by the center’s small-business specialist to determine if they could be set aside exclusively for small businesses. In addition, KSC had successfully participated in a program aimed at awarding contracts to minority-owned firms, with $7 million in awards made since the program began. (KSC Release 70-75) The scientists agreed that the missions under consideration could be undertaken jointly by NASA and the European Space Research Organization: ESRO would have primary responsibility for the spacecraft, and NASA would provide the launch vehicle. (NASA Activities, June 75)
The Department of Defense announced the award of a $1 500 000 costplus-incentive-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for launch services for the Atlas E and F vehicles at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (DOD Release 8—75)
Johnson Space Center announced award of a $11.5-million contract to General Electric Co. Space Div. to provide acceptance-checked equipment for the Space Shuttle orbiter. The equipment would be used to conduct standard tests and to detect variances in spacecraft systems in assembly at the Rockwell International Corp. plant. GE would also provide checkout support during the approach and landing phases of the Shuttle missions. (JSC Release 75—92)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
More than 19 000 aerospace workers struck McDonnell Douglas Corp. facilities in Missouri, California, and Florida, saying that their demands for increased wages and benefits had not been met. In McDonnell’s St. Louis plant, where the Defense Dept.’s F—4 Phantom jets and F—15 Eagle fighters were built, 12 000 employees walked off the job. The press quoted company officials as saying that the strike would slow, and perhaps stop, production. Only the few aircraft ready for final assembly and flight testing would be completed. About 7000 workers walked out of California facilities, including Vandenberg Air Force Base. At Kennedy Space Center, 200 McDonnell Douglas employees struck, causing postponement of the Telesat—C launch scheduled 6 March on a McDonnell-built Delta launch vehicle. (C Trib, 11 Feb 75; NASA PIO, interview, 14 Feb 75)
Kennedy Space Center announced a reorganization to prepare for the Space Shuttle era of space operations. John J. Neilon, Director of Unmanned Launch Operations since 1970, was named Deputy Director of Technical Support; George F. Page, Chief of Operations, Div. of Manned Spacecraft Operations, would move into Neilon’s former post. The Launch Operations Directorate would be reorganized into four major second-level groups: engineering, payloads, space transportation systems processing, and expendable vehicle operations. (KSC Release 253—75)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
NASA was considering resuming exploration of the moon in 1980, using a low-cost unmanned satellite to map the entire lunar surface from orbit, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Marius B. Weinreb told United Press International in a telephone interview. The proposed satellite, together with a small communications relay satellite, would gather information needed by scientists to organize the vast amount of data collected during the Apollo lunar landing missions. One mission of the satellite would be to provide a detailed chart of the lunar gravitational field, including field variations, to tell scientists more about the composition of the moon and perhaps about its origin and evolution. Previous lunar orbiters had merely mapped and photographed the lunar surface. Although scientists had learned much from Apollo data about the gravitational field of the moon’s near side, they knew little about the far side. The proposed satellite— equipped with instruments including x-ray and gamma-ray sensors— and its accompanying high-orbiting comsat, which would remain in range of both the satellite and the earth at all times, would send back to earth data on the entire lunar surface. Weinreb told UPI that NASA administrators had considered including the proposed project in the FY 1977 budget. Budget restrictions might prevent NASA from initiating new projects. (UPI, NYT, 11 Sept 75, 11; interview, Weinreb, 13 June 78)
NASA announced appointment of Gonzalo Fernandez as Assistant Associate Administrator for Center Operations, replacing Raymond A. Kline, appointed Assistant Administrator of Institutional Management. Fernandez, who came to NASA from the Air Force, would be responsible for the Offices of Administrative Data Processing Management, Information Systems, NASA Aircraft, Safety and Environmental Health, and Operating Systems. (NASA anno, 16 Sept 75)
A meeting at Goddard Space Flight Center of U.S. and U.S.S.R. officials to discuss a cooperative meteorology program recommended that in May—July 1976 each country, within a single 27-day solar rotation, launch two series of sounding rockets—one under quiet magnetic conditions, the other under disturbed magnetic conditions. In 1977 the two countries should hold a rocket-data comparison test in the vicinity of Wallops Island, Va. Both countries should launch more meteorological rockets during atmospheric warming periods. In 1976—1978 both countries should research radiation transfer as a factor in temperature sensing from satellites. From 1975—1978 joint remote-sensing, experiments using microwave were proposed, along with exchange of information on frequencies and data format to be used with direct-broadcast equipment. (NASA Gen Mgmt Rev Rpt, 17 March 75)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $4 778 000 contract extension to Bendix Corp.’s Launch Support Div. for support services including operation and maintenance of Launch Complex 39, mobile launchers, mobile service structure, industrial complexes, technical shops, propellant systems, life-support facilities, and a components-cleaning laboratory. The 4rmo extension brought the total value of the contract to $266 662 753. Complex 39, launch site for the Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz Test Project missions, would be the launch and landing site for Space Shuttle. Modification of the facilities was under way. (KSC Release 260— 75)
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton began a 3-wk preflight medical isolation at 12 pm CDT. Called the flight health stabilization plan, the isolation limited the astronauts to specific working and training areas at Johnson Space Center. In offhours they were being housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened personnel, wearing surgical face masks, could come into face-to-face contact with the astronauts. (JSC Release 75—59: Ezell e£ al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 313)
An Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight readiness review at Kennedy Space Center was attended by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee; and top management from NASA Headquarters and Marshall, Johnson, and Kennedy Space Centers. During the meeting Lee said that “ASTP is on schedule and ‘go’ for launch on July 15.” Top management had reviewed and closed out all aspects of flight preparations. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun-ney reported that no hardware problems remained that might interfere with an. on-time launch. MSFC Saturn Program Manager Ellery B. May reported that the 8-yr-old Saturn IB launch vehicle had been carefully checked out and all components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during one of these inspections corrosion cracks had been discovered in the fins, requiring them to be replaced [see 19 Feb.—19 March], May reported that the vehicle was ready to fly. William H. Rock, manager of the Sciences and Applications Project Office at JSC, said that modifications, including a larger, more effective lightning rod on the launch tower, had been made to the launch pad to minimize the hazards from lightning strikes. Jesse R. Gulick, KSC meteorologist, said that thunderstorm probability for launch day was 23% and that the probability of a tropical storm or hurricane winds was less than 3%. Based on previous years’ data, chances were good that, even if bad weather postponed the primary launch date, the Apollo spacecraft could be launched within 4 days. (MSFC Release 75 — 119; KSC Release 104 —75; Marshall Star, 18 June 75, 1; Ezell et al.. The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 310 — 12)
The Air Force launched a “spy satellite” from Kennedy Space Center at 12:15 am EST into a stationary orbit at about 36 000 km above earth. Although no announcement had been made of the success or failure of the launch, observers next day concluded that the launch had been successful. The satellite was one of a series designed to monitor missile launchings in China and the Soviet Union to give a 30-min warning of a land-launched attack or about 10-min warning of a missile attack from submarines. It had been launched by a Titan IIIC, 24th of this type launched from Cape Canaveral, and was thought to carry both infrared sensing equipment and still and TV cameras to permit day and night monitoring. (NYT, 16 Dec 75, 14; C Trib, 15 Dec 75, 5)
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)
The computer aboard Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) was the most advanced of its type ever flown on an unmanned NASA satellite, NASA announced. Able to handle up to 55 ground-station commands controlling spacecraft operations for up to 24 hrs, the compact digital computer was a forerunner of the NASA Standard Space Computer that will be used in a wide variety of unmanned missions. Managed by Goddard Space Flight Center, the standard space computer program was part of an agency-wide program to develop standardized satellite components, both to reduce costs and to increase reliability. The program also covers other spacecraft hardware such as nickel-cadmium batteries, transponders, attitude-control thrusters, pyrotechnic initiators, silicon solar cells, and tape recorders. (NASA Release 75 —85)
Dow Jones and Co.’s Wall Street Journal signed a 7-yr contract with American Satellite Corp. for the design and construction of earth stations and provision of high-speed communications that would permit a Florida-based WSJ printing plant to receive, via satellite, full printed pages for facsimile reproduction. Full pages would be transmitted, at an average rate of 3 min a page, from WSJ’s Massachusetts printing plant to a receiving antenna in Florida. The antenna would connect to printing equipment in the Florida plant, which would transform the communications signal into printed pages again. (AmSatCorp Release, 25 March 75; AmSatCorp Marketing Services Mgr., interview, 30 Nov 76; Jones, W Post, 1 April 75)
Two U.S. Air Force communications satellites, launched from Eastern Test Range, failed to reach orbit when the third stage of the Titan IIIC launch vehicle malfunctioned and tumbled out of control. United Press International quoted an Air Force spokesman as saying the two satellites, valued at $57 million, were to have been placed in geostationary orbits, one over the Pacific Ocean and the other over the Indian Ocean. The 544-kg comsats—designed to handle as many as 13 000 telephone calls or to relay televised or printed messages without danger of jamming or eavesdropping—would have completed the worldwide military communications network begun in 1973. Officials believed that a power problem was responsible for the failure. (UPI, NYT, 21 May 75, 40)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced selection of PM Facilities Management Corp. for a 2-yr $3 500 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide processing, preparation, retrieval, reproduction, and distribution of space-science data for the National Space Science Data Center. PMI would also maintain, upgrade, develop, and implement plans for improved data-handling information systems, and would provide scientific analyses and programming, prepare reports, maintain files, order supplies and equipment, and operate photographic and microfilm equipment. The Data Center served as a NASA-wide depository for space-science data and a means of analyzing and disseminating this information beyond that provided by principal investigators. (GSFC Release G—24-75)
NASA successfully launched Oso 8 Orbiting Solar Observatory at 7:43 am EDT from Eastern Test Range on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster, after a 1-day delay because of an electrical malfunction in the launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered a near-perfect circular orbit with a 560-km apogee, 544-km perigee, 95.74-min period, and 32.94° inclination. By 23 June Oso 8 was stabilized and was accurately tracking the center of the sun as planned. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. By 27 June all eight experiments had been activated and were acquiring data. Primary objective of the Oso 8 mission was to investigate the sun’s lower corona and its chromosphere, and their interface in the ultraviolet spectral region, to better understand the transport of energy from the photosphere into the corona. Secondary objective was to study solar x-rays and earth-sun relationships and to investigate the background component of cosmic x-rays. The 1064-kg spacecraft had two sections: A rotating cylindrical bottom section—the wheel—accommodated experiments that did not require solar reference pointing or that scanned the celestial sphere. The nonspinning rectangular sail section mounted on top of the wheel accommodated experiments that required stable pointing at the sun. The spacecraft carried eight experiments. The two on the sail section were a Univ. of Colo, high-resolution ultraviolet spectrometer to measure solar-ultraviolet line profiles in the range of 1050 to 2300 A and their variation with time and position, and a spectrometer and a Cassegrain telescope that would observe the solar chromospheric structure simultaneously in six lines from 1000 to 4000 A originating from different levels in the sun’s atmosphere. This experiment was provided by France’s Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Other experiments—all on the wheel portion of the spacecraft and supplied by U.S. universities, industry, and government agencies— included a high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer to monitor the sun’s emission in the 2- to 8-kev range, obtain a complete spectrum of the sun every 10 sec during flares, and obtain high-resolution spectra of many celestial x-ray sources; a mapping x-ray heliometer to measure location, spectrum, and intensity of intermediate-energy x-rays from individual solar-active regions and to acquire data on extrasolar x-ray sources; an investigation of soft x-ray background radiation using proportional counters; a cosmic x-ray spectroscope to determine the spectra of sources and the diffuse cosmic x-ray background in the energy range of 2 to 60 kev, and to measure intensity variations and identify possible emission lines of discrete x-ray sources; a high-energy celestial x-ray experiment to measure the spectrum of all point x-ray sources observable in the energy range of 0.01 to 1 megaelectron volts, and to search for temporal variations in the intensity and spectrum of the point sources detected; and a study of extreme ultraviolet radiations from earth and space, to determine the behavior of atoms such as hydrogen and neutral and ionized helium in the earth’s atmosphere by measuring the intensity and distribution of solar radiation resonantly scattered by these atoms. Oso 8 was the ninth, and last, in a series of spin-stabilized orbiting solar observatories designed to gather new knowledge of the sun, the earth’s atmosphere, and sun-activated terrestrial phenomena over a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum not detectable by ground-based equipment. Of the eight OSO launches that began with Oso 1 on 7 March 1962, only one, OSO—C, was unsuccessful, because of a launch-vehicle failure. Discoveries made by OSO spacecraft included gamma-ray emissions from the galactic center; a previously unknown isothermal plateau in the chromosphere of the solar atmosphere; differences in the structure of the extreme ultraviolet corona above quiet and active regions on the solar disk; evidence that the corona above the solar poles was significantly cooler than nonactive coronal regions near the equator; and synoptic observations of “holes” in the corona that survived several solar rotations. Oso 8—built by Hughes Aircraft Co.—was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs, 4 June 75,23 June 75,27 June 75; NASA Release 75 — 158) 23 June: NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration signed an interagency cooperative agreement to enhance the national energy effort. ERDA and NASA management would identify specific program tasks that could be undertaken by NASA centers in support of ERDA programs. ERDA would use NASA’s basic and applied research capabilities in areas including solar heating and cooling systems, gas turbines, fuel cells, hydrogen technology, ground-propulsion technology, bearings, seals, combustion, automatic control systems, and materials and structures technology. NASA would submit proposals and plans to ERDA for specific technology developments including testing, evaluation, and demonstration of projects or hardware; ERDA would also call upon NASA for specific short- and long-term technical and administrative expertise such as technical review boards, evaluation groups, and other assessment techniques. The agreement would establish an ERDA—NASA program committee to annually review NASA research and development work in support of ERDA. (NASA Release 75-182; ERDA Release 75-99)
Observation of the sun’s magnetic fields might make it possible to predict weather 4 days in advance with greater reliability, said scientists at the Institute for Plasma Research at Stanford University. Investigators at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Boulder, Colo., and at Stanford said that magnetic forces from the sun played a role in formation of pressure troughs on earth, which bring rainy weather; observations from space, corroborated from earth measurements, indicate influence on weather from solar flares, sunspots, and high velocities of the solar wind. The weather effect involved two phenomena, the sun’s magnetic-sector structure and a concept called the vorticity-area index. The index is a measure of the size of low-pressure troughs in square kilometers, calculated by computer from twice-daily standard weather-service maps. As solar magnetic sectors and boundaries were measured regularly at Mt. Wilson Observatory, the Astro-physical Observatory in the Crimea, and the Stanford Solar Observatory, scientists could compare the solar magnetic structure with the vorticity-area index to see whether the sun structure affected the nature and size of low-pressure troughs that bring rain and stormy weather. (NYT, 16 Nov 75, 40)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $1 612 948 extension to a $600 000 contract to Reynolds, Smith, and Hills Co. for Space Shuttle architectural and engineering services. The contract, which would run until June 1977, provided for modification to Pad A and Mobile Launcher 3 at Launch Complex 39, both being reconfigured for the Space Shuttle. (KSC Release 109—75)
The Air Force Systems Command reported that researchers at the Air Force Avionics Laboratory were testing fiber optics—thin strands of glass that transmit light—to transmit avionic signals from one point to another in an aircraft. Fiber-optics data transfer began with an electronic signal that was converted into light by a transducer; the light traveled through glass strands and was reconverted at the other end into electrical signals, with minimal loss of energy. AFSC quoted Avionics Lab researchers as saying that, unlike the usual copper wire, fiber optics were unaffected by static from nearby electrical equipment and were immune to lightning, nuclear radiation, electrical sparking, fires, and grounding problems. Because extensive lab testing was nearly complete, the next step would be a low-cost flight-test program, perhaps on a remotely piloted vehicle (RPV). The Avionics Lab also had awarded contracts to develop passive optical couplers, a fiber-optics data bus, and a wideband fiber-optics system that would handle large data rates. The proposed Air Force Advanced Development Program could put a total fiber-optics system on manned and unmanned aerospace vehicles by 1980. (AFSC Release OIP 087.75)
A theory that the moon was actually a piece of the earth broken away early in the planet’s formation 4.5 billion yrs ago was presented in a paper by Dr. John A. O’Keefe, a Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Professor Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner from the Univ. of California. The paper, presented by Dr. O’Keefe at a meeting of the Royal Society in London, stated that although the moon had little, if any, metallic core, data from Apollo lunar-landing missions and earlier unmanned lunar flights had provided chemical evidence that lunar rocks were once a part of a mass that had included a considerable portion of molten iron. The higher proportion of molten metal in the earth supported the theory that, before the split, the iron in the earth had sunk to the center, drawing with it the gold, platinum, and other rare metals found in molten rock originally mixed with the iron. According to the theory, the moon was pushed to its present distance from the earth by interaction with the tides of the body of the earth. Other theories about the formation of the moon included the possibility that the moon had been captured by the earth’s gravitational field when it passed near the earth, or that it had been formed simultaneously with the earth. Neither of those theories explained the moon’s lack of a substantial metallic core. (NASA Release 75—171)
Viking Lander 1 would undergo a critical milestone in its development, terminal sterilization, beginning 13 June, Robert S. Kramer, NASA Director of Planetary Programs, said at a Viking news conference in Washington, D.C. The Lander would remain in the oven for 2.5 days and then be removed and checked out. Past missions had failed because “maybe we knew how to sterilize a spacecraft but we didn’t know how to make one work after it was sterilized,” Kramer said. However, “we think we know a lot more now than we did 15 years ago. We believe we have developed the techniques to be fully reliable, but when we complete that test along about next Tuesday morning, then we are going to find out for sure.” A. Thomas Young, Viking Mission Operations Manager at Langley Research Center, said that plans called for launch of Viking 1 on 11 Aug. and launch of Viking 2 on 21 Aug. Mission planners had deliberately arranged for the first Viking to arrive at Mars on 18 June 1976, after 10 mos of travel, and Viking 2 to arrive on 7 Aug. 1976, about 1 yr after it was launched. Both spacecraft would spend about 17 days in orbit examining landing sites “to assure ourselves that they continue to be safe.” The sites, which had not been examined since 1971, must be checked again because Mars was a dynamic planet. Lander 1 was scheduled to begin its descent 4 July and start black-and-white photography immediately upon landing. Color photography would begin 18 hr later. The first soil sample would be collected on the eighth day. Analysis of the sample would take 12 days to complete, and 20 days would be required to complete one cycle of all surface science. Young noted that, to avoid confusion during the mission, Martian days would be called “sols” because they were a half-hour longer than earth days. During surface operations, the Orbiter passing overhead once a day would remain synchronized with the Lander; on the pass, the Orbiter, acting as a communications satellite, would relay information from the Lander to earth. When the Lander completed its work, the Orbiter would perform observations of its own, studying Martian surface features, including the proposed Lander B landing site, from orbit. (Transcript)
Kennedy Space Center announced the award of a $6 473 074 fixedprice indefinite-quantity contract to Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for minicomputers and associated equipment and services for the Space Shuttle. The contract included $4 226 646 in hardware and services already ordered and $2 246 428 in additional hardware. Modular Computer Systems would supply minicomputers, peripheral equipment, special interface devices, associated software, engineering and maintenance support, spares, and documentation. (KSC Release 114—75)
The Air Force was again studying the feasibility of a nuclear-powered aircraft twice the size of the C—5, the Washington Star reported. In an interview with the Star, Dr. Lawrence W. Noggle, program manager for nuclear aircraft-propulsion technology at Wright — Patterson Air Force Base, said that nuclear power could be used as an alternative power source for large subsonic aircraft. Other potential fuels under study were liquid methane, liquid hydrogen, and coal. A nuclear-powered aircraft, which would require larger engines to carry a larger cargo, could use conventional fuel for takeoff and landing and then switch to nuclear power at cruise speed. The Star quoted Dr. Noggle as saying, “We could use modified jet engines. . . with the reactor totally isolated from the engine through containment.” He predicted that nuclear-powered aircraft could fly for days without refueling. (W Star, 1 April 75, A4)
The Air Force had successfully test-flown an F—111D turbofan jet engine with all-composite third-stage fan blades 40% lighter than conventional titanium fan blades. The tests—made at Edwards Air Force Base—marked the first military flight evaluation of a rotating structural engine component made of composite materials. Objectives of the flight-test program were to determine long-term environmental effects on the material and to verify potential operation and maintenance cost benefits. Use of composites could provide a 15 to 20% weight savings in jet engines, allowing increased payloads or extended range. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 1)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew was making “excellent progress” recovering from lung ailments that developed when the crew inhaled nitrogen tetroxide during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July], Johnson Space Center Director of Life Sciences Richard S. Johnston told a crew-status press briefing at JSC. Johnston told reporters that, if the crew continued to progress, they would be released from Tripler Hospital on 29 July. However, their activities would be restricted for an additional 10 days to protect them from undue exposure to large crowds, to ensure continued improvement, and to avoid respiratory complications. (ASTP Transcript PC-59)
Pan American World Airways announced the industry’s first nonstop flights from New York and Los Angeles to Tokyo, beginning early in 1976. The announcement came a day after a new Boeing 747SP jetliner had made a demonstration flight New York to Tokyo in 13 hrs 33 min, fastest commercial service to Japan from the U.S. Current commercial time on that route, which required a refueling stop, was more than 17 hr. The Boeing 747SP (special performance) was 100 seats smaller than the 747-21, but had the same fuel capacity and the same four engines as the larger model. The SP had been capable of cruising faster and higher than any other commercial jetliner and had a range of 1200 km beyond that of the standard 747. (B Sun, 15 Nov 75, A9)
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)
In NASA’s 5—10 yr Global Air Sampling Program (GASP), a second instrumented Boeing 747 jumbo aircraft began sampling flights monitoring pollution in the earth’s atmosphere. GASP data on carbon dioxide, ozone, water vapor, and particles larger than 0.3 microns would help determine whether the amount of ozone was being altered, whether vapor trails from jets contributed to cloud cover, and the amount of pollution caused by aircraft. The first GASP-instrumented 747 began flights in December 1974. Four aircraft—one each from United Airlines, Pan American, Qantas Airways, and Scandinavian Airlines—would be instrumented for global sampling. (NASA Release 75— 60)
The Federal Communications Commission approved a plan for International Business Machines Corp. and Communications Satellite Corp.’s Comsat General subsidiary to form a domestic satellite company with a third company as long as no partner owned less than 10% or more than 49% of the stock. However, a plan in which IBM would replace Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. as Comsat’s partner and own 55% was rejected. The FCC stated that this plan would give IBM too much power over the specialized communications business. Other alternatives suggested by the FCC included a plan whereby IBM and Comsat could independently enter the communications satellite business or Comsat could join another consortium without IBM. Another alternative was that Comsat, which was not permitted to deal directly with the public, could lease space communications circuits to IBM under an arrangement similar to the one Comsat had with American Telephone & Telegraph Co. Whatever the arrangement, FCC ruled, IBM must establish a separate corporation for its satellite operations. (FCC Memorandum Opinion and Order 75—156; FCC Release 46281; DJ, WPost, 24 Jan 75, D7; W Star-News, 24 Jan 75, F21)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two 9-mo contracts for parallel design studies of a biological holding facility for Spacelab. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. received $242 640 and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received $177 360 to develop conceptual designs of habitats for live biological specimens supporting life-sciences space flight research programs. The habitats—consisting of the structure and the environmental-control, food and watering, waste-management, lighting, and instrumentation systems—were to be suitable for a wide variety of specimens with emphasis on the adult rhesus monkey and the adult laboratory rat. (MSFC Release 75-133) 25 June—3 July: The countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step dress rehearsal for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, was successfully completed at Kennedy Space Center. The rehearsal culminated in actual fueling of the Saturn IB and a simulated launch of the Apollo at 3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. The cryogenic propellants loaded for the “wet” portion of the test were off-loaded and the final portion of the count repeated with crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton aboard the spacecraft. A second simulated ignition and liftoff occurred at 2 pm EDT on 3 July. During the test, a leak detected in Brand’s spacesuit was traced to one of the pressure-sealing slide fasteners. Modifications were made and the spacesuit was successfully retested. {Spaceport News, 26 June 75, 1;KSC Release 115—75;Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
Goddard Space Flight Center awarded a $20 000 research grant to the University of Florida to establish the feasibility of the electromagnetic wave energy-conversion (EWEC) concept. The EWEC converter used electromagnetic antennas to absorb the sun’s electromagnetic radiation into an array of insulated components and then convert it directly to electricity. The absorber operated similarly to insect antennae and the retina of the eye: Insects communicated by the reception of infrared and other electromagnetic radiation or energy, using their antennae tuned to the proper frequency by nature’s design. Once received, the energy was converted into electrical impulses. (NASA Release 75 — 102) During April—May. NASA conducted Atmospheric Variability Experiment IV and Atmospheric Variability Severe Storms Experiments I and II in cooperation with the U.S. Air Force, Army, National Weather Service, and several universities. Coordinating data collected over the eastern two-thirds of the U.S. by satellites, aircraft, radar, and weather balloons, participants hoped to develop new techniques for predicting where and when tornadoes might strike. The data collected, including information on thunderstorms, updrafts, and wind and cloud data, would be compared with ground-truth observations to determine the relationship between severe storms and their environment. Participating in the experiments were 41 radiosonde stations, 18 radar stations, 7 instrumented aircraft, and 5 meteorological satellites. (MSFC Release 75 — 102) May 1975
Frank Briscoe Co., Inc., and Santa Fe Engineers, Inc., were the apparent successful bidders on two major Space Shuttle contracts which would be awarded by Kennedy Space Center, KSC announced. Frank Briscoe Co. had bid $8 733 300 on a contract for the construction of the Orbiter processing facility, Orbiter towway, and associated site work and utilities at KSC. It was in the processing facility that the Orbiters would be safed, serviced, and maintained after returning from flights into space and then prepared for their next mission. Phase 1 of the construction—scheduled for March 1977 completion—included a 5000-sq-m building with a low bay area 88 m long, 30 m wide, and 8 m high and two high bay areas 61 m long, 46 m wide, and 29 m high. Santa Fe Engineers had bid $3 567 567 on a contract to construct the Shuttle approach and landing test facilities at Flight Research Center. The contract would include site preparation, construction of a maintenance hangar and shops, Shuttle Orbiter mating structure area, hypergolic fuel and oxidizer area, fire protection pump station, concrete towway and service aprons, parking area and road paving, and necessary utilities. The project was scheduled for completion in September 1976. (KSC Release 73—75) '
President Ford’s announcement that he intended to restore the White House Office of Science and Technology was discussed in a Washington Post editorial: most scientists were heartened by President Ford’s announcement. They had unanimously deplored President Nixon’s decision to abolish the office, believing that it was vital to the nation’s well-being for the President to get the most objective possible scientific assessment of new weaponry, as well as of medical, economic, and environmental policies. However, scientists also felt that the establishment of the office and the possible appointment of National Science Foundation Director Dr. H. Guyford Stever as its head would not solve the problem. A report drafted by a committee of 13 leading scientists had spelled out what was needed: establishment of a Council for Science and Technology that would carry the same weight as the Domestic and Economic Councils and could hold its own with the Office of Management and Budget and DOD. Any serious candidate for the top science job would want to consider whether the President “really intends to make constructive use of a science adviser. Past experience tells us that the best mechanism for advice from the scientific community is of no avail if the President isn’t listening.” (IF Post, 31 May 75, A12) During May: Preparations continued for late summer launches of the two Viking spacecraft to Mars. A Lander 1 plugs-out test was completed 8 May, 2 days later than planned, because of a grounding problem. By 26 May all flight equipment, except for the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer, had been installed on Lander 1. Lander 2 was mated with its protective aeroshell on 28 May. Orbiter 1 was undergoing final mechanical assembly as the flight subsystems became available after individual reworking. By 31 May all temperature-control louvers, protective covers, and thermal blankets had been installed. Initial Orbiter 2 system testing was completed 5 May, and Orbiter block validation tests were begun. All solar panels for both Orbiters had been assembled and swing-tested, and were awaiting buildup of the low-pressure gas system. On 13 May a major hardware review of both landers was held at Kennedy Space Center with 100 NASA and industry participants. The review was the final chance to discuss modifications in the spacecraft before closure of the bottom plates and sterilization. Following the review, Langley Research Center’s Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said, “Everything is going just great and right on schedule.” (Viking launch and mission operations status bulletins 4, 5, 6; NASA Activities, June 75)
Doctors had rechecked x-rays of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s lungs taken before the 15 July launch and found that they also had shown a shadow revealed by postflight x-rays, Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, NASA’s ASTP physician, said at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. Dr. Nicogossian said that the spot had not been noticed before because the x-rays were difficult to read and the spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony structure. Only a 6 Aug. tomogram [see 25 Aug.] had verified that the shadow was a lesion. Dr. Nicogossian said the nitrogen tetroxide inhaled by the ASTP astronauts during reentry [see 15—26 July] had not been shown to have caused or increased the size of the lesion. Dr. Nicogossian added that, if cancer were diagnosed during the surgery, the usual medical procedure was to remove a part of the lobe, but he did not think that would prevent Slayton from flying in the future. Slayton said that he felt “pretty damn lucky” that the lesion had been discovered when it was. “This thing could have been discovered before the flight. . . . And I could have easily gotten jerked off the flight, so that would have been bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had the gas in the cockpit on reentry, . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have picked this thing up until my next annual physical which is 6 or 8 months off.” Then it would have been a “lot tougher” to fix. Slayton, one of the seven original U.S. astronauts, had been grounded in 1962 because of an erratic heart rate, first detected in 1959, but had been returned to flight status March 1972 in time for assignment to ASTP. He told the briefing that he hoped to be out of the hospital within 7 days and back to work in 2 wk, and on flight status again within a month. (Transcript, ASTP PC—63, 20 Aug 75)
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
The Air Force announced successful test flight of an F— 111D equipped with a turbofan jet engine having all-composite third-stage fan blades 40% lighter than conventional titanium blades. This was the first military operational evaluation of a rotating structural engine component made of composite materials. (AFSC Release OIP 214.75)
The Air Force System Command’s Materials Laboratory had successfully static-tested a full-scale F—15 aircraft wing constructed of advanced composite materials, AFSC announced. The wing had withstood a maximum load 45% greater than expected during actual flight, before giving way at the point where the titanium rear spur flange and upper skin were bolted together. The composite wing, 18% lighter than an allmetal wing, was made of a brown epoxy thin honeycomb sandwich material reinforced with graphite-epoxy stiffeners. The ribs were graphite-epoxy and the spurs were metal. The wing, the largest aircraft wing ever built of advanced composite materials, was 4.9 m wide at the root chord and 1.5 m wide at the tip chord, and had a 4.3-m span. The program had begun in May 1971 with an $8.2-million contract award to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for development of the wing, which was expected to reduce fuel requirements by increasing range, speed, and maneuverability. (AFSC Release OIP 021.75)
Johnson Space Center announced that the first of two Space Shuttle training aircraft had been test flown at Grumman American Aviation’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. The modified Gulfstream II would be used to train crews for Orbiter descent and landing procedures. The cockpit layout and the aerodynamic modifications of the trainers provided motion and visual cues and handling qualities similar to those of the actual Orbiter. The two trainers would be delivered to Johnson Space Center early in 1976. (JSC Roundup, 10 Oct 75, 1)
NASA’s new Low Cost Modular Spacecraft (LCMS), a recoverable compartmented spacecraft being considered for use aboard the Space Shuttle, was. demonstrated at a news conference at Rockwell International Corp.’s Space Division. The LCMS consisted of an instrument and spacecraft assembly joined by a transition ring. Scientific instruments or earth-resources sensors could be attached to the LCMS for specific missions. Designed by Goddard Space Flight Center engineers, the LCMS would fit into the 5- by 18-m payload bay of the Orbiter and also could serve as a platform for as many as 14 satellites. The system could be placed in orbit by the Shuttle and later serviced or recovered and returned to earth for needed repairs. Dr. Robert G. Wilson, Director of Advanced Payload Analysis at NASA Headquarters', said that a recoverable modular satellite system such as LCMS could save as much as $100 million annually over the cost of nonrecoverable satellites. (JSCRoundup, 14Feb 75, 3;GoddardNews, Feb 75, 8)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D— Mass.) introduced S. 397 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to acquire and maintain for future generations the site in Auburn, Mass., on which Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched the first liquid-propelled rocket on 16 March 1926. (CR, 27 Jan 75, S884) 27 January—13 February: A joint conference of technical directors for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project met at Johnson Space Center. Participants in the conference, held while U.S. and Soviet working groups also met at JSC (see 16 Jan. —8 Feb.), reviewed the progress of ASTP preparations and published the necessary documentation. A joint communique issued 13 Feb. stated that discussions and agreements were completed on technical questions relating to the development of new spacecraft equipment and design improvement, mission ground-support equipment, and publication of technical documentation. The communique also stated that communication lines between U.S. and U.S.S.R. centers fully guaranteed the flow of information necessary to conduct the joint mission. Both docking systems were carefully checked and were ready for flight, with final checkouts scheduled at the respective launch sites. Crew training was proceeding satisfactorily (see 7—26 Feb.) with the final joint training session scheduled for April in the U.S.S.R. Soviet ASTP Technical Director, Professor Konstantin D. Bush-uyev, had informed U.S. officials that Soyuz 16 (launched 2 Dec. 1974) had successfully completed a full test of basic flight phases planned for ASTP as well as performance of spacecraft systems and interaction with U.S.S.R. ground Control systems. Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. tracking activity during the flight had shown that the precision of tracking information was satisfactory. During a 13 Feb. press conference at JSC, Professor Bushuyev said that, in addition to changes in the Soyuz life-support systems and the addition of the docking apparatus, other design changes on the Soyuz spacecraft included the installation of a transporter for the Apollo and related antennas, a new interspacecraft communications system, an optical target to permit Apollo to target the approach and rendezvous, and some flashing beacons and orientation lights. (Joint communique text; JSC press briefing transcript, 13 Feb 75)
The Air Force Systems Command announced the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils half the size of a C—5 aircraft’s wing to recover remotely piloted vehicles (RPVs). RPVs were currently retrieved by recovery helicopters, a reliable but expensive system affected by weather conditions. The parafoil, part of an AF effort to find cheaper ways to land RPVs, was a high glider which, when deployed like a parachute, would take on an airfoil shape and descend at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. Under the terms of the contract Aero would design and build two 12- by 24-m parafoils for testing scheduled to begin in May. (AFSC Release OIP 81.75)
NASA and the Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Systems Organization had jointly contracted for procurement of 12 advanced meteorological satellites, saving more than $37 million, AFSC announced. Both agencies had developed satellites to observe and report worldwide weather conditions and were negotiating procurement of improved, longer lived meterological spacecraft. The contracts for long-leadtime parts for the new satellites—nine for NASA and three for the Air Force—were a follow-on to an earlier Air Force procurement program for a meterological satellite identified as Block 5D. Although some of the systems differed, similar technical requirements permitted the basic spacecraft to serve both agencies. Use of an already developed basic design would save NASA about $33 million, and the joint production contract would save both agencies nearly $2.4 million in material and assembly costs. (AFSC Release OIP
Kennedy Space Center announced award of an $18 749 million contract to Blount Brothers Construction Co. for modification of Launch Complex 39 Pad A, to accommodate all early Space Shuttle missions. The complex had been the site of all but one of the historic Saturn V launches; Pad B, from which the Skylab Orbital Workshop was launched, would be modified later. The contract included conversion of the mobile launcher for Shuttle operations. (KSC Release 164—75)
NASA had awarded a $2 548 265 contract amendment to Aeronutronic Ford Corp. of Houston for operation of the Mission Control Center at Johnson Space Center. The amendment to a contract originally awarded in 1963 called for additional labor and materials that would bring the value of the contract to $267 710 123. The work would employ 513 persons at the three AFC facilities in Houston, and in Penn, and Calif. (JSC Release 75—94)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
New members of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, led by Committee Chairman Olin E. Teague (D—Tex.), made an orientation tour of Kennedy Space Center. In addition to visits to Launch Complexes 36 and 39, the KSC industrial area, and the Visitors Information Center, the committee members viewed the Apollo spacecraft being readied for the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and the Viking lander being prepared for the August twin mission to Mars. The members also received special briefings on Center activities^ (KSC Release 11—75)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of General Electric Co.’s Space Div. and Martin Marietta Corp. for competitive negotiation of a contract to check out, control, and monitor subsystem hardware for the Space Shuttle launch processing system. The contractor would design, develop, build, test, and install the hardware. The launch processing system would use modern industrial automation techniques, applied to a modular concept, to meet maintenance and refurbishment requirements for tum-around and launch of the Space Shuttle. The other candidates for the contract had been Grumman Aerospace Corp. and Aeronutronic Ford Corp. (KSC Release 94—75)
A NASA-sponsored research program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology had demonstrated that ultraviolet light could convert water into a hydrogen fuel, NASA announced. MIT researchers placed a titanium dioxide crystal and a piece of platinum connected by a wire into a beaker of water in which inert ionic substances were dissolved to allow an electric current to flow. The titanium dioxide and platinum acted as electrodes, establishing electrical contact with the water. When ultraviolet light from a laser illuminated the titanium dioxide, application of electrical potentials as low as 0.2 volts produced hydrogen and oxygen gases. The process thus far was inefficient, only 1% of the light energy being converted into chemical energy. Researchers were experimenting with different electrodes and reaction temperatures to find methods that would decompose water using low-energy visible light instead of high-energy ultraviolet light, which was only a small fraction of the light available from the sun. (NASA Release 75—106) Dr. Michael Boretsky, Dept, of Commerce analyst, agreed, saying that the productivity decline could be attributed in part to the “relative decline in-the overall rate of the United States technological advance.” Since the mid-1960s, output per man-hour had been growing at half the average rate of the previous 100 yr, while productivity gains had been speeding up in other countries. Funds that could correct this situation by supporting the development of new technology had instead been channeled into social commitments. Dr. Ralph Landau, chemical engineer and president of Halcon, Inc., said that, because labor costs in the U.S. and leading foreign nations were virtually equal, it was no longer advantageous for U.S. companies to sell licenses to foreign enterprises to use American patents. Instead pressures existed to keep the technology at home, creating jobs in the U.S., and to sell U.S.-made goods abroad. During the business meeting on 22 April, 84 new members were elected to NAS “in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research.” NAE elected 86 U.S. engineers to its membership, including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, former Kennedy Space Center Director; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Associate Administrator; and Dean R. Chapman, Ames Research Center scientist. (NAS Release, 22 April 75; NAE Release, 1 April 75; joint NAS-NAE Release, 9 April 75; McElheny, NYT, 27 April 75, 15)
The first airborne terminal for an Air Force communications satellite system was being installed in a C—141 aircraft as part of a flight-test program to develop a system for transmitting high-priority messages throughout the world via Air Force repeater satellites. In addition to the C—141 terminal, the system included six additional airborne and four ground terminals. Results of the 6-mo test would help DOD decide whether the terminals should be produced in quantity. (AFSC Release OIP 303.74)
An A— 7D aircraft with a DIGITAC digital flight-control system—first of its kind to be flight-tested by the Air Force—made its first flight at Air Force Flight Test Center. DIGITAC was part of a program to investigate the feasibility of installing digital flight-control systems in current and future tactical fighter aircraft. The system, featuring a pilot-selectable control mode, would increase flight-control reliability with its component self-test capability, improve combat effectiveness by permitting multimode aircrafthandling qualities, and cost less because of the system’s inherent flexibility and the general availability of its digital components. (AFSC Release OIP 057.75)
Indecision and lack of a national policy had prevented the U.S. from having its own domestic communications satellite system after 9 yr of planning, a Washington Star article quoted Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk as saying. In less than 10 yr a global comsat system developed under U.S. leadership was carrying more than two-thirds of the world’s transocean communications. Canada had had its own since 1972. The problem, Charyk said, was that, after the success of the global system, “everybody wanted in.” Companies, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Western Union Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., RCA Corp., and Fairchild Industries, Inc., expressed interest in developing a domestic system. The Federal Communications Commission, whose job it was to decide who would operate such a system, seemed only intent upon keeping ComSatCorp and AT&T from dominating the field. Quoting Charyk, the Star said the net effect of this lack of a positive policy by the White House, Congress, and the regulatory agencies was that all the U.S. had to date were two or three earth stations using reproductions of the Canadian system. Despite the problems, Charyk said that two of ComSatCorp’s domestic programs were nearing operational stages: Marisat, a maritime comsat planned for a summer 1975 launch, and Comstar 1, scheduled for launch in 1976. ComSatCorp would also participate with several European countries and Canada in the Aerosat program to test the use of comsats for aircraft navigation. However, Charyk said that, under the “open skies” policies of the FCC , ComSatCorp had no guarantees of permanent service. “It is hard to get customers with these rules in effect.” (Snider, WStar, 20 June 75, D7)
Air Force Systems Command Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory scientists were studying changes in human body weights and sizes as part of a NASA-requested anthropometric study to help engineers design cockpits and crew stations for future use. NASA engineers who wanted to lay out the Space Shuttle work station were concerned that body sizes of the pilots might change before the station was used. The scientists performing the study, using both current data and data that went back as far as the Civil War, estimated that in 1985 a pilot would average nearly 2 kg heavier and 1.5 cm taller than in 1967, when he had weighed 78.5 kg and was 177 cm tall. In addition to statistics, NASA requested drawing board manikins for designing the Shuttle’s work areas. The study had produced two 2dimensional manikins like cardboard dolls with movable joints; each manikin was articulated in nine places to represent typical ranges of body movement. A 95% manikin represented a person 189.0 cm tall; a 5% manikin, representing a 168.3-cm astronaut or pilot, was designed so that only 5% of the 1985 pilot-astronaut population would be smaller. An engineer using both manikins could design a crew station or cockpit that would accommodate 90% of all astronauts and pilots. (AFSC Release OIP 072.75)
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)
In the general purpose laboratory (GPL) at Marshall Space Flight Center, investigators from MSFC and Johnson Space Center were conducting experiments in high-energy cosmic-ray astronomy, superfluid helium, optical x-ray astronomy, and life sciences. The objective of the experiments, designated concept verification test (CVT) 5, was to verify operational and integration concepts for their applicability to Spacelab, the reusable manned space laboratory being built by the European Space Agency as a payload for the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the high-energy astronomy experiment was to demonstrate the use of minicomputers for experiment operation, control, and data management, and the real-time interaction of payload specialists with experiment operations. The superfluid helium experiment examined characteristics of helium droplets at temperatures near 2.2 K (—512°F), which would help in developing cryogenic techniques for use in Spacelab. The optical astronomy experiment, which demonstrated remote experiment operation by obtaining data from a Ferson 40.6-cm telescope 9.2 kilometers away, gave practice in investigator-experiment interaction and helped in developing computer control techniques, display requirements for telescope operation and data management, and astronomy training requirements for crew members. The four life-sciences experiments included studies of sporophore formation, the vestibular function, a clinical diagnostic system, and muscle-like contractile protein. Investigators also participated in an experiment to demonstrate the use of a computer in real-time mission planning, scheduling, and applications. By involving investigators in the CVT simulations, NASA would be able to plan the most cost-effective use of Spacelab. (MSFC Release 75-178)
A significant influence on NASA’s ability to maintain viable programs in the face of possibly unstable funding will be the extent to which commercial and foreign government users participate in the development and financial support of future payloads,” Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. Av Wk interviewed the Director of Mission and Payload Integration in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, Philip E. Culbertson, who said that it would be better, in the long term, to move into a position where more organizations outside NASA were sponsoring and paying for missions and payloads. The agency was encouraged by the interest of industries in flying and funding Space Shuttle missions involving a wide range of basic scientific and technical operations. Foreign reimbursable payloads, already an important part of NASA launch operations, were seen as an even iarger factor in Shuttle payloads development. Japan, already holding discussions with NASA to lay the groundwork for a viable national space program, was considered a serious Shuttle customer; Japan would like to develop both scientific and earth applications programs in the communications, navigation, and weather satellite fields.. Canada’s interest in positioning domestic communications satellites over its territory would continue into the Shuttle era. Even individual Soviet scientists had made inquiries into the possibilities of flying payloads on the U.S. Shuttle. Culbertson pointed out that, unlike earlier NASA manned space programs that included scientific funding in overall program budgets, NASA in-house Shuttle payload development was the sole responsibility of the specific NASA disciplines themselves. NASA’s FY 1976 budget request contained from $50 to $100 million for various efforts that could evolve into Shuttle payloads, and the budget for FY 1977 would markedly increase payload funding. However, with the budget crunch, funding for Shuttle payloads would compete directly with other programs and the payload proposals “will have to stand on their own merit.” Culbertson also said that major decisions would have to be made on how long to keep which expendable launch vehicles in the program. In another interview, NASA Spacelab Program Director Douglas R. Lord said that upcoming major decisions concerning Spacelab included a follow-on procurement plan for Spacelab hardware and priorities on how often ESRO (European Space Research Organization) and other crews and experimental hardware would fly on Shuttle— Spacelab missions. Lord said that operations of overall Spacelab functions would probably be maintained separately from payload operations: Johnson Space Center was the logical place to handle overall operations, and Marshall Space Flight Center was the leading candidate for the Spacelab payload operations center. Goddard Space Flight Center had expressed interest in handling operational needs of the high-energy experiments on Spacelab pallets. (Covault, Av Wk, 17 March 75, 59- 60) 18March: “The expertise and facilities of LeRC [Lewis Research Center], as well as other NASA centers, are being considered by ERDA [Energy Research and Development Administration] as part of its overall definition of a total institutional structure required to carry out the nation’s energy R&D program,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., ERDA Administrator said in a letter to Representative Charles A. Mosher (R—Ohio). The letter was a reply to correspondence from members of the Ohio congressional delegation and Cleveland businessmen and industrialists to President Ford calling for increased use of LeRC talent to meet the nation’s energy crisis. Dr. Fletcher and Dr. Seamans noted that the newly established ERDA was the lead Federal agency for managing national energy R&D. ERDA intended to use the expertise and facilities of other Federal agencies where it was feasible and in the national interest with respect to cost, timeliness, and program management. LeRC, NASA’s lead center for aerospace propulsion and power, was already involved in ERDA-sponsored projects in solar heating and cooling, wind energy, and topping cycles to increase the efficiency of coal-fueled steam plants. But LeRC would continue its main task to work on propulsion technology, conducting energy research in support of ERDA “when it was consistent with the requirements of its principal mission within NASA.” (Text, letter to Mosher from Fletcher and Seamans, 18 March 75)
NASA’s Remotely Piloted Research Vehicle (RPRV) was being equipped with landing gear to enable it to land under control of a pilot on the ground, Flight Research Center announced. Previously helicopters and parachutes had been used in midair recovery of the vehicles. Developed by. FRC, the RPRV—a scale-model airplane up to 9 m long—was an economical and safe way to test advanced aircraft. After air launch of the RPRV, a test pilot in a ground-based cockpit used flight controls and instruments to “fly” the RPRV through maneuvers, while a camera provided visual information. First application of the landing gear would be for a spin test of a 3/8-scale model of the Air Force F—15 fighter. (FRC Release 3—75) .
Department of Defense said the Navy had understated the long-term cost of building the new F—18 carrier aircraft by at least $1.6 billion, the Washington Star reported. The Star said the Navy had chosen the F—18 under pressure from DOD and Congress, after the Air Force selected the F—16 for its low-cost fighter instead of the fighter version of the F—18. At the time the Navy estimated the cost of each F—18 as $7.8 million, or $2.6 billion to develop and produce the first 128 F—18s; however, the Star reported, a DOD analysis found the 5-yr costs would be closer to $4.3 billion. The future of the program was under discussion. One alternative would be to raise projected Navy budget to accommodate the increased costs of the F—18. Another would be for the Navy to drop F—18 and go back to industry to design and develop a lower cost fighter that would fit into the original budget and, in the interim, to let the Navy buy fighter-bombers from McDonnell Douglas to meet its fleet-modernization needs in the early 1980s. (Finney, W Star, 17 July 75, A16) 17 July. Pioneer 10, launched 2 March 1972 and traveling out of the solar system at 43 200 km per hr, was operating normally despite a report that the spacecraft was making unexplained orientation changes [see 11 June]. The apparent changes were caused when, during a routine change in spacecraft orientation on 6 May, the spacecraft’s star sensor made an undetected shift in its lock from the star Betelgeuse to the star Sirius. This shift twisted the frame of reference for measuring direction, and for changing the direction of spin-axis pointing. As a result, onboard and ground computers had recorded a gradual northward shift of the spin axis relative to the earth’s motion around the sun. Also, when the thrusters were fired to move the spin axis with the earth’s east-west course, “southward” impulses were necessary. No loss of data had occurred, and techniques were being designed to verify star reference during intervals when the star sensor was used. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)
The Space Shuttle orbiter might travel by ground rather than air from Rockwell International’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., to Edwards Air Force Base for its approach and landing tests, a Rockwell official said as the orbiter made its first appearance for the press. Original plan had been to send the orbiter piggyback on NASA’s Boeing 747 scheduled to launch the unpowered craft during its tests at Edwards. Travel on the ground would take 6 hr to go about 32 km, using an off-the-road vehicle inherited from the Apollo program, and would cost less. (NASA Release 75— 293; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 107)
The Air Force continued its development of the remotely piloted vehicle (RPV), the Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview reported. The Air Force awarded three 1-yr firm-fixed-price contracts for definition Studies of an advanced remotely piloted vehicle and associated elements. Rockwell International Corp. received $699 684; Boeing Aerospace Co., $646 750; and Northrop Corp., $499 614, to produce designs of an RPV for use in the 1980s. The system was expected to provide an improved cost-effective capability of carrying out electronic warfare, reconnaissance, and strike missions. The three companies would define the vehicle and its avionics, options of launch and recovery, ground-support elements, and systems maintenance to permit rapid mission turnaround. The Newsreview reported the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils, half the size of a C—5 aircraft wing, to recover RPVs returning from missions. Aero Co. would design and build for flight testing two 12- by 24-m parafoils— high-glide parachutes that, when deployed like a parachute, take on airfoil characteristics, descending at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. (AFSC Newsreview, June 75, 1) July 1975
NASA’s use of the firefly s two light-producing chemicals, luciferin and luciferase, to test for the chemical presence of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), an energy-storage compound present in every living cell, had increased interest in luminescence as a tool for medical research, the New York Times reported. Research done in 1948 by Johns Hopkins Univ. scientists had demonstrated that ATP was the third essential ingredient—along with luciferin and luciferase—necessary for the firefly’s glow, and that the amount of light generated was directly proportionate to the level of ATP present. The Hopkins scientists had also developed a simple test for life itself, since luciferin and luciferase added to any living matter could reproduce the firefly’s glimmer. NASA applied this information, with more sophisticated lightdetection instruments, to develop a test for life on Mars for use aboard the Viking spacecraft (launched 20 Aug.) NASA scientists working with the firefly chemicals at Goddard Space Flight Center had developed many applications, including a method of detecting bacteria in water; this permitted speedy diagnosis of urinary infections, as well as testing the effect of various antibiotics on particular infections. Univ. of Calif, scientists continued the research, adapting the techniques for related work in measuring creatine phosphokinase (CPK) in the bloodstream. CPK, present in all human blood, was produced in abnormally high quantities during muscle-cell degeneration that accompanied cardiac arrest or muscular dystrophy. CPK could be treated to produce ATP and, with the application of firefly chemicals, to produce a glow proportionate to the amount of CPK in the bloodstream. Researchers had used the measurements as a quick blood test to tell whether a patient had suffered a heart attack. (NYT, 25 Aug 75) 26 August—3 September: NASA launched Symphonie 2, France and West Germany’s second experimental communications satellite at 9:42 pm EDT 26 Aug. from Eastern Test Range. A three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta launch vehicle boosted the spacecraft into a synchronous transfer orbit with a 37 974-km apogee, 413-km perigee, 678.3-min period, and 13.2° inclination. On 29 Aug. at 11:48 am EDT, ground controllers activated the onboard liquid-fueled apogee motor to circularize the. orbit at geosynchronous altitude. By 31 Aug. Symphonie 2 was in an orbit with a 35 870-km apogee, 35 364-km perigee, 23-hr 47-min period, and O.CP inclination. NASA’s primary objective for the mission—to launch the Symphonie 2 into a synchronous transfer orbit with sufficient accuracy to enable the satellite to accomplish its operational mission—had been successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on 3 Sept. When finally positioned at 11.5° west longitude over the equator, the 402-kgSymphonie 2 would provide 1200 telephone, 8 voice, and 2 TV channels for experimental communications between Europe and the African and South American continents. Second of two experimental comsats developed by the French-West German Consortium Industriel Franee-Allemand pour le Satellite Symphonie (CIFAS), under the direction of Germany’s Gesellschaft fur Weltraumforschung GFW and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), Symphonie 2 would expand the French-West German experimental satellite TV and telegraph communications program begun with the launch of Symphonie 1 on 18 Dec. 1974. In October 1973 NASA had agreed to provide the launch vehicle and services on a cost-reimbursable basis, and in June 1974 had signed a launch services contract with the consortium. Estimated cost of hardware and services was $12 million. Goddard Space Flight Center, under the direction of the Office of Space Science, was responsible for the launch vehicle and for limited tracking during initial activities. When the satellite separated from the vehicle third stage, the Symphonie Project Operations Group in France and West Germany would assume operational responsibility. (NASAMORs S—492— 204— 75— 02, 25 July, 3 Sept; GSFC SSR, 31 Aug 75; GSFC Wkly SSR, 21—27 Aug 75; NASA Release 75— 234)
Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. representative in the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted its twelfth annual report to the President, covering the activities of ComSat from 1 July 1974—30 June 1975. Two more Intelsat IV satellites had been orbited, Intelsat IV F—8 21 Nov. 1974 over the Pacific Ocean and Intelsat IV F— 1 22 May 1975 over the Indian Ocean. A third satellite, Intelsat IV F—6, failed to achieve orbit when the launch vehicle malfunctioned. By 30 June 1975 a network of 112 antennas—27 more than last year—at 88 earth stations was providing 379 ComSat pathways, with 107 countries leasing satellite services, an increase of 7 over the previous year. Comsat General Corp., a subsidiary, had entered into a joint venture with the European Space Agency and the Government of Canada on 3 Dec. 1974 to provide satellite capacity for an Aerosat (aeronautical satellite) communications test and evaluation program. Comsat General and International Business Machines Corp. had notified the Federal Communications Commission that they would seek to enter the domestic satellite business with one or more partners. ComSat’s earth stations in Connecticut and California neared readiness for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean areas. ComSat reported a net income of $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. (Text) During August: “The importance of space to our defensive military effort can only increase in the future,” Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, retiring commander of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA’s Apollo Program Director from 1964— 69, said in an interview. Gen. Phillips speculated that aircraft, including the B— 1 bomber under development by the U.S., would be an important part of the military force “for as many decades ahead as anyone cares to project.” However, he saw energy scarcities increasing the need for training simulators and alternative aircraft fuels. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 75, 1) September 1975
Air Force Systems Command’s Aeronautical Systems Div. announced plans to begin flight evaluation of fan blades constructed of advanced composite materials. The new blades, made of an aluminum alloy matrix enforced by silicon carbide-coated boron filaments, would be flown on an F— 111 aircraft over a 2- to 3-yr period at the Air Force Flight Test Center in California. The composite blades, 40% lighter than conventional titanium blades, were expected to increase operating efficiency by reducing rotating mass, increasing tip speeds, and eliminating part-span shrouds. (AFSC Release OIP
Soviet and American fraternizing at Cape Canaveral and Florida’s Disney World in recent weeks were evidence of how much the world had changed since the 1950s, a New York Times editorial said. “What was once a ferociously pursued race in space has given way to detente in space,” with the preparations for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. Skeptics, complaining that Moscow would be the “big net gainer” in the project, were correct only from a narrow intelligence point of view. They missed the main point for detente in space. Neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union had resources sufficient for fruitful human activity in space for decades ahead. “It is simply enlightened selfishness for Washington and Moscow to work together in space.” And this was only a start. What was needed even more was “broadly based cooperation in space efforts embracing the personnel and talents of all nations for the benefit of all humanity.” (NYT, 15 Feb 75. 28)
HASPA—the Navy’s high-altitude superpressured powered aerostat— failed to reach its predicted altitude when the balloon-inflation mechanism malfunctioned. When fully extended, HASPA had measured 101.5 m long and 20.4 m in diameter. The launch at Kennedy Space Center had been planned as a 3- to 5-hr flight; during launch, the mylar container was inflated with the helium contained in the upper third and restrained there by a collar that would drop away to give the gas room to expand with altitude. The mechanism failed and the balloon inverted at 11.26 km, releasing the helium through a vent in the nose of the balloon, which impacted at KSC a half hour after launch. HASPA had been designed to function as a low-level satellite for a variety of payloads. (Spaceport News, 14 Nov 75; ETR PIO, interview, 5 Nov 75)
The U.S.—represented by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense—signed a memorandum of understanding with Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway that finalized selection of the General Dynamics Corp. F —16 air combat fighter as the four countries’ replacement for the F—104G. The U.S. and the four countries entered into a co-production agreement under which the Europeans planned to produce up to 348 aircraft—at a value of $2.1 billion—for their own use. The proposal permitted aircraft manufacturers in these countries to share in the manufacture of aircraft and parts for U.S. and third world sales, which could more than offset their initial investment [see 2 June]. The Europeans would share logistics, maintenance, and training facilities in Europe. The agreement would help enable the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and allied forces to standardize their weapon systems. The U.S. Air Force had announced earlier plans to procure at least 650 F—16s, with a large number of these deployed to European bases. (AFSC Release 280—75)
A simple device familiar for centuries—the flywheel—had been the subject of a national symposium as a possible solution for some of America’s critical energy problems. The first conference on flywheel technology, held at Berkeley, Calif., under sponsorship of the Energy Research and Development Administration and the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, had been told that modern materials and design had made possible a superflywheel that could transform the energy picture. The principle upon which flywheels performed—storage of mechanical energy by a spinning wheel—had been enlarged by the use of fiber composites developed for use in spacecraft nosecones that had greater strength-to-weight ratios, being 10 to 20 times stronger than steel and much lighter. As the amount of energy stored by the flywheel varied as the square of the rotation speed, the limit had been on the tensile strength of the material used; the fiber wheel could be spun faster to store more energy per kg than the conventional metal one, and would also cost less. A superflywheel might spin at 100 000 or even 200 000 rpm. Both the Soviet Union and American industry had displayed interest in developing the flywheel; use of the technology in automobiles would reduce pollution and would represent a safety improvement. The flywheels also could act in backup systems for homes using solar energy and windmills for their energy needs. Further investigation of the materials under stress-rupture tests was being conducted at the Lawrence laboratory and elsewhere. (NYT, 30 Nov 75, L84)
Former astronaut William R. Pogue (USAF, Ret.) received the 1974 Thomas D. White Space Trophy during ceremonies at the National Geographic Society Headquarters in Washington, D.C. Pogue received the trophy—given annually to the military or civilian member of the Air Force who made an outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace—for his achievements as pilot of Skylab 4, third and final mission aboard the U.S.’s first manned orbiting workshop. The mission (16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974), longest manned flight in history, had established the foundation for future long-term missions in space. Pogue had retired from both the Air Force and the astronaut corps on 1 Sept. (DOD Release 456 —75)
Predictions of a trend toward harsher winters for North America had been put in question by satellite monitoring of snowcover over the northern hemisphere during the past 9 yr, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service had published a document, “Monthly Winter Snowline Variation in the Northern Hemisphere from Satellite Records, 1966—1975,” containing the most complete record available of hemisphere snowcover. Analysis of the charts had revealed no significant change in North American snowcover during the entire period. Predictions of harsher weather had raised the possibility of southward movement of the polar ice cap, which could be caused by a drop of only a few degrees in average winter temperature. The document concluded that “Lack of systematic increase in . . . snow cover tends to contradict the evidence . . . that the current climate is changing adversely.” (NOAA Release 75—217)
Dr. Detlev W. Bronk, president emeritus of Rockefeller Univ. and former president of Johns Hopkins Univ., the Natl. Academy of Sciences, and the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science, died at the age of 78. A scientist who had been adviser to Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy, Dr. Bronk had been credited with formulating the modem theory of the science of biophysics—application of physics to the life systems of plants and animals. He had been chairman of the National Research Council from 1946 to 1950, and president of the National Science Foundation for three terms from 1950 to 1960. In 1964 he had received the Medal of Freedom, highest civilian award to be granted by a U.S. President. (B Sun, 18 Nov 75, A13; NYT, 18 Nov 75, 38M)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Secretary of the Interior Thomas S. Kleppe announced the selection of Dr. William Nordberg, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Dr. Carlos Brockmann, director of the Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the 1975 William T. Pecora Award. Dr. Nordberg was selected for his meteorological contributions to the Landsat program and for his management of day-to-day research operations using data from Landsat 1 and 2, launched (as Erts 1) on 23 July 1972 and on 22 Jan. 1975. Dr. Brockmann was selected for his leadership of a multidisciplinary team of Bolivian scientists responsible for the evaluation and application of Landsat images. Within 1 year, the team had produced evaluation reports covering geology, volcanology, forestry, hydrology, and land use of Bolivia; the group also published an improved national atlas of Bolivia. Given annually by NASA and the Dept, of Interior in recognition of “outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the understanding of the Earth by means of remote sensing,” the award would be presented at the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. 4-day symposium on earth resources at Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 28—31 Oct. (NASA Releases 75-283,-285)
The appointment of Lt. Gen. Duward L. Crow (USAF, Ret.) as Associate Deputy Administrator became effective. Gen. Crow succeeded Willis H. Shapley, who retired. Before joining NASA in September 1974 as Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, Gen. Crow had been Assistant Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force since October 1973. He had previously been Comptroller of the Air Force. Replacing Gen. Crow as Assistant Administrator for DOD and Interagency Affairs was Lt. Gen. William W. Snavely (USAF Ret.) who had been Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics since January 1973. (NASA Release 75— 260)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a $44 800 000 contract amendment with Lockheed Electronics Co., Inc., for electronic, scientific, and computing-center support services at JSC. The services would support JSC programs including Space Shuttle, earth resources, aircraft, health applications, and the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment. The amendment brought the estimated value of the Lockheed contract to $173 100 000. (JSC Release 75—93)
President Ford had signed legislation establishing a 17-member U.S. Metric Board to plan for voluntary conversion of the nation to the metric system. Dr. Ernest Ambler, acting head of the National Bureau of Standards, said the signing of the bill would encourage U.S. industry and commerce to export products made to metric dimensions, which “should stimulate additional international trade.” (SBD, 30 Dec 75, 299) During December: Goddard Space Flight Center and the Fla. Dept, of Natural Resources had approved the first long-range, space-assisted program to develop an “early warning system” for the onset of red tide, an ocean-borne organism that had left tons of dead fish rotting on beaches around the world. Dr. Warren A. Hovis of GSFC had designed an ocean-color scanner capable of detecting subtle variations in the color of coastal waters that might indicate changes in concentration and species of marine phytoplankton, especially the red-tide dino-flagellate Gymnodinium breve. Red tide had been a major problem because of oxygen depletion in ocean water from fish decomposition, and eye and respiratory infections caused by toxic particles produced in the organism. Shellfish beds affected had been closed for months by authorities. An outbreak of red tide in 1971 had cost the state of Fla. more than $20 million in lost tourist business. The ocean scanner, developed for use in the Nimbus-G pollution-sensing spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1978, could be used in photographic overflights by aircraft and Landsat spacecraft, in connection with on-site sampling of ocean waters by research ships, to detect the organism in time to take countermeasures and warn the public about affected areas. {Spaceflight, Vol 17 No. 12, Dec 75, 425)
Kennedy Space Center announced the selection of Modular Computer Systems, Inc., for final negotiations on a $6.7-million fixed-price contract for equipment associated with the Space Shuttle launchprocessing system. The company would provide minicomputers and their associated equipment, software, maintenance, spares, and engineering support. The launch-processing system now under development at KSC would provide automatic test, checkout, launch control, and operational management for NASA’s Space Shuttle program. (KSC Release 69—75)
NASA executed a $3.65-million supplement to a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Serv-Air, Inc., to continue to provide aircraft for earth-observation and astronaut-proficiency training at Johnson Space Center. Contract provisions also called for maintenance, modification, and related ground support of the JSC aircraft; maintenance and ground support of transient aircraft; engineering, design, fabrication, and installation of electronic and mechanical systems, subsystems, components and equipment; and related logistic functions. This agreement provided for the third and final year of the contract which had an estimated total value of $7.57 million. (JSC Release 75 —23) 1 —4 April: In Montreal, the 89-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization held its third ordinary meeting of signatories in conjunction with the 25th anniversary of the Canadian signatory, the Canadian Overseas Telecommunications Corp. Significant accomplishments of the meeting included agreement that domestic services provided for Chile by INTELSAT would be considered on the same basis as international services, thus increasing Chile’s voting representation on the board of governors; that any signatory owning shares in INTELSAT totalling 1.25% or more would be entitled to representation on the board of governors; and that the capital ceiling of $500 million for payments and contractual commitments for development of Intelsat V satellites, planned for launch in the late 1970s, would have to be increased by from $200 to‘$400 million. (INTELSAT Release, April 75)
Former astronaut Alfred M. Worden, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Application Div., announced that he would leave government service, effective 5 Sept. Worden was also retiring from the Air Force after 20 yrs. During the Apollo 15 lunar landing mission (26 July— 7 Aug. 1971), Worden was command module pilot and, with fellow crewmen David R. Scott and James B. Irwin, spent 12 days 7 hr 12 min in space. Worden transferred to ARC in September 1972 as a research scientist in the Airborne Science Office. He was also Chief of the Systems Studies Div. before his appointment to the Application Div. In his announcement Worden said he would spend one year lecturing on “Spaceship Earth” and writing a book commissioned by the High Flight Foundation, an interdenominational evangelistic organization based in Colo. (NASA Release 75—248)
The Air Force had awarded a $28.5-million contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for design, development, and testing of a strengthened wing for the C — 5A transport airplane that the New York Times called a symbol of Pentagon “cost overruns.” Aim of the original C—5A contract with Lockheed had been to produce a transport capable of carrying a 99 700-kg payload and having a service life of 30 000 flying hours. Even before it had gone into full operational use, the C—5A wing had been shown in static ground tests to be too weak to carry the prescribed load and had developed fatigue cracks in the metal structure. The cracking had been attributed to high stress levels inherent in the design, ineffective fasteners on the wing panels, and difficulty in mating the stiff contours of the wing and joints during manufacture. The Air Force had paid $4.5 billion on delivery of 81 C—5As; it had already spent more than $198 million through June 1975 correcting deficiencies for which Lockheed was responsible under the original contract, renegotiated when Lockheed was in financial difficulty in 1971. In addition to $1.3 billion for fixing the wings, the AF planned to spend another $200 million to fix other defects. Cost of the repairs would nearly double the original AF estimate of $3.4 billion for the C—5A program. However, without the repairs, the C—5A fleet would have to be grounded beginning in 1979 when the flying-time safety limit had been reached. Because of the defects, service life had recently been re-estimated at 8750 hr and payload limit at 78 900 kg. (NYT, 15 Dec 75, 1; WSJ, 24 Dec 75, 3)
NASA’s Earth Resources Technology Satellite, ERTS, had been renamed Landsat, NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews announced at a Landsat—B prelaunch press briefing in Washington, D.C. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, would be called Landsat 1; ERTS-B, scheduled for launch 19 Jan., would be designated Landsat 2 once in orbit. Mathews said that, since NASA planned a SEASAT to study the oceans (see 9 Jan.), Landsat seemed a more appropriate name for a satellite that studied the land. Landsat Program Manager Harry Mannheimer said that Landsat— B would be launched into the same orbital plane as Landsat 1 but 180° out of phase. Between them the two satellites would retrace the identical ground track every 9 days rather than the 18-day interval of one satellite. The additional coverage would enable scientists to study dynamic phenomena more effectively. Mannheimer said that a significant improvement over Landsat 1 was Landsat—B’s increase in command storage, adding flexibility in commanding the various instruments while the spacecraft was out of view of a ground station. James R. Morrison, Landsat Resources Survey Program Manager, said that, whereas the emphasis of the Landsat 1 mission was on experimentation, the emphasis for Landsat—B would be on fewer but larger scale applications of remote-sensing information to real resource problems. Of the 120 investigators—compared with 320 investigators during the Landsat 1 mission—57 were U.S.-sponsored and 52 were from foreign countries. During the rigorous selection, preference had been given to investigations that included direct participation and cost-sharing by bona fide users in both the public and private sectors. New with Landsat— B were the Applications Systems Verification Tests (ASVT), based on results of Landsat 1, to further develop, demonstrate, and document Landsat results. The ASVTs were larger in design and scope than earlier investigations, essentially beyond the capability of any one investigator to manage. ASVTs for Landsat—B included a large-area crop inventory experiment (LACIE), ice-warn program, snow-cover and snow-melt prediction program, natural resources information system, and environmental information system. (Text)
Appointment of Lt. Gen. William J. Evans as commander of the Air Force Systems Command became effective. Gen. Evans, who had been deputy chief of staff for research and development at Air Force Hq, was replacing retiring Gen. Samuel C. Phillips. AFSC had been responsible for developing Air Force aerospace technology. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug. 75)
Kennedy Space Center awarded a $74 998 contract to the Univ. of Fla. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences for continuation of a freeze-prediction study. A1973 contract had provided for study of the application of satellite thermal and infrared imagery to development of a freeze-prediction model; results were so encouraging that a second contract had been awarded in 1974. Also involved in this effort had been meteorologists from the Lakeland office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and its Environmental Services Center at Auburn, Ala. Freeze-warning information had previously been provided by NOAA’s Ruskin, Fla., facility on the basis of data from 300 recording thermometers operated by a Federal-state agricultural weather system and other reporting stations; the KSC contracts had aimed at developing a computerized system using thermal scanning and infrared imagery from spacecraft and aircraft for more accurate predictions. The study used data from till agencies, including spacecraft readings and actual ground- and leaf-temperature measurements provided by Univ. of Fla. personnel at specific times in selected test areas, combined at KSC for analysis in its earth resources data-analysis facility. The analyzed data had then gone to the university and to NOAA for predictive model development. (KSC Release 294—75)
A team of Federal and university scientists were using three instrumented aircraft and an elaborate ground network to construct a threedimensional map of the atmosphere’s electrical fields around Kennedy Space Center and to determine the conditions under which a launch penetrating these fields would trigger a lightning strike. By July the team hoped to be able to predict what the electrical conditions would be at the launch pad 10 to 20 min before liftoff. The project, directed by the Dept, of Commerce’s Environmental Research Laboratories and funded by NASA, included scientists from NASA, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Naval Research Laboratory, N. Mex. Inst, of Mining and Technology, and Univ. of Ariz. The experimenters would conduct a month of aircraft flights under and around various convective clouds, measuring electrical fields and making penetrations of frozen cloud anvils—cirrus clouds swept off the tops of thunderstorms by upper level winds. In addition, data from the mapping ground network—24 electrical-field-measuring stations installed around KSC by NOAA in 1973—were fed into a computer whose video component displayed a map of the area and ground stations, total electrical activity in nearby storms, weather radar contours of precipitation, electrical-field contours, and the positions of lightning strikes. The project was a continuation of one begun for NASA by NOAA after the Apollo 12 launch on 12 Nov. 1969 when lightning struck the spacecraft, shutting off the spacecraft’s electrical power and setting off numerous alarms. The spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while the crew restored the primary power system. (NOAA Release 75-91; A&A 69, 372-378)
Dust storms had been observed on the moon every sunrise and sunset by a three-axis microparticle detector left on the moon by Apollo 17 astronauts during their December 1972 mission, a Nature magazine article reported. The article, based on a report by scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, said the GSFC scientists suspected that the dust was being lifted from the lunar surface and then driven away from the rising or setting sun by electrostatic fields associated with the transition from day to night, or vice versa. The finding supported a theory advanced 20 yr ago by Dr. Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ., who had suggested that electrostatic forces transported dust from lunar highlands to lowlands, accounting for the smooth appearance of the lunar seas. Although the Apollo landings had shown that those seas had been formed by lava flooding rather than deep dust accumulations, their surface was covered with very fine dust. Also, because neither wind nor rain existed on the airless moon, some other process must have been responsible for the evident erosion. Electrostatic levitation was being suggested as one possible explanation. Because the lunar vacuum acted as an insulator, the dust cloud hugged the surface, reaching only between 20 and 30 cm high, explaining why it had been detected from a low angle by instruments on the lunar surface but never by orbiting astronauts or earth-based equipment. (Hughes, Nature, 10 April 75, 481—2)
Langley Research Center had awarded General Electric of Phila. a 2.5yr $3.2 million contract to provide an orbital scatterometer for the SEASAT—A spacecraft scheduled for launch in 1978. The scatterometer would measure wind speed and direction. (SBD, 31 Oct 75, 317) During October: Air Force scientists under contract to NASA had completed a study of the physiological effects on man resulting from transfers from one atmosphere to another during the 15—24 July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The difference between the Soyuz 7031-kg-per-sq-m atmosphere of 30% oxygen and 70% nitrogen and the Apollo’s 3515.5-kg-per-sq-m 100% oxygen represented the transition between 3048 m and 8230 m in altitude. In 1973, scientists, using a hyperbaric chamber to simulate spacecraft environment, had found that volunteer subjects showed symptoms of decompression sickness (the bends) when moving from one atmosphere to the other. During the following year the scientists had found a way to lessen the chance of decompression sickness: The most satisfactory procedure was to increase the time allowed for denitrogenation (breathing 100% oxygen at ground-level pressure). This helped to remove excess nitrogen— cause of the bends—from the body. The Air Force study had helped NASA and Soviet ASTP planners schedule the actual transfers. (ASFC Newsreview, Oct 75, 8)
Helios 1, the U.S.—West German solar probe launched 10 Dec. 1974, passed within 0.309 AU (46 million km) of the sun at 5:13 am EDT, closer than any previous spacecraft had come to the sun. During the perihelion, while traveling at 238 000 km per hr, Helios 1 measured the solar wind, magnetic fields, solar and galactic cosmic rays, electromagnetic waves, micrometeoroids, and zodiacal light. Although the spacecraft encountered a heat load from the sun 10.5 times that encountered on earth, good data were obtained and the spacecraft continued to operate well. Helios 1 was in a solar elliptical orbit with a 0.985—AU aphelion, 0.3095—AU perihelion, 190.15-day period, and 0.02° inclination. It would reach a second perihelion 21 Sept. Helios 1, built by West Germany in cooperation with the U.S., carried 10 experiments, 7 of them West German. Spacecraft operations were controlled from the space operations center near Munich. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for U.S. participation. A second spacecraft, Helios—B, was scheduled for launch in early 1976. (NASAMORs 16 Jan 76,11 April 76; Powers, GSFC Helios thermal control mgr, interview, 21 Sept 76)
Michael Collins, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and Santiago Astrain, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, signed an agreement to transfer three early Intelsat communications satellites to the Museum as part of its 1976 inaugural display. INTELSAT was providing the museum with a backup model of the INTELSAT’s Early Bird 1, launched 6 Apr. 1965 as the first commercial comsat. A backup model of the second-generation Intelsat II and an engineering model of third-generation Intelsat III satellites would also be sent for display. Fourth-generation satellites would not be represented because they were too large for display. The new Air and Space Museum, located in Washington, D.C., was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (INTELSAT Release 75—9)
A decrease in the amount of ozone in the stratosphere would cause an increase in skin cancer in white (the most susceptible) Americans, Walter Sullivan wrote in a New York Times article. The findings were based on the combined results of a 1974 NASA study that used instrumented aircraft to profile ozone and nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, the National Cancer Institute’s 1974 Third National Cancer Survey, and the Dept, of Transportation’s 3-yr study “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft” [see 21 Jan.]. The NASA study, which used high-altitude U-2 aircraft, confirmed that atmospheric ozone increased from the equator to the poles and was also influenced by regional and seasonal variations. Ozone molecules above the latitude of Houston were only three fifths as plentiful as above the latitude of Minneapolis. Correspondingly, the Cancer Institute survey showed an annual incidence of nearly 400 skin-cancer cases per 100 000 whites in Dallas, Tex., and less than half that figure in the Minneapolis area. These data, when combined with the DOT study, indicated that the number of skin-cancer cases in the U.S. would increase by 6000, or 1%, a year if 120 supersonic transports operated in the stratosphere for 4 hi daily, thus depleting the zone by 0.5%. (Lowenstein et al., Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, Nov 75, 2185— 90; Sullivan, ATT, 7 Feb 75, 11) 7 February—1 March: The eight prime and backup Soviet cosmonauts training for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joined with U.S. prime and backup astronauts in the U.S. to continue training for the joint mission. The cosmonauts—Aleksey A. Leonov, Valery N. Kubasov, Anatoly V. Filipchenko, Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, Vladimir A. Dzhanebekov, Boris D. Andreyev, Yury V. Romanenko, and Aleksandr S. Ivanchenkov—arrived in Washington, D.C., 7 Feb. and traveled to Kennedy Space Center the following morning. The group toured KSC 8 Feb. giving the cosmonauts their first glimpse of the U.S. launch complex. Col. Leonov commented that the pad from which Alan B. Shepard was launched in 1961 “is a very simple launch stand compared to the ones we use now.” Following a tour of Disney World in Florida 9 Feb., the cosmonauts spent 10 Feb. inspecting the Vehicle Assembly Building, where the Apollo would be stacked on the Saturn IB launch vehicle; the Launch Control Center firing room, from which the rocket would be controlled; and Launch Complex 39 Pad B, from which the Apollo spacecraft would be launched. Press coverage of the first Soviet visit to KSC noted that previous invitations for Soviet officials to visit KSC had been turned down,apparently because of Soviet unwillingness to reciprocate with invitations to Baykonur Cosmodrome. But in May U.S. astronauts would return the visit by going to the Soviet launch site. The astronauts and cosmonauts flew to Johnson Space Center to begin a 2-wk training period that included exercises in command and docking module simulators and mockups; joint language-training sessions; briefings on experiments, contingencies, and mission rules; and practice run-throughs of the planned joint activity days. Following a press conference at which U.S. and Soviet ASTP crew members were introduced to JSC employees, the Soviet cosmonauts returned to the U.S.S.R. in two groups, on 28 Feb. and 1 March. (NASA Release 75—34; JSC Release 75—07; NASA ASTP Status Report No. 7; Spaceport News, 21 Feb 75; JSC Roundup, 28 Feb 75, 1; McElheny, NYT, 10—17 Feb 75)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced that James B. Lazar, NASA’s Chief of Electric Propulsion and Flight Experiments Branch in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, and Roderick W. Spence of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory would receive the James H. Wyld Propulsion Award. The award was given annually in recognition of “outstanding leadership of this nation’s advanced propulsion programs in the separate fields of nuclear and electric rocket propulsion.” Lazar had been responsible for NASA’s electric propulsion program, providing NASA with the option for a highly reliable, efficient, and flight-proven space propulsion system. Dr. Spence had directed design and development of the nuclear rocket reactors at the Los Alamos laboratory, providing the foundation of technology for the nation’s nuclear rocket program. (AIAA Release 18 Sept 75)
Under an agreement with the Air Force, Flight Research Center pilots would fly the YF—17 aircraft—contender for selection as the Air Force combat fighter—in a research program to acquire flight data of a high-performance aircraft for comparisons with wind-tunnel tests and other analytical methods, FRC announced. The comparisons would be used to update prediction techniques required for the design of future highly maneuverable aircraft. During the 25 flight hrs, pilots would measure performance and stability at high angles of attack at both high and low altitudes, and perform maneuverability tests and pilot physiological studies during sustained high acceleration levels. (FRC Release 11—75)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $5 137 000 contract to Mayfair Construction Co. to modify the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) for Space Shuttle operations. The contract provided for modifications to High Bay 3’s extensible work platforms, installation of new checkout cells in High Bay 4, and modifications to the north door of the VAB transfer aisle and related support facilities. (KSC Release 160— 75)
Press briefings on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project were held at Johnson Space Center. ASTP participants would be conducting experiments in space sciences, life sciences, and applications, ASTP Project Scientist Dr. Thomas Giuli said at an experiments briefing. The five space-science experiments included a soft x-ray experiment to study radiation by scanning across the celestial mode, pointing at known discrete sources in the soft part of the spectrum from 2 kev to 0.1 kev, and investigating 10 specific x-ray sources known to emit only in regions below 2 kev. A helium-glow experiment would investigate temperature and density of the interstellar medium in the vicinity of our solar system by observing two special frequencies of extreme ultraviolet light emitted from the sun after they traveled into interstellar space, hit the interstellar medium, and were reflected back again. Other space-science experiments included a study of the sun’s outer atmosphere during an artificial eclipse created by maneuvering the Apollo spacecraft. During the “eclipse,” the Soyuz crew would photograph the sun’s corona. Among the earth environmental and applications studies was an experiment to measure neutral atomic oxygen and neutral atomic nitrogen of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Another experiment would try to devise a simple means of monitoring the aerosol content of the earth’s atmosphere. A water-resources management experiment, planned and coordinated with the government of India, would photograph the Himalayan area to map drainage patterns and water-reservoir locations. Life-science experiments included a study to observe optical sensations from cosmic rays experienced by the crew, an investigation of mutation in cells grown in space, and studies of the effect of space flight on the ability of microbes to infect humans and of changes in the human immunity system to resist infections under space flight conditions. . At a mission profile briefing, Kenneth A. Young of JSC’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div. said that plans called for a 9-day Apollo mission beginning 7.5 hrs after the launch of Soyuz by the U.S.S.R. The planned rendezvous period would be 2 days, with docking scheduled for the 30th inertial orbit, or third day in flight, of the Apollo spacecraft. Following much negotiation, U.S. and Soviet mission planners determined that the two spacecraft would dock over Soviet territory, providing real-time telemetry coverage for the Soviet Union, but at a location where NASA’s Ats 6 communications satellite could provide communications coverage to the U.S. The first handshake would take place over Spain. The spacecraft would undock on the 5th day and perform several joint experiments while separated. Soyuz was scheduled to land the following day. Apollo would continue unilateral experiments in orbit before landing at the end of the 9th day in space. Astronaut Richard H. Truly said, during a joint crew activities briefing, that while the Apollo and Soyuz were docked, all communications would be conducted in the language of the listener regardless of the nationality of the speaker. (Transcript)
A “rather exciting development” in the ability of manned spacecraft systems to navigate accurately should be available in 10 yr, General William J. Evans, Commander, Air Force Systems Command, told the 57th annual meeting of the American Defense Preparedness Assn, in Los Angeles. The NAVSTAR Global Positioning System, the “most precise and accurate positioning, velocity, and navigation assistance air or surface vehicles have ever had,” may replace as many as five separate systems now required for these functions. (AFSC Release 15 Oct 75)
The Air Force’s prototype B— 1 strategic bomber successfully completed its second flight test at Air Force Flight Test Center. Primary objectives of the 3-hr 21-min flight included evaluation of the aircraft’s wing sweep control system, flying qualities in the initial climb, and power approach configuration. The auxiliary power unit was also evaluated and air-start tests were made. Following takeoff, the B—1 climbed to 3050 m, where its landing gear, flaps, and slats were retracted. After flying at low speeds with the wings in the full forward 15° position, the wings were swept 25°, and the aircraft climbed to 4900 m and conducted air-start tests at mach 0.7. The prototype then slowed to 463 km per hr and its speed brake was checked in a descent to traffic-pattern altitude. The B— 1 then landed safely at AFFTC. (AFSC Newsreview, March 75)
A prototype of the YC—15 advanced medium short-takeoff-and-landing (AMST) cargo transport successfully completed its first flight. Airborne for 2 hr 26 min, the YC—15 was flown from Long Beach municipal airport to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., achieving a peak altitude of 5500 m and a top speed of 485 kph. During the flight the pilots evaluated the aircraft’s flight controls, handling and slow-speed-flight qualities, and speed advance to the assigned maximum. Built by McDonnell Douglas Corp. for the Air Force, the YC—15 was the first large transport aircraft to include both the NASA-developed supercritical wing for improved flight performance and reduced fuel consumption, and externally blown flaps for powered lift. This aircraft and a second nearing completion would be evaluated, during a 12-mo flight-test program, against established Air Force performance goals and against two YC—14 prototype AMSTs built by Boeing Co. (Fink, Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 18—20; NYT, 27 Aug 75, 58; AFSC Newsreview, 16 Oct 75, 16) 27 August-. Astronomers had picked up microwave signals that dated back 10 billion yrs to the creation of the universe, Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank radio telescope station, told the 137th annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. First picked up accidentally by equipment testing space communications, and later monitored by a sounding rocket, the signals apparently had originated in the cataclysmic explosion—the “big bang”— caused when a single primeval fireball exploded to form the universe. The observed radiation was “a relic of the high-temperature phase of the universe,” Lovell stated, “perhaps within a second or so of the beginning of the explosion.” Lovell urged scientists to reexamine their responsibility to society during their quest for knowledge of the universe and life on other planets; he questioned whether man could “survive for long the consequences of the probing of scientists,” saying that the search might produce answers too overwhelming for the mind of man to comprehend. He warned that extensive military involvement might lead to great human disaster, recalling how man’s quest for knowledge had led to the development of nuclear weapons. (AP, W Star, 28 Aug 75)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 1 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1976 NASA budget called for the authorization of $3,539 billion and net outlays of $3,498 billion for the 12-mo period beginning 1 July, and additional NASA Budget Plan, FY 76 (in millions of dollars) FY 1974- FY 1975 FY 1976 Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 amounts of $958.9 million in authorizations and $905.6 in net outlays for the 3-mo transition period beginning 1 July 1976. Dr. Fletcher said the new budget was “lean but manageable.” For the first time since 1961 the budget provided no new program starts. In accordance with President Ford’s request "to hold FY J975 and FY 1976 expenditures to a minimum, NASA, in FY 1975, had deferred obligations of $72 million and outlays of $70 million, reduced civil service employment by 300, and made program adjustments to stay within the total FY 1975 and 1976 hudgets. Further adjustments might be necessary if the inflation rate continued to grow. Although NASA’s FY 1976 budget was up $300 million from the previous year, $200 million of this increase was specifically anticipated in last year’s budget to carry forward commitments built into programs approved in FY 1975. Therefore, NASA had received an effective increase of only $100 million, or about 3%. This, along with the nation’s current 9% inflation rate, was a “good indicator of the leanness of NASA’s FY 1976 budget.” The budget would permit NASA to proceed with current major programs as planned: The Space Shuttle, scheduled for a first manned orbital flight in mid-1979, and Landsat—C, scheduled for a fall 1977 launch, would continue on schedule. Reduction of fuel use in aircraft remained a principal focus in NASA’s aeronautics research and technology. NASA was also continuing stratospheric studies, including the effects of pollutants on the environment, with significant contributions coming from NASA meteorological and atmospheric satellites, sounding rockets, and balloons and high-flying aircraft. Although there would be no new starts, NASA would continue its study and advanced technical development for science, applications, and aeronautics projects to be started in future years, including preliminary work for payloads to fly on the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. The 1975 calendar year launch schedule was one of the most ambitious in U.S. history with 28 launches scheduled, including the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July and the two Viking missions to Mars scheduled for August. Although NASA’s legal responsibilities for energy research and development—designated under the Solar Heating and Cooling Act of 1974—had been transferred to the Energy Research and Development Administration, NASA would work closely with ERDA in various aspects of solar research and development. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said at the press briefing that the largest budget increase was for manned spaceflight, where the increase for the Shuttle was partially offset by reduced spending for the rest of manned spaceflight. The small increase for space science did not tell the whole story: If funds for the Viking program were subtracted, the budget for the rest of science had increased $170 million from FY 1974 to FY 1976. Although applications, aeronautics, and space technology programs each showed small increases, funds for tracking and data acquisition decreased slightly despite increased maintenance costs for tracking stations, because NASA was beginning to close down tracking stations, preparing for the time when tracking and data relay satellites would be available. . NASA Budget Plan (in millions of dollars) FY 1974 FY 1975 FY 1976 Manned space flight 999.9 1110.3 1414.6 Space science 664.5 542.8 582.6 Applications 159.0 174.5 175.0 Aeronautics and space technology 234.3 237.8 250.3 Tracking and data acquisition 244.0 248.0 243.0 Energy programs 4.7 4.4 5.9 Technology utilization 4.5 5.5 7.0 Total Research and Development 2310.9 2323.3 2678.4 Construction of Facilities 101.1 142.7 84.6 Research and Program Management 744.0 765.2 776.0 Total budget plan 3156.0 3231.2 3539.0 William E. Lilly, NASA Comptroller, said that, of the $84.6 million budgeted for construction of facilities, $47.2 million was to continue the buildup of Space Shuttle facilities, mostly for launch and landing facilities at Kennedy Space Center. The remaining funds were for normal rehabilitation and modification of existing facilities, with smaller amounts for minor construction and for facilities planning and design. Civil service manpower was expected to continue at the same level for FY 1976 with 24 316 employees. However, the number of support service contractors—excluding mission or stage contractors—would decrease from 18 637 in FY 1975 to 17 811 in FY 1976. The estimated 125 000 persons working on NASA programs during FY 1975 was expected to increase by 6000 to 7000 by the end of FY 1976. Distribution of funds to the Centers would change: An increase of $224.3 million would go to Johnson Space Center for the Shuttle program. A decrease of $37.3 million for KSC reflected a decrease in funding for the construction program. Goddard Space Flight Center Estimated Distribution of Total NASA Budget (in millions of dollars) FY 1975 FY 1976 Decrease Johnson Space Center 922.6 1146.9 224.3 John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA 275.9 238.6 -37.3 Marshall Space Flight Center 428.7 541.2 112.5 National Space Technology Laboratories 10.0 10.9 0.9 Goddard Space Flight Center 493.7 461.1 -32.6 Wallops Flight Center 31.9 31.3 -0.6 Jet Propulsion Laboratory 180.9 188.1 7.2 Ames Research Center 168.2 193.0 32.0 Flight Research Center 34.6 40.3 5.7 Langley Research Center 285.5 249.4 -36.1 Lewis Research Center 218.1 253.3 35.2 NASA Headquarters 159.1 166.4 7.3 Undetermined 22.0 18.5 -3.5 Total 3231.2 3539.0 307.8 was down $32.6 million, largely because of a decrease in funding for Delta vehicles. (OMB, Budget of U.S. Govt., FY 76 and Appendix; NASA FY 76 budget briefing, 1 Feb 76, transcript; NASA Release, FY 76 budget briefing background material; Fletcher budget statement, 3 Feb 76, text)
Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs since May 1974, would resign effective 30 August. Previously, Dr. Schmitt had been chief of the Astronaut Office, Science and Applications Directorate, at Johnson Space Center. Selected as a scientist-astronaut by NASA in 1965, he had been the lunar module pilot on Apollo 17 (7—19 Dec. 1972) and the only civilian scientist to walk on the moon. Dr. Schmitt planned to return to his home state of N. Mex. to pursue geological consulting and personal activities. (NASA anno, 11 Aug 75)
President Gerald R. Ford presented the 1974 National Medal of Science, the nation’s highest science award, to 13 distinguished American scientists. Among those honored during the White House ceremony was Dr. Rudolf Kompfner of Bell Telephone Laboratories Research Communications Div., who received the award for his invention of the traveling-wave tube and for major contributions to communications satellites and to optical communications. Dr. Linus C. Pauling received the award for his contributions in the fields of structural chemistry, molecular biology, immunology, and genetic diseases. Dr. Pauling, two-time winner of the Nobel Prize, had been long bypassed for the national award, despite repeated recommendations of a scientific advisory committee, because of his outspoken criticism of much of American foreign policy. Victor Cohn of the Washington Post reported that the award signaled “an end to a White House war on unfriendly scientists conducted during the Johnson and Nixon administrations.” President Ford told the 200 persons attending the ceremonies that, looking back over 200 yr of the nation’s history, we owed a great debt to science and to all the men and women who have “carried on the scientific enterprise of this country.” The whole spirit of science— one that urged us to innovate, to explore the unexplored, and to answer the unanswered—was the true spirit of America. Although scientific priorities had changed over the years, the “Nation’s commitment to that most basic of all inquiries—basic research— has not diminished, . . . Our Nation’s future and that of the world depends on the creativity and the genius of men and women such as these we honor today.” (PD, 22 Sept 75, 1027—28; Cohn, W Post, 18 Sept 75, Al; ATT, 19 Sept 75, 23)
Dr. John L. McLucas, Secretary of the Air Force, announced the selection of the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16 prototype for full-scale engineering development as the Air Force’s F—16 air combat fighter. A $417 904 758 fixed-price-incentive contract to fabricate 15 engineering development F—16 aircraft was awarded to General Dynamics, which had been in competition with Northrop Corp. and its YF—17 lightweight fighter prototype during flight-test evaluations at the Air Force Flight Test Center. Dr. McLucas said the decision in favor of General Dynamics had been based on cost and technical engineering proposals submitted by the companies. The Air Force planned to introduce a minimum of 650 F—16 aircraft into the active inventory by the early 1980s. The Air Force also awarded a $55 500 000 fixed-price-incentive contract to United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. to produce the F100 engine used in the F—16. (DOD Release 16— 75)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) said in a speech on the Senate floor that he had asked the Central Intelligence Agency to assess the safety of Soviet manned space technology. “The inlaunch failure of another Soviet manned satellite last Saturday [7 April] reinforces my deep concern that the upcoming joint Apollo-Soyuz experiment may be dangerous to American astronauts. . . . The history of the Soviet-manned program shows an appalling lack of consistency. As soon as one severe problem is solved another occurs.” (CR, 9 April 75, S5527)
U.S.S.R. and India signed a 5-yr agreement on scientific exchange and cooperation between the Soviet Academy of Sciences and India’s Dept, of Science and Technology. The agreement provided for wider cooperation between the two countries in various fields of science and technology, and for the exchange of delegations and information. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 6 March 75, Jl) 19 February—19 March: Hairline cracks were discovered in the holddown fittings on the fins of the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Apollo spacecraft in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. After an earlier routine inspection at Michoud Assembly Facility had turned up one crack, a more detailed inspection at Kennedy Space Center 19 Feb. revealed 25-cm cracks on the fittings of two of the eight fins. A decision was made to replace the two fins. The cracks would not affect flight, but were in an area carrying the weight of the vehicle as it sat atop the mobile launcher. During a later inspection, cracks also were found in the remaining six fins, making it necessary to replace all eight. Replacement work began 11 March. Engineers strengthened the cracked areas by placing compressive stresses in the surface of the material, by pneumatically pounding it with a small bundle of rods. Six of the fins were replaced by 15 March. The spacecraft was placed atop the Saturn IB on 17 March and replacement of the remaining two fins was completed by 19 March. (KSC Release 27—75; NASA Release 75—50, 75—57\ Marshall Star, 19 March 75)
Soviet officials gave western newsmen their first glimpse of a Soviet space center during a tour of the main Soviet flight-control center 24 km from Moscow. The Washington Post reported that the group led by the center’s technical director, Dr. Alberty V. Militsin, toured a 5-yr-old six-story brick and sandstone building acknowledged by Dr. Militsin to be one of several space facilities near Moscow. The operations room, which was similar to the control room at Johnson Space Center, contained five rows of consoles, each with telephones and closed-circuit TV screens. Mission Control Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev told the newsmen that the consoles were staffed during missions by from 15 to 24 officials and technicians. An illuminated world map on the wall showed tracking stations and the orbited paths of spacecraft. Electronic screens flashed flight information. Other support consoles, communications systems, and computers were located elsewhere in the building. Dr. Militsin said that the center had contact with Soyuz spacecraft in .each orbit for 5 to 25 min, depending on the orbit. The newsmen also visited the three-room suite near the main operations room assigned to nine U.S. technicians for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (Osnos, W Post, 13 May 75, A10)
