An unmanned ground terminal that could operate with several satellites in synchronous orbit above the earth was patented by three engineers for the Communications Satellite Corporation. Previously, a separate earth terminal was needed for each satellite. William K. Sones, Laurence F. Gray, and Louis Pollack, of the ComSat staff in Washington, D.C., invented the new facility, considered a major advance that would add reliability and reduce costs. The structure included a single reflector about 9.7m by 15.4m with enough traveling-wave tubes, transmitters, receivers, and amplifiers to handle two or more satellites, plus monitors and controls; the reliability feature was a system that switched in another tube if one became defective. Possible uses would be on offshore rigs or at oil-pipeline installations that were unmanned but required constant communication by satellite. (ATT, 10 Jan 76, 31)
The National Transportation Safety Board reported that U.S. commercial airlines had the best safety record in 1975 since 1957, with only 42 accidents and a total of 124 deaths, 112 of those in the major air disaster of the year: the crash of an Eastern Airlines flight short of the runway at Kennedy International Airport in New York City on
A federal judge ordered NASA to reinstate with back pay and benefits the federal employees who lost their jobs at Marshall Space Flight Center to private contractors, the Washington Star reported. In a suit filed in 1967 in the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., by the AFL-CIO American Federation of Government Employees, the union contended that 22 MSFC contracts with private companies resulted in the layoff of about 3000 federal workers. Judge Joseph Waddy agreed that the contracts were illegal and ordered that federal employees who lost jobs as a result of work going to the private companies should be rehired, and that any similar contracts be canceled. The decision upheld Civil Service Commission standards that forbid a private contractor from assuming an employer-employee relationship over federal workers. NASA attorney Sid Masri said as many as 2000 employees could be terminated as a result of the decision, which NASA was sure to appeal. (W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-2, B-2; WSJ, 19 Aug 76, 17)
Britain and France announced their decision to build no more Concorde supersonic jetliners beyond the 16 now under construction or in the air. After a meeting in London with France’s transport minister Marcel Cavaille, British industry minister Gerald Kaufman told a news conference that future projects would concentrate on less exotic subsonic aircraft that would stand a better chance of making money. The Concorde, a project begun by treaty in 1962, had already cost about $1.92 billion for research, design, and development; each plane, with support facilities, would cost about $49.6 million. Nine had been built and sold—five to British Airways, four to Air France—and, of those remaining, three would go to British Airways and two to Air France, while preliminary purchase agreements had been signed with Iran for two others. British Airways had begun supersonic commercial flights in Jan. 1976 with its Concordes between London and Bahrein; Air France had begun similar service at about the same time between Paris and Rio de Janeiro. On 24 May 1976, a trial service began from London and Paris to Dulles Inti. Airport at Washington, D.C. Banned by the New York Port Authority from landing at JFK Inti. Airport, pending results of environmental testing at Dulles, the Concorde was losing money for both its state-owned sponsors; Air France reported losses of from $30 to $32 million in the first 9 mo of Concorde operation. Potential customers for the Concorde had made it clear that they would be interested only in the Europe-to-New York City route, most lucrative of the international flights. Kaufman added that the two countries had not become disenchanted with supersonic transport even though their future plans were to build smaller planes; “the fact that you’re going for bread and butter now,” he said, “doesn’t mean that you’d be disenchanted with caviar later.” (ATT, 3 Nov 76, 61; W Post, 4 Nov 76, A-3; W Star, 3 Nov 76, A-5)
NASA announced selection of Hamilton Standard Division, United Aircraft Corp., for negotiations leading to award of contract for development and production of space suits to be used by men and women during Space Shuttle flights. The basic cost-plus-award fee contract would cost about $15 million through Sept. 1980. The suit system, consisting of a basic suit and built-in support system including breathing-atmosphere and cooling components, would be adjustable instead of custom-made for each astronaut (as in earlier programs) and would come in small, medium, and large sizes to fit candidates varying in height from 1.5 to 2 m. Hamilton Standard would provide hardware and spares needed for 7 suits and support equipment, as well as training, manpower, and equipment needed to support the program at NASA field centers. Johnson Space Center would have technical direction of the contract. (JSC Release 76-46)
Dr. John F. Clark would retire 1 July after 10 yr as director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. His successor would be Dr. Robert S. Cooper, deputy director of GSFC. Dr. Clark had come to NASA in 1958, serving from 1963 to 1965 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, after which he was appointed to his post at GSFC. An authority in atmospheric and space sciences, Dr. Clark while director at GSFC had been responsible for major advances in communications, weather and climate, earth resources, space physics, and space astronomy. (NASA Release 76-71)
Physicists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, 111., discovered a new elementary particle, heaviest ever observed, the annual meeting of the American Physical Society was told. The investigators from Columbia Univ., the State Univ. of N.Y. at Stony Brook, and the Fermi lab said the “upsilon” particle raised the possibility that physics might never be able to identify any ultimate or basic building blocks of matter. The upsilon was discovered in debris of particles created by acceleration of a proton beam aimed at a beryllium target; the resulting collision produced a cluster of electron-positron pairs with a mass of 6 billion electron volts, more than 6 times that of the proton and 1.5 times that of any other particle. The report on the upsilon particle was a last-minute addition to the annual meeting’s agenda because the data were available only in the last few wk; first observed about 5 mo ago, the upsilon had been seen only 12 times so far, but was expected to require new thinking in theoretical physics. (B Sun, 6 Feb. 76, A-3; W Post, 9 Feb 76, A-3)
Space-related technology would serve to monitor municipal water pollution and dispose of solid wastes, NASA announced, describing systems for electronic monitoring of water quality in cooperation with the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority and for sewage treatment at a plant midway between Los Angeles and San Diego. Johnson Space Center at Houston developed under contract with Boeing a trailer-mounted automated system to process data from up to 40 different water sensors for rapid indications of pollution, temperature, turbidity, and similar items. The current procedure was to sample city water at regular intervals and send the samples to a laboratory for analysis, with results available days later. JSC and the Goddard Space Flight Center developed a biosensor to give total bacteria count directly, by adding chemicals that caused bacteria to radiate light; this sensor could both detect and quantify living or dead bacteria in a continuous-flow water sample. At Langley Research Center, scientists working on Skylab environmental control had developed an electronic sensor that could detect human or nonhuman fecal coliform bacteria in a few hours, rather than a few days; the device would permit public health authorities to act quickly if large quantities of disease-producing bacteria entered a water supply. The automated monitoring system would eventually include a device to detect known carcinogenic chemicals—chloroform and carbon tetrachloride, for instance—already found in the drinking water of cities surveyed for the project. Some of the pollutants were thought to be byproducts of chlorine added to city water to guard against waterborne diseases. A gas-chromatograph technique developed at Ames Research Center to extract minute samples of organic materials from the atmospheres of other planets would be valuable to concentrate the harmful chemicals detected in city water for rapid onsite analysis. Another Ames system, attaching fluorescent dyes to bacteria so that their presence could be recorded by electronic sensors, could be applied to detection of waterborne viruses. As for sewage disposal, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used for the new million-gallon-per-day treatment plant at Huntington Beach, Cal., a process invented by Marshall Humphrey, a JPL engineer working on lightweight materials for insulating rocket motors. Using a pyrolytic converter to produce activated carbon by chemical changes induced by heat, he found that sewage solids were excellent raw material for production of carbon. The new process would convert solid sewage to activated carbon, which could then be used to remove impurities from incoming waste water and recycled and reactivated with new incoming sewage. Gases generated from sewage solids would serve as fuel for the converter. Dry black odorless powder of carbon and ash would be the only residue from the process. Even the billion-dollar secondary sewage-treatment plants in compliance with EPA standards had not solved the problem of solid-waste disposal; primary treatment of sewage had left about 40% solid waste in water leaving the plants and discharged into rivers and offshore waters. The JPL process would exceed EPA standards for ocean discharge and reduce capital costs of processing systems as much as 25%. (NASA Release 76-57; KSC News, 4 Mar 76, 2)
Dr. William H. Pickering, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology since 1954, retired, announcing that he would return to Caltech as a professor of engineering. He had earned all his degrees at that institution and had joined the faculty in 1936, becoming a member of the JPL staff in 1944. The staff at that time numbered a few hundred; when he became director, the total had reached 1000, and numbered about 4000 when he announced his retirement. Born in New Zealand in 1910, Dr. Pickering had become one of the world’s foremost experts in space technology. Under his leadership, JPL had designed Explorer 1, first successful U.S. satellite, and went on to develop and operate the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner space probes. Dr. Pickering was first president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1963, and president of the International Astronautical Federation in 1965-66. NASA’s announcement of his retirement said he would work on gaining worldwide scientific support for the proposed International Solar System Decade of research and space exploration of all aspects of the solar system. (NASA anno. 23 June 75; NYT, 21 June 75, 41; LA Times, 31 Mar 76, 1; Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1)
Charles W. Mathews, NASA Associate Administrator of Applications, retired after 33 yr of government service with NASA and its parent organization, NACA. As a member of the science staff at the Langley Research Center since 1943, he was chairman of the group that developed specifications for the Mercury spacecraft before NASA was established. When Mercury became an official program in 1958, Mathews transferred to Houston (now the Johnson Space Center), serving as manager of the Gemini program. Upon completion of Gemini, Mathews went to NASA Hq as director of the Skylab program (then known as Apollo Applications Program); in 1968, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, and remained in that position until 1971. Awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson in 1966 for contributions to the manned space program, Mathews received the award a second time in 1969 for contributions to the first manned lunar landing. At his retirement, he stated that he would “continue to devote effort to the further realization of the tremendous potential of space . . .” (NASA Release 76-38)
Astronomical observations and laboratory experiments spanning 16 yr had failed to detect any signals of life in outer space, the 142nd annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told. The session in Roston heard reports on a 4-galaxy scan using the largest radiotelescope in the world—the 600-m-dia. antenna at Arecibo, P.R.—from Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. and his Cornell colleague, Dr. Frank Drake, director of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center at Arecibo. “Of the trillion stars we looked at in four galaxies,” Dr. Sagan said, “there is not a single one that at the time of our observation was devoting a major effort to communicate with us.” Another effort—a 4-yr scan by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Rank, W.Va., of 659 stars in the region of the Milky Way—had yielded negative results after analysis of 90% of the observations. However, fewer than a millionth of the stars in the Milky Way had been scanned, for very brief periods, at only a few wavelengths. Negative results did not rule out the possibility of receiving the looked-for signals some day, the meeting was told. (NYT, 21 Feb 76, 40; B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A-3; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-3)
Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1 Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt. Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new procedures.” (NYT, 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
Discovery of a new kind of photosynthesis—a bacterial system using purple instead of green pigment to convert sunlight into chemical energy and food—was announced by a team of scientists from NASA’s Ames Research Center and the Univ. of Calif, medical center at San Francisco. Contained in cell membranes of Halobacterium halobium, found in salty waters, the pigment when energized by sunlight could transfer protons across the membrane. It appeared to increase the evaporation rate of salt, with possible applications in desalination of sea water; it also seemed to resemble rhodopsin, the little-understood visual pigment of the eye, and might aid in understanding the evolution and operation of vision. The purple pigment, which acted as a proton pump, might also explain the key process of ion transport in all cells. Deposited on a film and exposed to sunlight, it had already been tried out in crude solar cells. Scientists were excited by the possibility of practical uses of the purple pigment because—although less efficient than chlorophyll—it could be purified and was stable over a broad range of temperatures and activities. The newly discovered process was the first instance of a system other than the one based on green chlorophyll in which cells could use light energy to survive, said Dr. Walter Stoeckenius of the University of Calif., chief researcher. Bacteria used in the research came from salt flats near the Mediterranean, where they had been known for a century to cause pinkeye in salted fish and red herrings to become red. The study in which the discovery was made was part of research into earth organisms living in extreme environments like those expected to exist on other planets. (NASA Release 76-30; ARC Release 76-12; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A— 1; B Sun, 3 Mar 76, A-3)
Isaac T. Gillam IV, NASA Hq Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles, was designated Director of Space Shuttle Operations at Dryden Flight Research Center, effective 23 May. In his new position, Gillam would be responsible for development of test support facilities, institutional support of test operations, and flight and industrial safety for test operations in support of Shuttle carrier-aircraft testing and orbital approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC. Before coming to NASA Hq in 1963, Gillam served in the U.S. Air Force as pilot, missile launch crew commander, and ROTC instructor; he had done graduate work at Term. State Univ. while serving as assistant professor of military science. From 1963 to 1966, he was resources management specialist at NASA Hq and was then appointed Assistant Delta Program Manager in the Launch Vehicles Directorate. Named Delta Program Manager in Sept. 1968, he became Program Manager of Small Launch Vehicles (including Delta and Scout) in June 1973. He received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work in the launch-vehicle program. (NASA Release 76-96)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
An enormous radiotelescope “the size of the earth” to be used in studying the process of star formation in earth’s galaxy had been constructed by linking installations in Washington, D.C., California, Australia, and the Soviet Union, the Naval Research Laboratory announced. Four large radiotelescopes distributed around the world had joined in using very long-baseline interferometry (VLBl) to record microwave signals received at each antenna on videotape, and comparing the recordings. The resultant huge antenna would be able to resolve a source less than 2 ten-thousandths of a second of arc, comparable to the thickness of a human hair at a 161-km distance, or a man’s footprint on the moon. An instrument this size would be needed to study primordial clouds in the constellation Aquila containing water-vapor molecules that emit intense microwave radiation through maser amplification, analogous to the operation of optical lasers. These water-vapor masers seem to be associated with star formation taking place in giant clouds in the galaxy; sizes of the individual masing sources, which may number more than 100 in a single cloud, range from half to 3 times the distance between the sun and the earth. The masing radiation offered a way to study the clouds that obscure radiation at other frequencies and to estimate the physical conditions that surround star formation. Installations in the experiment were NRL’s 26-m antenna at its Maryland Point, Md., observatory; NASA’s Deep Space Network 64-m antenna at Tidbinbilla, Australia; the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory’s 22-m antenna at Semeiz, USSR; and the Calif. Institute of Technology’s 39-m antenna at Owens Valley, Calif. The maximum spacing achievable is the earth’s diameter (12 600 km), a distance approximating the separation between the Md. and Australian antennas (12 091 km). (NRL Release 45-7-76B/HF; NYT, 20 July 76, 13)
New Mexico State University and NASA would sponsor a 3-day symposium aimed at motivating Hispanic and Native American college and high-school students to follow science and engineering as career fields, the Johnson Space Center announced. The symposium sent invitations to faculties of 14 colleges and universities with high numbers of Hispanic and Native American students, as well as local area high schools, to hear speakers and view exhibits from NASA field centers and from the aerospace industry. The session from 21 to 23 April would highlight career opportunities in the aerospace field, including a workshop session on the need for additional aerospace courses in the school curriculum and a job fair providing information on placement. (JSC Release 76-23)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $40 214 contract extension of 12 mo to Ky. State Univ. for continuing its studies of the effects of oxygen atmospheres on animals. The animal under study was the vinegar fly—Drosophila melanogaster—which was grown and tested under 5%, 20%, and 60% oxygen concentrations (normal oxygen content of earth’s atmosphere is 21%). Studies over 2 yr showed that, at the 5% and 20% oxygen levels, survival rates of the initial generation of the flies were the same. Flies in a 60% oxygen environment had a survival rate like that of the flies in the 20% environment, for up to 20 days; after 20 days, flies in the 60% atmosphere died. Tissue studies indicated that exposure to a 60% oxygen environment resulted in physical changes, . including accelerated aging and problems in the nervous system. The contract extension would permit studies of the mortality, fertility, and gene frequencies of the flies over 10 or more generations. The data would aid in establishing proper oxygen content in manned spacecraft atmospheres during future manned missions, and in selecting humans to participate in manned missions and in deep-sea dives. (KSC Release 198-76)
Long-term directions and opportunities in civil aviation—including passenger air travel by rotorcraft from small urban-center airports, or intercontinental air transportation on hypersonic craft rated environmentally acceptable—were projected in a NASA study, “Outlook for Aeronautics,” announced by the agency as the result of its study on the role it should play in research and development of aviation and the technical advances that might be needed. Relatively few major new developments could be expected through the early 1980s because of economic setbacks and environmental pressures, the agency said, but, with adequate research and technology investments, new opportunities should arise in the period 1985-2000. Demand for passenger transportation should grow from 250 million annually to about 1 billion annually by the year 2000; by the late 1980s, air traffic should exceed the capacity of the present airport system. Congestion should lead to development of short-haul aircraft using smaller airports; increasing costs would result in greater efficiency and economy with improved safety in subsonic aircraft, the report said. (NASA Release 76-78) During April: Air Force cold-weather tests of an air-cushion landing system for use on large transport aircraft were completed after 4 wk at a site in Canada. The device, which resembled an upside-down life raft installed under the fuselage, was made of rubber and nylon; it measured about 10 m long and about 4 m wide. The elastic container was filled with air from two engines mounted under the wings; air forced out through more than 6800 holes on the bottom surface created an air bearing between the landing surface and the trunk. The cushion system, successfully demonstrated in the late 1960s on a smaller single-engine aircraft, had the advantage of exerting a very small amount of pressure over the entire landing surface as contrasted to conventional landing systems. Further tests of the system would be conducted on the twin-engine short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 76, 15)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
Vandals who damaged the moon rock on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., were not successful in obtaining a piece of the rock, said the Washington Post. The lunar sample, a 40-gram triangular chuck of basalt, had been imbedded in a block of glass so that it might be touched by museum visitors; about 2 cubic mm had been chipped away and a missing corner of the triangle and a scratch over the surface had become visible in the single beam of light that illuminated the sample. NASA had sent experts to photograph the damage and to vacuum the exhibit area for any dust or small chips that might have come off the sample. Electronic security measures were being increased, and a fulltime guard had been stationed near the display, as a result of the incident. (WPost, 12 Sept 76, B-3; Av WTc, 27 Sept 76, 16)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
Travelers aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle orbiter in the 1980s would use a unique space suit and rescue system, developed at Johnson Space Center. The Shuttle suit, a departure from the customized astronaut suits, would consist of a two-piece upper and lower torso cover in small, medium, and large sizes to accommodate all astronaut candidates or crews, including females. Only the pilot and mission specialist would be outfitted with the space suit; the commander and payload specialists would be provided with a personal rescue system nicknamed the “cosmic soccerball,” consisting of a container nearly a meter in diameter constructed of three layers—urethane, Kevlar, and an outside thermal protective layer, with a small viewing post of tough Lexan—containing its own simplified life-support and communications systems. During a rescue operation in space, a space-suited astronaut could transfer the rescue balls in one of three ways: using the handle to carry the enclosure like a suitcase from one vehicle to another; hooking a device like a clothesline between two spaceships and passing the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship to the other; or using the remote-manipulator arm in the orbiter’s cargo bay to pluck the rescue ball with its passenger from the disabled ship and put it aboard the rescue ship. Materials to be used in the rescue ball and the Shuttle suit would provide longer shelf life, according to technicians who ran pressure and abrasion tests on them; use of the fabric to make joints in the space suits (instead of the Apollo and Skylab suit use of neoprene rubber molded into convolutes containing cables) would provide better mobility and reduce cost and weight of each suit. The new suit also featured a module construction that closed with a body seal at the waist, considered more reliable than the pressure-seal zippers used in the previous suits. The new suits also were designed with an integral portable life-support system as part of the rigid upper torso, instead of the bulky 34-kg package that previously had to be unpacked and connected to the suit. (NASA Release 76-56; JSC Roundup, 26 Mar 76, 1)
2 January: NASA planned 18 major satellite launchings in 1976, 16 from Cape Canaveral and 2 from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base. First of these, on 13 Jan., would be a U.S.-Canadian communications technology satellite; second, on 15 Jan., would be the Helios satellite built by West Germany. Other NASA launches during the year would include 2 comsats for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; 2 maritime comsats (Marisats); Palapa, a comsat for the Indonesian government; the second geostationary operational environmental satellite (COES-B); and Lageos, a laser geodynamic satellite to help alleviate earthquake hazards. (NYT, 3 Jan 76, 5)
The universe had been analyzed and found to be open, a group of astronomers told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston. The director of Cornell Univ.’s national astronomy and ionosphere center, Dr. Frank Drake, said that the most recent astronomical data indicated that in about 30 billion years the universe would have changed, and no stars would appear in a night sky, having gathered into “Island Universes”—clusters of galaxies widely separated from each other. Computer analysis of recent observations indicated that separation of galaxies into islands had not yet begun, which meant that the universe might be comparatively young. The conclusion that the universe was open had been based on factors such as expansion rate, deceleration, and density of the universe. Evidence today would support the “big bang” theory which stated that the universe had exploded in the beginning from a single solid mass, and would go on expanding. (B Sun, 19 Feb 76, A-3)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of the world’s leading authorities on the sun and its corona, died at Mass. General Hospital after a long illness. During his lifetime, he had viewed 15 total solar eclipses, leading expeditions to distant places like the Sahara (1973) and Siberia (1936), where the Soviets provided a parlor car of the Trans Siberian Railroad for his equipment and camping gear. Dr. Menzel had taught for nearly 40 yr at Harvard; Dr. Fred L. Whipple of Harvard, a colleague and former student of Dr. Menzel, noted that many of the best-known astronomers in the U.S. had also been taught by Dr. Menzel. The Minor Planet Center of the Inti. Astronomical Union recently named an asteroid Menzel in recognition of his contribution to astrophysics. In 1938, Dr. Menzel developed the first coronagraph in the U.S. to permit study of the sun’s corona without an eclipse; in 1933, he had collaborated with J.C. Boyce in establishing the presence of oxygen in the solar corona, and in 1941 he had worked with Winfield W. Salisbury on the initial calculations that enabled the first radio contact with the moon in 1946. He had received a Ph.D. in astrophysics at Princeton in 1924, writing science-fiction stories to help pay his expenses, and had taught at the Univ. of Iowa and Ohio State Univ. before becoming professor of astrophysics at Harvard in 1939. He was director of the Harvard College Observatory from 1954 to 1966, when he was named research scientist at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge. He had retired from the university in 1971, but had continued to do research there. (ATT, 16 Dec 76, 50)
The U.S. Air Force announced it would begin flight tests of a new system called latar (laser-augmented target acquisition/recognition), developed by Northrop Corp. to give pilots of single-seat aircraft enhanced air-to-surface and air-to-air attack capability. The latar pod, mounted in the gun bay of the USAF F-4E, would contain long-range high-resolution electro-optical equipment for target imaging, laser designation, and acquisition and tracking; its field-of-view would be limited only by the fuselage and the externally carried munitions on the aircraft. The system would allow a pilot to acquire a target visually, using either a helmet-mounted sight system or a telescopic radar, with the optical turret following his line of sight; the view seen by the latar would appear on a helmet-mounted display built by Minneapolis Honeywell. The system would be suitable for use in all types of aircraft, including helicopters. (OIP Release 203.76)
The Air Force awarded a $1 million supplement of a previous costplusincentive-fee contract to General Electric’s Aircraft Engine Group at Cincinnati, O., a labor-surplus area, for extended flight-test spare parts support for B-l aircraft engines, the Department of Defense announced. (DOD Release 213-76)
The U.S. Navy launched an experimental ocean-surveillance satellite—part of the Whitecloud system developed by the Naval Research Laboratory—on 30 April from Vandenberg AFB aboard an Atlas launch vehicle, reported Defense/Space Business Daily. The satellite was in a near-circular orbit of 1122-km apogee, 1100-km perigee, inclined 63.5°, with a period of 107.5 min. (SBD, 20 May 76, 21) NASA Hq conducted a news conference on the Viking mission to Mars, with Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science; Robert Kraemer, director of planetary programs; Walter Jakobowski, Viking program manager; James Martin, Jr., Viking project manager; and Dr. Gerald S. Soffen, Viking project scientist, to review the mission and answer questions. Dr. Anthony Calio, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science, opened the session by recalling the work done on Viking over the past 7 yr that would culminate in Viking’s reaching Mars within the next few weeks. The U.S. for the first time would be operating 4 spacecraft simultaneously, 2 in orbit and 2 on the planet’s surface. Kraemer mentioned Galileo’s sighting of Mars in 1609, the detection of “eanali” on the planet’s surface by Schiaparelli and others in the 1800s, and Percival Lowell’s founding of the Lowell Observatory in 1894 followed by his publication of reports on “Mars and Its Canals” and “Mars as the Abode of Life.” Edgar Rice Burroughs, author of the Tarzan stories and “grandfather of science fiction writers,” began writing stories about civilization on Mars that had kept the public “waiting ever since to get down to the surface and see what is there.” Although, as Kraemer pointed out, 4 Mariner missions had shown that civilization did not actually exist on Mars, nothing had ruled out the existence of life, and that was a purpose of the Viking mission. Jakobowski reviewed the history of Voyager, Surveyor, and Viking, especially the 1971 Mariner flyby that revealed Mars as a dynamic planet. Martin, Viking project manager at Langley Research Center, said the 2 Viking spacecraft had been flying for a long time and had turned in “exceptionally good” performance; this would be the first mission to use optical navigation to confirm radio-tracking data, and the first set of results had shown the spacecraft to be “right on course.” Martin added that—as an expression of confidence in his team—a quiet period had been declared the coming week when most of the flight team would be on vacation; “the team needs that time off to get ready for a pretty active and hectic summer,” he said. A.T. (Tom) Young, Viking mission director at LaRC, showed slides of mission operations and possible landing sites, reviewing the reasons for site selection and what NASA hoped to learn in both scientific and engineering areas, concluding with a summary of expected activities during the first 20 days on Mars. Viking-mission audio from JPL would be available starting about 15 June. Dr. Soffen noted that the scientific questions about Mars covered more than the presence of life there, which was only one of 13 investigations to be conducted by Viking, and suggested that the press representatives “ought to prepare yourselves from an educational point of view about all the experiments other than just the biology.” The first question raised by the press was on the indicators of a safe landing; Martin replied that there would be 5—telemetry from a footpad switch; startup of the lander computer, accompanied by turnoff of the descent-engine heaters; drop on equipment-power bus with shutoff of entry equipment; and switch in data rate from the orbiter-to-lander 4-kilobit rate to a 16-kb rate for sending pictures to the orbiter. A question about turning on the backup lander computer got a detailed response involving detectors and switches in a complex procedure that occur when “the second computer hollers for help,” as Young put it. Other questions concerned dust storms, camera resolution, and chances of success; Soffen concluded by noting “if we knew the answers, we wouldn’t have to do this mission.” (Text, 20 May 76; NASA Releases 76-90, 76-98)
NASA’s reusable Space Shuttle program would produce significant benefits for civil aviation, the agency reported in announcing the first operational tests of an advanced flight-control system for civil aircraft to be conducted by the Shuttle, together with advances in structural materials technology for aerospace manufacturers. Standard heavyweight mechanical backup flight-control systems had been required when reliability of electronic control systems was in question; however, aerodynamic requirements for the use of mechanical systems had hampered development of flight-efficient aircraft designs. Use of the advanced electronic controls would reduce weight, resulting in less fuel consumption, and a computer tie-in with ground navigation and mission controls would provide constant reliable communication and reduce traffic delays. Use of composites—strong lightweight combinations of metals and plastics—would reduce structural weight by more than 30% compared to aluminum. Developed by NASA and the Air Force in collaboration with industry, the composites would demonstrate in Shuttle testing the weight reduction and cost effectiveness needed for future designs. (NASA Release 76-58)
Both the Boeing Co. and Japan’s official transport-development corporation announced pending agreement on Japanese participation in a billion-dollar project to develop a new medium-range Boeing jet liner in the 1980s. The new plane, temporarily designated the 7x7 (middle number to be given later), would be a 198-passenger 2-aisle craft, probably with 3 jet engines: one under each wing, and a third on the tail. It would be low-noise and fuel-conservative, with a high-performance bent wing to operate close to the speed of sound. The medium-range jet would fly one-stop trips between N.Y. and San Francisco. The pending agreement was announced separately, Reuters news agency reporting from Tokyo that the Civil Transport Development Corporation representing government and leading aerospace manufacturers had said the parties were ready to proceed; Boeing headquarters in Seattle termed the announcement premature, but verified progress in negotiations. Proposed Japanese share in the venture had ranged from 50 to 30 to 20%, the last amount currently being discussed. Aeritalia, the Italian aerospace-development concern, had agreed to put up 20% and Boeing had favored French, British, and West German participation. (NYT.11 Aug 76, 43)
An ad hoc committee of 9 prominent astronomers, assisted by a group of experts from NASA, ERDA, and the Air Force and the atmospheric and astronomical science communities, reviewed the program of solar research being conducted by the U.S. Air Force’s Sacramento Peak Observatory in N.M., and recommended that the National Science Foundation assume responsibility for its operation after 30 June 1976. The Air Force had established the observatory near Alamogordo in 1952 to research methods of predicting solar geophysical disturbances that might affect military responsibilities of the AF; reduced manpower had forced the AF to earmark the observatory for phaseout. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of NSF, announced that NSF would take over the SPO operation and continue its role in solar research at a productive level. Constructed at a cost of about $8 million, SPO had an estimated replacement value of about $20 million. (NSF Release PR76-15)
Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded to Klate Holt Co. of Houston a 1-yr $ 1.5-million extension of contract for custodial support services at JSC. The cost-plus-award-fee contract was originally awarded in July 1975. The contractor had provided custodial services in 82 buildings at JSC and to buildings occupied by JSC at nearby Ellington AFB. (JSC Release 76-45)
U.S. worldwide predominance in science and technology had eroded over the past 15 yr, said a National Science Foundation report transmitted to Congress by President Ford. Based on a review of 492 major technological innovations, the report said the U.S. share of the total sank from 75% in 1953-55 to 58% in 1971-73. U.S. spending on research and development declined from a peak of 3% of gross national product in 1963 to 2.3% in 1974. Since 1960, U.S. receipts for use of American inventions abroad had tripled, but payments the other way had increased 4.5 times. Foreign inventors receiving U.S. patents now accounted for more than 30% of all those issued by the Patent Office. The study was the most specific compilation to date on changes in relative support for science in the U.S. and other nations; the USSR, West Germany, France, and Japan had improved their inventiveness and worker productivity faster than the U.S. The message to Congress did not mention the international comparisons, but said inflation and recession had adversely affected science and technology in the U.S. (NYT, 14 Mar 76, 1)
A 2-mo study this summer at the Ames Research Center would bring together a specially chosen panel of a dozen scientists—“authorities on every aspect of space exploration”—to make an in-depth examination of problems anticipated in the colonization of space. Sponsored by NASA, the group would also consider whether satellite power stations for earth could be built by space colonists. In a report by James Barron for the Washington Star, Princeton physicist Gerard K. O’Neill detailed his ideas for a kilometer-plus-wide cylinder with living quarters for 10 000 colonists on its outer rim, the length to be determined by the number of colonists desired; O’Neill emphasized that the colony could be ready by 1990 using existing technology and materials mined from outer space. O’Neill last year took his theories to a NASA-sponsored study group at Stanford University that included 28 physicists, engineers, and social scientists; the panel recommended that the U.S. move toward the colonization of space, saying that it “would represent ‘cashing in’ on the scientific information returned to us by Apollo.” (W Star, 18 June 76, A-l)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel J. Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science, had selected Drs. Charles R. Chappell and James L. Burch of Marshall Space Flight Center as members of the flight team for the proposed Electrodynamics Explorer (EE) satellite mission, consisting of 2 satellites in polar orbit to study physical processes in the atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetosphere from high and low orbit. Dr. Chappell’s proposal for the mission was a cold-plasma instrument, a retarding ion-mass .spectrometer; Dr. Burch proposed a high-altitude instrument for measuring medium-energy plasma. The 2 scientists participated in the project study phase during the past yr, and would work on the flight team with the EE study office at Goddard Space Flight Center in preparing a project plan for the dual-satellite mission. (NASA Release 76-123) At ceremonies in the town of Smiljan, Tesla’s birthplace, President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia praised the “orientation” of Tesla and his compatriots in the U.S. in their support for Yugoslavia during World War II. Later, at a luncheon, Tito reviewed Tesla’s achievements and urged the Yugoslavs to create conditions that would induce talented youths to remain and not leave their country to go abroad. At an informal meeting Dr. Fletcher presented Tito with photographs of Yugoslavia taken by a U.S. satellite, and received from the celebration committee a “golden plaque” bearing Tesla’s picture to be presented to President Ford. President Ford’s message at the ceremonies had stated that Tesla’s work “stands as a link between our two countries in the history of notable accomplishments in science and engineering.” (FBIS, Tanjug Domestic Service, 9-10 July 76, 11-16)
NASA Hq announced that Robert S. Kraemer, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become special assistant to Dr. Robert S. Cooper, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, working on the applications missions of the center. Kraemer had been at NASA Hq for 9 yr, 6 of them in his current position. (NASA Hq. special anno., 5 Nov 76)
Meetings in Ardashat, Armenia, between Soviet and American scientists on space biology and manned flight safety had concluded, announced the Yerevan domestic radio news service. The meeting heard reports on results of the Apollo-Soyuz joint space mission, and proposed subjects for discussion at another meeting to be held in the U.S. in 1977. The government of the Armenian Republic gave a reception to honor the participants. (FBIS, Yerevan in Armenian, 29 Sept 76)
More new discoveries would be made in space than on the ground during the first 10 to 15 yr of Shuttle operations, a colloquium on bioprocessing in space was told by James H. Bredt, NASA program manager for space processing. The meeting of more than 200 industrial and academic bioscience researchers at Johnson Space Center heard reports on Space Shuttle and Spacelab capabilities and status. Noting that Spacelab would be able to carry 300 to 400 experiments, more on each flight than all other previous manned space missions combined, Bredt urged the audience to submit experiment programs that would make use of the new national resource. Participants recommended formation of a small group of bioscientists to advise NASA in discussions of space processing suggestions, and scheduling of followup meetings to define areas of interest so that programs could be developed before instrumentation development began. NASA spokesmen said more than 1400 experiment proposals for Shuttle flights were on hand, and Shuttle flight opportunities covering the first 2 Spacelab missions would be announced later this year. (Av Wk & Sp Tech, 29 Mar 76, 53)
Sen. John Glenn (D-0.), first American to orbit the earth in Mercury 6, said he would be available as a running mate for Jimmy Carter in the national elections but would not pursue the vice-presidential nomination. Glenn said Carter was clearly front runner in the Ohio primary scheduled for 8 June, and that his “ship is already in.” (NYT, 11 May 76, 13)
Johnson Space Center announced selection of Mason-Reguard, Lexington, Ky., for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for protective support services, including security, operation of police and fire departments, safety engineering, and emergency ambulance service. Proposed Cost of the services from 1 Oct. 1976 through 30 Sept. 1977 would be $1 837 000, with option for extension over two more 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-52) During August: The U.S. Air Force files for Project Blue Book, a 20-yr investigation of unidentified flying objects, had drawn many visitors since they were opened to the public at the National Archives in Washington, D.C., on 14 July, according to Science magazine. The USAF investigation had been closed in 1969 after the government decided that none of the 12 618 cases in the file indicated the existence of extraterrestrial vehicles. Only 701 of the total number remained unexplained. Biggest year for sightings was 1952, with 1501 reported; only 146 were reported for 1969, last year of the project, and only 1 of the objects sighted that year remained unidentified. The national preoccupation with UFOs “currently seems to be at a low ebb,” said Science, adding that the most promising investigations might be in the behavioral or subjective aspects of UFO sightings. (Science, 20 Aug 76, 662)
Tests on the Lageos—a geophysical research satellite expected to remain in orbit several million years—concluded at Goddard Space Flight Center at the end of Jan., NASA announced, and the satellite would be shipped to the Western Test Range in California for launch in late April. Called the “cosmic golfball” because of its 426 special reflectors designed to return laser pulses to their exact point of origin on the earth, Lageos would provide a stable point in the sky to permit measurement of the relative locations of participating ground stations within a few centimeters; these measurements would provide scientists with models of earth’s crustal motion, useful in predicting earthquakes. Manager of the Lageos project would be the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 76-17)
Simultaneous measurement of ocean-surface conditions from an aircraft and from an altimeter on NASA’s Geos 3 satellite 840 km above the surface was the mission of a NASA-Navy team just back from a month’s expedition to Newfoundland. Correlation of aircraft data on actual surface conditions with remotely sensed data from Geos 3, launched 9 April 1975, would demonstrate satellite capability of making accurate and rapid sea-state measurements. Newfoundland was chosen for the experiments because it exhibited a wide range of climatic and oceanographic conditions within a relatively short time period. Measurements taken were sea ice, sea state, surface-wind field, and determination of atmospheric refractivity. Each pass of the satellite—8 to 10 times a day— would produce 10 to 15 min of data relayed to Goddard Space Flight Center via tracking stations at Bermuda, Madrid, or Winkfield, England. Satellite observations plotted for the North Atlantic would be compared with aircraft data and with daily Navy-NOAA forecast maps. The team consisted of 8 persons from the Naval Research Laboratory and 11 representatives of Wallops Flight Center and Lockheed contractors. (NASA Release 76-39; WFC Release 76-2)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
Clocks around the world would be set back one second this New Year’s Eve, because the earth’s spin was that much longer in 1976 than it was last year. The backward move would be the sixth in the last 5 yr because of a slowing in the earth’s spin, the Washington Post explained; the changes were made twice in 1972 and once in each of the last 4 yr, each time on New Year’s Eve. The standard U.S. timepiece (at the Natl. Bureau of Standards Laboratory at Boulder, Colo.) would be reset at midnight GMT (7 pm in Washington, D.C.), and similar atomic clocks would be reset at the same moment in more than 80 countries including the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China. The earth’s spin had been slowing for at least 250 yr, when it was first noticed, except for a 10-yr period before 1900 when the rotation speeded up by 25 sec. In 1878, Simon Newcomb, then chief astronomer at the Naval Observatory, first systematically observed a fluctuation in the rate of rotation, which still is verified by 80 observatories around the world who send their findings to the Inti. Time Bureau in Paris, established in 1972 (the year the clocks lost 2 sec). Scientists attributed the slowdown to the moon’s pull on the tides, braking the motion of the earth’s mantle. (W Post, 31 Dec 76, A2) During December: The Air Force Systems Command announced that former astronaut Maj. Gen. Michael Collins had been appointed mobilization assistant to the AFSC commander. The position was the top Air Force Reserve post in AFSC. Collins, who was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a reserve major general 10 Mar. 1976, would continue to serve as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 76, 10)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
A press briefing following the 7th lunar science conference at Johnson Space Center [see 22 Feb.] featured the cochairmen, Dr. Larry Haskins, chief of planetary and earth sciences at JSC, and Dr. Robert Pepin, director of the Lunar Science Institute, and Dr. Deter Hayman of Rice Univ. Dr. Haskins said the conference aimed at broadening the planetary view of people working with lunar samples and data; a substantial interest was developing in the lunar polar-orbiter mission among people more interested than before in planetology, and aware that orbiting and remote-sensing missions would be the principal source for studying geoscientific evolution of these bodies. As an example, long-range operation of the lunar-surface packages had produced information that resulted in a lowered value for lunar heatflow; this in turn “constrained” the composition of the moon and its evolutionary history—“Whatever history it has, the amount of heat in the interior has to match the present heat loss from the body.” Also, said Dr. Haskins, lunar data were being used widely by scientists not previously concerned with lunar research: for example, archived data would be used to tell whether the moon was differentiated only in its outer extent, or more than 50% of it had undergone chemical separation or even developed a core. Another example would be the matching of seismic with magnetic data to get a better overall picture of lunar evolution. Dr. Pepin noted that 740 people had attended the conference, many more than the previous year; the program committee had purposely included discussions of other planetary and meteorite investigations that revealed much about the first 500 million yr of solar-system history, whose clues still exist in the moon (although hard to interpret) but no longer exist on earth. Experience with other planets had been insufficient to say if they had preserved early solar-system records; “best chances are not,” he added. Early solar-system history, especially of the inner planets, was characterized by enormous bombardment of all solid surfaces by objects now referred to as meteorites, but on a scale in those days “that almost suggests we should call them something else.” These huge objects clearly left their mark, with evidence that the bombardment took place more than 4 billion yr ago, then rapidly tapered off. Data from Mercury, Mars, and Venus would be expected to show that the historical record had been erased by time, constant impact, and geological activity in which the surface was pounded, dispersed, or remelted. The intense bombardment had wiped out earth’s early geological record too; terrestrial geologists had tried to put the age of the oldest earth rocks farther and farther back, getting in gradual stages as far back as 3.7 billion yr in a large anorthosite deposit in Greenland.This boundary condition for earth geology was one reason for the growing interest in lunar and general planetary studies: the flow of information had been not only from planetary to terrestrial scientists, but also in the other direction. Lunar scientists had begun to examine terrestrial craters such as the 60-km impact phenomenon called Manicouagan: what would have been referred to 5 yr ago as remnants of a Manicouagan volcano had now been established as an impact, mainly because the ease of sampling (greater there than on the moon) had permitted study of energy partition and formation of rock, glass, and melt material in a large-scale impact. Comparative planetology means applying results of studying one planetary surface to explain phenomena on other planetary surfaces. Earth, unlike other planets we know about, continued as a thermally active planet with volcanism, mountain upheaval and wearing down, and had obliterated much of its earlier record. The early stages of the lunar and planetary program focused attention outward; now these studies had provided knowledge applicable to earth, and the generation and development of lunar-surface morphology as a result of external bombardment was only one example of this application. Over the next 2 to 3 yr, a group of 50 to 100 scientists would be studying in detail the phenomenon of volcanism on all the terrestrial planets as a fundamental stage of planetary development, in a pilot project to define comparative planetology and relate it to a specific aspect. Mercury apparently had basalt flows; Venera pictures suggest recent activity on the surface of Venus that produced what seem to be basalts. Mars clearly had basalts: it had the largest volcano in the solar system, “an enormous structure that would . . . cover the state of Kansas if . . . plunked down there.” In 2 or 3 yr, Dr. Pepin said, we should be able to give an integrated picture of the issuing of basalts from the interior onto the surface, an extremely important process in the development and evolution of a planet. Life in the solar system was an exciting subject now, said Dr. Hayman, and discoveries were coming in at a pace that would make today’s theories outmoded by the time they got into print 6 mo from now. The task of scientists, he said, was to include the general public in the excitement, and to make it filter through to the colleges and universities, to high schools, and even to grade-school levels. One thing that had changed in the past 20 yr since the days of Harold Urey and Hans Seuss was the concept of the solar nebula and the formation of planets and satellites by accretion. The problem was the noncondensable material in the nebula, and where it went: the solar physicists explained its absence by the theory of a solar upheaval that cleaned out the inner parts of the solar system by a superstorm of ions. Applying thermodynamics to this theory made it possible to calculate which compounds would condense out at what temperature. The Allende meteorite that fell in Mexico in 1969 contained compounds similar to what had been predicted as a result of condensation of the solar nebula at high temperatures. Then, 2 or 3 yr ago the idea arose that the sun and planets had formed not only from gases but also from so-called presolar grains, which had not been specifically identified; their identity on the earth and moon would have been lost over time because of geological processes. So the search shifted to meteorites. Although none of the grains had been definitely identified, the conference had heard 2 reports that might be interpreted as finding presolar grains. Metallic nuggets in the Allende meteorite were found to consist of platinum-group metals in extraordinarily small fragments, a millionth of a meter, that did not vaporize or melt readily and might be presolar grains (although it would take a lot of work to settle the question, Dr. Hayman said). Also, a group from Berkeley had dissolved carbonaceous meteorites in hydrofluoric acid to get rid of the silicates; the carbon residue was found to be full of gas called “planetary” because its composition differed from that of the sun and was much more like that of earth. The question was how carbon material could have been of planetary origin under the solar-nebula theory: speculation was that the carbonaceous material might predate the formation of the sun and have originated elsewhere. It could not have undergone great heat without being destroyed, so the objects containing the material must have been created farther out, not in the inner region of the sun and terrestrial planets but in the region of the giant planets. If the heavier elements were synthesized in the stars by nuclear processes, especially in explosions of novas and supernovas that produced all sorts of elements as they blew away their outer envelopes, all the elements are probably represented in this expanding envelope. With rapidly dropping temperatures, the condensation of presolar grains would occur within 10 yr. It would be possible to look at the product of a single event to extrapolate the total of many such events of which all the elements around us would be the product. Dr. Haskins said in summary that developments in methodology and the availability of more precise measurements would make it possible to supplant earlier measurements. Geophysicists were learning to extract information from bits of material instead of bucketsful or large chunks as they had done in the past. The Apollo program had been responsible for a steady progress in the field of measurements: “there simply was not the funding and interest correlated together to do it prior to that time.” Asked what the scientific community had learned about the moon in the 3 yr 3 mo since the last moon mission, Haskins said they were beginning to understand the major stages in the evolution of every planetary body composed of rocky material; the moon had passed through stages that the earth had not reached, and had preserved a record of what had happened—for example, a preview of the kind of rock that would be formed later in earth history. The findings provided a broad framework in which more and different questions could be asked, not just investigation of the more obvious characteristics of the many materials brought back. Queried on the lunar-sample curatorial facility, Dr. Haskins said that moon rocks from the Apollo expeditions were housed in a leaky, flimsy facility that would not protect them for use of future generations of scientists. A new facility was desperately needed, because the present building was not fireproof and the roof leaked; within the building, the rocks had been kept in nitrogen-filled cabinets and handled only in clean-room conditions, to prevent contamination. However, moisture in the surroundings might have led to erroneous deductions regarding the moon environment when scientists analyzed the lunar samples. (Transcript, 7th lunar science conf. press briefing, 19 Mar 76; NASA Release 76-25; JSC Release 76-15; Science, vol. 185, 346; W Post, 21 Mar 76, A-3)
Spaceflight, publication of the British Interplanetary Society, announced that Soviet authorities after a 2-yr delay had released a photograph of Capella—the brightest star in the constellation Auriga—obtained by the “Orion 2” observatory aboard Soyuz 13. Capella is a yellow giant star 150 times as luminous as the sun and 47 light-years away. Soviet scientists believed they had found a “new association of stars” in the several dozen hot stars of extremely low radiation discovered around Capella; they claimed this was the first time in the history of astronomy that a telescope had obtained a spectrogram of a planetary nebula—a huge gaseous formation with a high-temperature star at the center-—and had obtained pictures of a known star with a gaseous envelope rich in Third Century America, sole Bicentennial exposition paid for by the U.S. government, opened to the public 30 May 1976 at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA 76-H-44S) silicon. The Orion 2 equipment could make precision study of stellar objects in the ultraviolet spectrum and provide spectrograms of stars of 13th magnitude “to extend the limits set by the American Skylab, whose crews took pictures of stars down to 7.5th magnitude,” the Russians said. (Spaceflight, May 1976, 177)
A NASA study reported that relocation of crew training and mission-control activities from Johnson Space Center in Tex. to Cape Canaveral in Fla. would offer “no management, technical or budgetary advantages” and “would seriously affect a smoothly functioning, highly efficient organization” at JSC, delaying the Space Shuttle program by up to 2 yr. The study, requested in June 1975 by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of a subcommittee on space science and applications of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that relocation would cost up to $842 million by 1983, and that the funds would not be recoverable. (ATT, 19 Sept 76, 24)
Three space scientists at Johnson Space Center would begin a week-long round-the-clock test of experiments and procedures in a mockup of the Spacelab designed for the Space Shuttle. The team, headed by astronaut-physician Dr. Story Musgrave, would eat, sleep, and perform space-related duties in a mockup of the Shuttle orbiter crew compartment, and would carry out more than 20 experiments in space medicine and one in space physics inside the 6.8-m-by-4.06-m Spacelab mockup. The team inside would be in constant communication with flight operations engineers and scientists at control points outside the mockup, which had been equipped with both instruments and experiments just as the Spacelab would be. The team would demonstrate 14 operational tests whose results would serve in planning inflight crew activities, procedures, and scheduling, and in studying items such as personal hygiene, general housekeeping and special-purpose cleaning and maintenance, and functional utility of the orbiter aft deck from which many of the Spacelab experiments would be monitored. The simulation was also designed to evaluate ground-support procedures and data-handling techniques. (JSC Release 76-04)
Scientists at Johnson Space Center had used helium-filled balloons as the preferred means of carrying payloads to study the atmosphere above the ozone layer. Although sounding rockets and airplanes could operate in the medium between 30 and 50 km over the earth’s surface, neither could remain stationary for very long, the rocket’s time in the stratosphere being measurable in minutes; also, payload weight for an airplane must decrease with the altitude it can maintain, whereas a balloon would be capable of taking an 1800-kg payload as high as 50 km. JSC’s Environmental Effects Office had used balloons to study effects on the ozone layer of fluorocarbons and other chemical interactions in the upper atmosphere; recent Natl. Research Council recommendations on reduction of use of freons had been partially based on JSC balloon-flight data. The JSC Space Physics Branch had used balloons to carry cosmic-ray instrumentation for the study of high-energy particles, and had worked with the Utrecht Space Sciences lab in carrying an ultraviolet telescope by balloon for use in a range of light that was opaque to observation from earth. Balloons and payloads prepared by JSC were launched from Palestine, Tex., by the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research, with parachutes for recoverable experiments. (JSC Release 76-70; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave government service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space missions (including 2 (lights to the moon) and was the second American to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; JSC Release 76-20; W Star, 16 Mar 76, A-2)
FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced award to Wilcox Electric Co., Kansas City, Mo., of a $3 720 699 contract for nine Category III instrument-landing systems that would complete a program to provide all-weather landing capability at key airports across the U.S. One Category III system would be installed at the FAA academy at Oklahoma City for training; the other eight would go to Kennedy Airport, NYC; O’Hare, Chicago; Houston Inti., Kansas City Inti., Seattle-Tacoma Inti., Los Angeles Inti., Portland Inti., and Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne County Airport. The new equipment had already been installed at Dulles Inti, near Washington, D.C., Atlanta Inti., San Francisco Inti., and Stapleton Airport at Denver, as well as at the FAA center at Atlantic City, N.J., where it had been used for test and evaluation. Category III equipment would permit landings without visual reference to the ground, under weather conditions with ceiling zero and runway visibility no less than about 200 m. Existing Category II equipment at the sites to be replaced would be moved to other airports, to be named later. (FAA Release 76-97)
Third Century America, the U.S. Bicentennial exposition on science and technology, opened to the public with 30 000 persons attending; 32 000 employes of the Kennedy Space Center had attended a preview the day before. Built within 4 mo, after President Ford in Feb. called on NASA to create a Bicentennial fair at Cape Canaveral, the exposition occupied 30 acres and 15 geodesic domes clustered around the mammoth Vehicle Assembly Building, so large that the U.N. Secretariat could be mounted on wheels and rolled easily through its doors. “The message from NASA, 16 other federal agencies, and a conglomeration of defense contractors,” said the Washington Post, was that America had spent her technology tax dollars well. The show was put together with $3 million in grants from the Dept, of Commerce, a $500 000 loan from NASA’s budget, and an $800 000 advance from the KSC visitor center account. Before it opened, the show was expected to draw 800 000 to 2 million persons; in July, average daily attendance was about 5000, and expectations were reduced to 500 000 before the fair closed 7 Sept. Many Fla. attractions reported a drop in attendance this summer. (W Post, 25 July 76, G-5) During May: Rockwell International Corp. awarded contracts for the Air Force B-l strategic bomber program. On 18 May, Rockwell awarded a $2.4-million contract to Hamilton-Standard Division, United Technologies Corp., for air conditioning and pressurization equipment and air-recirculation loops for the fourth B-l in the 4-plane prototype program. The firm had supplied similar equipment for 3 earlier B-ls. On 24 May, Rockwell awarded a $1.8-million subcontract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for tail assemblies, consisting of 2 horizontal stabilizers and a single vertical stabilizer, for the fourth B-l prototype aircraft. Martin Marietta had supplied stabilizers for the other 3 B-Is. Rockwell, system contractor on the B-l program, had developed the B-l to modernize the strategic bomber force; its advantage over previous heavy bombers was the design ability to avoid enemy defense by flying at nearly some speed at treetop height to avoid radar detection. The first 2 prototypes were in flight test, and the third was scheduled to fly later in 1976. (Rockwell Releases LA-3, LA-4)
Simultaneous measurements by two polar-orbiting satellites of powerful electric currents causing magnetic disturbances on earth had produced composite diagrams of horizontal current-flow in the ionosphere, vertical currents along magnetic-field lines, and the resulting magnetic perturbations, NOAA announced. A team of scientists representing NOAA and five universities had presented their findings at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco. Dr. Yohsuke Kamide of the Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (sponsored by NOAA and the Univ. of Colorado) said that, before the advent of satellites, auroras had been studied from the ground with cameras and magnetometers, which could detect the presence of powerful currents but not their location or direction. The Triad satellite launched in 1972 by the U.S. Navy had carried a Johns Hopkins Univ. three-component magnetometer to measure the strength of vertical currents supplying the “auroral electrojets”; using it, together with a satellite launched by the USAF Defense Meteorological Satellite Program and ground-based measurements from stations in Alaska, Canada, and the USSR, the team had produced its composite for 30 instances of perturbation. Other members of the team were Herbert W. Kroehl of NOAA’s Environmental Data Service; Dr. Gordon Rostoker, Univ. of Alberta; Dr. Syun-ichi Akasofu, Univ. of Alaska; Dr. Thomas A. Potemra, Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Dr. Ching Meng, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley. (NOAA Release 76-274)
Steam might be the power behind rockets of tomorrow, the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told by Dr. Freeman Dyson of the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study. Steam engines of the future would be powered not by coal but by laser beams so powerful that they could instantly turn water into superheated high-velocity steam that could carry a 1-ton spacecraft into earth orbit. Basic research on laser propulsion had already been done by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz of the Avco Everett Research Lab. in Cambridge, Mass. A laser beam with energy of 1 million kw would be needed to carry a rocket and its spacecraft away from earth; this laser would be 10 times more powerful than any developed so far. Ideally, the laser and rocket would be located on a mountain at 3-km altitude, where air would be free of water vapor that would reduce laser efficiency. Development of laser propulsion would take money, Kantrowitz said, but not as much as other rocket engines have cost. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A-2)
Tass reported a new development in U.S.-Soviet scientific and technical cooperation in a joint oceanographic experiment called Polymode to study vortex formations in the ocean. Professor Alan Robinson of Harvard University, heading a delegation of U.S. oceanographers toa plenary meeting of the Polymode organizing committee, said the mission would help crack the secrets of the ocean and place its resources at the service of mankind. Scientists had theorized that ocean vortexes, like cyclones in the atmosphere, had substantial influence on weather all over the globe. Work on Polymode would begin in mid-1977, with the northern area of research in the North Atlantic, 1000 km west of the Azores, and the southern area 200 to 300 km north of the Antilles. (FBIS, Tass in English, 29 Apr 76)
Inspection by U.S. Air Force and Japanese technicians of the MiG-25 Foxbat Soviet interceptor plane landed in Japan by a defecting pilot early in September revealed a minimum of innovation and an approach that relied on “brute force,” reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Examination of the Foxbat revealed a standard ejection seat, although the pilot had told U.S. interrogators none was carried because of a desire to hold down the weight of the steel-frame aircraft (about 14 000 kg with wings, tail surfaces, and afterburners removed). The number of cockpit instruments was about half those used in the F-4EJ built in Japan under license. None of the avionics in the MiG-25 used solid-state circuitry, relying instead on vacuum tubes; fatigue cracks in the airframe had been repaired by rough welding techniques. Despite the design deficiencies, however, the MiG-25 was “a formidable opponent,” Av Wk noted. (Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 18)
The $6.2-billion Space Shuttle, “America’s only remaining space spectacular,” might come apart at the seams because of unsafe nuts and screws, Jack Anderson and Les Whitten reported in the Washington Post. Discussion at NASA as early as Apr. 1973 had centered on the menace of substandard screws; in July 1973, Johnson Gage—-a Bloomfield, Conn, firm-—had sent NASA a warning based on tests of individual screw and nut threads stating that the standards “provide for a loophole that allows [NASA to] accept outright junk.” Computer tests had revealed that millions worth of faulty threads reached Rockwell International Corp., principal Shuttle contractor, because of low standards and it was feared the inferior screws had gotten into Shuttle equipment. Although company engineers were worried about the standards and the resultant products, the company bought fasteners from outside suppliers and could not control quality from 6000 vendors in 47 states, company minutes said. Industry had fought to keep the low standards rather than pay the estimated $120 million cost of retooling; the American National Standards Institute, led by industry, had blocked every move for tighter standards, Anderson and Whitten charged. (WPost, 17 Apr 76, B—11)
NASA announced that its Viking Undergraduate Intern Program, permitting U.S. college students to participate in the Viking mission to Mars, was under way at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Fifty-eight students from about 600 applicants had been selected to spend 30 days during the summer working with Viking scientists in a number of scientific areas at JPL, where more than 72 science teams were conducting a detailed examination of the planet, including a search for life. The program was the idea of Prof. Thomas Mutch of Brown Univ., leader of the Viking imaging team, who was assisted by a teammate, Prof. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ.; the 2 professors reviewed each of the applicants’ qualifications and selected the 58 students for the summer’s work. The program, designed to directly involve undergraduates with a strong interest in planetary science, was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation and by NASA’s Planetary Geology Office. (NASA Release 76-139)
A fully metallic replica of the Spacelab—called a “hard” mockup—had begun assembly near Bremen, West Germany, at the plant of ERNO, a subsidiary of VFW-Fokker and prime contractor for the Spacelab. The role of the replica was to ensure that all nonelectrical elements of the complex craft would be compatible; 4 additional Spacelabs would be constructed, including the flight unit, only one of which would be constructed. The next model would be the “high fidelity” model, to be built after final design details are agreed on later in 1976; it would be used for crew training. The next—Engineering Mockup 1—would be sent to the U.S. in 1978 for fitting into the Shuttle. The flight unit would be scheduled for shipment to Kennedy Space Center a year later; finally, Engineering Mockup 2 would be built and kept in Europe to help members of the European Space Agency (ESA) prepare missions over the 10-yr operational period. The single flight version, designed to make at least 50 flights, would carry a wide range of scientific and technological experiments for which the experimenters would be expected to pay a fee. The Europeans hoped to modify this policy in view of their nearly $400 million investment in the project. (NYT, 4 June 76, A—15)
President Ford would name Dr. H. Guyford Stever, director of the National Science Foundation for the past 4 yr, to head the recently reestablished White House Office of Science and Technology, the New York Times reported. The post had been abolished by President Nixon 3 yr ago “amid reports that he did not like the advice he was getting from it, particularly concerning antiballistic missiles and supersonic planes,” the Times said. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine had reported earlier that 4 conservative Republican senators had warned President Ford that Stever’s nomination would be an “affront” to Congress; the NSF had been a target of some congressmen because of funding projects that Congress considered questionable, Av Wk said. Other candidates for the position had shied away because of a possible change in administration after the forthcoming elections. Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) urged quick action on the nomination; the Senate Appropriations Committee had just cut $1 million from a $3.3-million budget estimate for the Office of Science and Technology. (NYT, 22 July 76, 37; Av Wk, 5 July 76, 13) with pleasure at the accomplishment,” when “it was commercial time . . . and the 9 a.m. programs.” Viewers were “left wondering whether there was really an event of such magnitude being televised or more science fiction,” the Star commented. (WStar, 21 July 76, B-l) Commentary on the Viking landing on Mars: The Chicago Tribune hailed the mission as “an epoch-making success . . . The achievement is the greater because the world has known from the beginning what we were attempting to do. There would have been no way to hide a failure.” (C Trib, 21 July 76, 1-7) The Phila. Inquirer called the landing “another giant leap for mankind” that “underscores the sophistication of unmanned spacecraft . . . Risks can be taken . . . that could not be justified with persons aboard ... Its performance in the first hours on Mars speaks more eloquently than words.” (P Inq, 21 July 76, 5-A) The NY Times said the TV networks were criticized for their coverage; Dr. J. Richard Keefe, former NASA scientist now at the Univ. of Louisville, said the coverage was “downright disgusting . . . Talk about being blase about space exploration, this was just incredible ... I think the population has become apathetic about the whole space program. It’s kind of sad, I think.” Spokesmen for the network told the Times they had given 20 to 25 min of coverage, showing the 2 pictures transmitted by Viking 1 and released by JPL where the transmission was received. NBC said its New York City switchboard had about 30 calls asking for more; ABC reported 25, and CBS reported 8 or 10. ABC said the number of calls was significant “for the time of day.” “What they may not have understood was that we showed whatever we had,” the spokesman said. “That was it.” (NYT, 21 July 76, 12) The Wall Street Journal said in an editorial that it could not “speculate with any confidence on why yesterday’s Viking / landing on Mars was important. And yet we are confident that it was.” The TV networks that “spent tedious hours broadcasting the dullest political convention on record” a wk ago “were preoccupied with game shows” while Viking was sending back its first pictures of the surface of another planet. However, those who said the $1 billion cost of the project was wasted unless Viking’s cameras pick up “ something interesting, like a local resident,” would be missing the point, WSJ added. The project demonstrated application of the most advanced technology to a single objective, advanced managerial skills as “a triumph of human organization,” and left mankind with the psychic effects of the visit to another planet. “ . . . After each leap deeper into space, nothing is quite the same again.” (WSJ, 21 July 76, 22) A Washington Star editorial said that Viking 1 may have “ended generations of fanciful imaginings” about life on Mars, and asked if it was worth 7 yr of effort and $1 billion “to get a rather sobering view of what our imaginations told us was a fascinating planet.” Although it was much too early to predict the “ultimate scientific harvest,” the Star said “we have no doubt that the ultimate payoff will be more than adequate in scientific if not in fictional terms.” (W Star, 22 July 76, A-14) The first color photograph of Mars, showing a dramatic blue sky against a rust-red soil surface, was in error, Viking project scientists announced. Astronomer Carl Sagan said that someone had given the wrong weighting to the color filters in reconstructing the electronic image on earth, and that corrected photos would show a pinker sky. The seismometer on the Viking lander had apparently jammed and would impair detection of “marsquakes” unless corrected; Lou Kingsland, deputy mission director, said the proper command might not have been issued or the problem might be in the electrical circuits. {WStar, 22 July 76, A—1) Having successfully set down the Viking 1 lander in a safe spot, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., announced that Viking 2 would be sent to a region likely to be more scientifically interesting even with less assurance of safe touchdown. Cydonia, a region halfway between the Mars equator and north pole, was considered because of a greater likelihood of water, required for the presence of life as we know it. Viking project scientists said they were eager to survey a site as different physically from the desert Chryse site as possible. Viking 2, still more than 1.6 million km from Mars, would arrive in orbit there early in Aug. and land about 4 Sept, if all went well. Debate on the second landing site focused on possible hazards in the northern region, out of range of the radar signals that led to choice of the first site. Astronomer Carl Sagan said the first landing was “reasonably lucky,” with chances of success calculated at only 60%, and the northern site would be less promising. However, he and the other scientists voted overwhelmingly for Cydonia because, as Sagan said, “it is not only the probability of success but the significance of success” that merited consideration. (WStar, 22 July 76, A-6) Asked about the role of luck in the successful Viking 1 landing on Mars, Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., replied, “I don’t plan on luck .... I believe that most of what you call luck you make yourself. It’s people doing that extra job ...” Martin’s management approach during his 8 yr with the Viking project had been to “get into the details of everything .... I’ve never known any other way to be successful .... It inspires and motivates the next level of management to get involved.” (ATT, 22 July 76, 24) The “most electrifying new information” received from Mars since the Viking 1 landing was that the Martian atmosphere contained 3% nitrogen, an element essential to life as we know it, said the NY Times. Until this week, the absence of nitrogen on Mars had been the most compelling argument against existence of life “in any form” on Mars; now this argument had been removed. (ATT, 22 July 76, 30) JPL scientists were still hedging on the color of the Martian sky, after announcing that photographs released earlier showing a blue sky might have been processed wrongly. Astronomer Carl Sagan noted that the “boos given to (the) announcement about a pink sky reflect our wish for Mars to be just like the earth.” Dr. Thomas Mutch, leader of the Viking imaging team, said computer verification of the filtered signals for color reconstruction could take another wk or two. (WStar, 23 July 76, A-l) Viking Mission Director A. Thomas Young told a news conference that the problem with the lander’s soil-sampling arm was probably an error in the computer command that failed to drop a locking pin near the arm’s “wrist.” A new set of commands to extend the arm further and free the pin would be sent 24 or 25 July. The arm would scoop up soil and drop it in a hopper on the spacecraft that would distribute it to 3 biology experiments aimed at detecting signs of life on the planet. Other scoops would be used for chemical analysis. (ATT, 24 July 76, 1) Besides the trouble with its soil sampler, the Viking 1 lander was having radio problems, said Project Manager Martin. One of two receivers getting direct communications from earth was not working properly, and the radio for relaying data from the lander to its orbiter was operating in a low-power mode. Also, the instrument for detecting “mars-quakes” had not been released from its “caged” position on the lander despite repeated commands. A special scientific team was checking to see if all the problems were related, perhaps in the computer signals to the electrical circuitry. ( W Star, 23 July 76, A-3) Mars was a very much richer and larger planet than the airless and waterless moon, said a NY Times editorial, with a firm surface and virtually every essential required for life. Barring the catastrophe of a nuclear war, Mars could be sustaining a human population “by the time of this nation’s Tricentennial,” the paper said. (NYT, 25 July 76, A— 16) “I really do not know what the fuss is all about—landing on Mars, I mean. I landed there 40 years ago,” said Buster Crabbe, who played both Flash Gordon and Buck Rogers in movies of the 1930s. Crabbe, who won the 400-m freestyle swimming gold medal in the 1932 Olympic games, was hired by Paramount Pictures to do a Tarzan film, and wentron to star in space pictures. “People still remember old Flash,” the 68-yr-old Crabbe said. “Here I am still around, no ill effects from my space travel .... I do feel sorry for our space people though, having to go through all the things we did years ago. I don’t think they know what’s in store for them. Just wait till they run into the clay men and the hawk men and the shark men.” (NYT, 25 July 76, E17; Tucson Ariz. Daily Star, 30 July 76, A-19) Viking 1 did not relay any picture of life-sized Martians to earth because it landed in the wrong place, charged columnist Art Buchwald in the Wash. Post. Buchwald reported his friend, a science-fiction buff, as saying the scientists were interested only in finding “a smooth place to set down the camera.” If the/Martians sent a camera to earth, the smoothest place to land it would be the Sahara desert. “If you lived on Mars you wouldn’t pitch a tent on some barren spot where nothing was happening,” argued the friend. “If Viking had landed next to one of their canals, the Martians would have sailed their tall ships up to it and given us the greatest show ever seen on television.” (WPost, 25 July 76, H-l) A series of simple commands from earth freed the mechanical arm on the Viking 1 spacecraft reported to have jammed 22 July. The extendable arm would be able to dig into the Martian soil as planned, and the second Viking spacecraft would be able to land in Cydonia now that the Chryse area could be explored. The Viking was commanded to extend its arm twice as far as previously and to rotate it several times to free a locking pin inserted to protect the arm from vibration during its flight in space and landing on Mars. The command was timed to precede transmission of a spacecraft camera image taken soon after receipt of the command; the boom would not be in the picture if it had not responded to the order to extend itself in front of the camera eye. When the picture came in a half hour later, the mechanical arm was in clear view, and a surface shot clearly showed the locking pin had fallen free. Flight directors had not succeeded in uncaging a seismometer, composed of 3 delicate balancing beams to detect movements in the planet’s crust, that had been wired together for protection from vibrations. Spacecraft computer signals to electrify and burn the wire were not received, and a second command bypassing the computer apparently failed also. Detection of marsquakes might have to depend on Viking 2, scheduled to land in the Cydonia basin about 4 Sept. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) The atmosphere of Mars was once 10 times thicker and richer in gas than it is today, and “we could breathe that atmosphere” if it were richer in oxygen, said Dr. Tobias Owen of the State Univ. of N.Y., a member of the project science team at JPL, where the first samplings by the Viking 1 mass spectrometer were analyzed. Mars’s atmosphere was now 95% carbon dioxide, 2 to 3% nitrogen, 1 to 2% argon, 0.3% oxygen; earth’s atmosphere is 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, 0.9% argon-40, and 0.03% carbon dioxide. “Mars is an intermediate planet between the earth and the moon,” said Dr. Owen. “We do not see a hugely abundant biology, but that doesn’t say there’s none at all.” Color pictures of the Martian surface near the Viking lander revealed a soil even redder than in the original picture received last week. Rocks strewn over the desert sands exhibited a red coating laid down years ago when Mars’s atmosphere was richer in oxygen and water, “through oxidation of the iron and hydration of the minerals,” said Viking geologist Alan S. Hinder. “We propose to test the hypothesis by cracking open one of the red rocks ... to see if there is any rust inside.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-l; W Star, 27 July 76, A-3; C Trib, 27 July 76, 5) Viking 1 ’s mechanical arm scooped its first sample of the Mars surface 28 July, leaving a sharp-edged trench clearly visible in a picture transmitted afterward by the unmanned lander. The 3-m arm, a tube about 38 mm in diameter, ended in a sharp-edged scoop that could dig into the surface with a force of about 13 kg if necessary. When the cover snapped shut on the sample, the arm retracted and swiveled to sift the sample into a funnel feeding into the “biology box.” This container, about the size of a large milk carton, encased the 3 experiments designed to detect life. Two other experiments, also located under funnels, were the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer to detect organic molecules and an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer to identify inorganic materials, Sensors inside the funnels would tell whether the samples were sufficient. The 3 biology experiments were the “pyrolytic release” experiment of Dr. Norman Horowitz, to look for microorganisms that used the sun as a source of energy like photosynthesis on earth to build organic compounds, through exposure of the sample to radioactive carbon dioxide under artificial sunlight; a “labeled release” experiment by Dr. Gilbert Levin of Biospherics, Inc., to look for signs of microbial metabolism by tracing radioactive organic compounds injected into the Mars sample to see if they were consumed, releasing gaseous wastes that could be detected; and a “gas exchange” experiment by Vance Oyama of NASA’s Ames Research Center to provide a rich variety of foods in a liquid form—“chicken soup”—to the Mars sample and iook for changes in gas composition inside the experiment chamber that would indicate the food was being used. The biology-box samples would incubate for from 5 to 12 days before results were announced, and a positive finding would be confirmed by subsequent control experiments. The science team anticipated a long wait for any kind of answer, as well as the possibility that the answers might be contradictory. Dr. Gerald Soffen, chief scientist for Viking, pointed out that results would be difficult to interpret: “you have to put yourself on the level of a microbe,” he added. The microbes might drown in the liquid, ingest the wrong food, or burn up in the warm experiment chambers. (W Star, 28 July, A-l, A-5) One of the five soil-testing experiments on Viking 1 did not receive enough soil to actuate it, project officials announced, and two attempts to start the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer working on a sample apparently failed. Project Manager Martin said the flight engineers were not yet able to determine what went wrong, because the sampling arm apparently worked as planned but the sample never got into the instrument. The motor driving a stirring rod to brush particles through a strainer did not come on, and scientists speculated the sample might still be sitting on the strainer. A photograph of the trench dug to obtain the sample had shown that the soil was surprisingly cohesive, “like wet sand,” according to Princeton Univ. scientist Dr. Robert B. Hargraves. After delivering soil to the experiments in the biology box, the mechanical arm made 2 attempts to dig and deliver a sample to the mass spectrometer but the instrument did not signal receipt of the sample either time. It was not clear, Martin said, whether the arm lost the soil on the swing back or was off the mark when it deposited the soil, or the soil in the hopper never filtered down to the instrument. The arm responded properly to the following command and delivered a spoonful of soil to the x-ray spectrometer with no difficulty. (ATT, 29 July 76, 1; W Post, 29 July 76, A-3; W Star, 29 July 76, A-3; WSJ, 29 July 76, 1) Viking project scientists debated the makeup of the Mars soil sample that might have been too thick to filter into an instrument opening. Dr. Ronald Scott said that, although the material was somewhat cohesive, “certainly something must have gotten through.” Deputy Mission Director Kingsland said the most likely causes of the apparent malfunction were failure of the mechanical scoop to obtain a full sample, or failure of the “level full” indicator in the instrument to signal properly. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, chief of the gas chromatograph experiment, said the arm might have come up empty from the trench after scooping for the biology experiments, and that a repeat attempt next week would take both possible explanations of the problem into account. Kingsland said the material seemed to have a consistency “something like wet clay.” Dr. Scott emphasized that this did not indicate water in the soil. The other instruments seemed to be processing their samples normally, and results from the inorganic-chemistry sampling in the x-ray spectrometer should provide the first assay of Martian soil as early as tomorrow. (ATT, 30 July 76, A-22; WStar, 30 July 76, A-5; CTrib, 31 July 76, 2) The first experimental results from Mars, returned 30 July by Viking 1 ’s lander, showed that the surface consisted of iron, calcium, silicon, titanium, and aluminum, in amounts that would be determined within a few days. The entire surface around the lander was covered with a very thin coating of vivid orange-red iron oxides that gave the plant its red or rusty appearance. “Mars is a painted desert,” said Dr. Gerald Soffen, one of the project scientists. Dr. Priestly Toulmin, leader of the inorganic-chemistry team, noted that Mars soil up to now could be analyzed only by long-distance methods such as light reflections from the surface; Viking had “picked up a piece of Mars and put it into an analytical instrument.” Dr. Benton Clark, also of the inorganic-chemistry team, said that Viking had not detected trace elements like vanadium or molybdenum considered essential for plant growth on earth; this did not mean the elements were not present, nor had elements like arsenic been detected that would make earth soil sterile. The results “do not rule out the possibility of some form of life,” Dr. Clark added. Results from the 3 biology experiments would be transmitted to earth within a few days. (NYT, 31 July 76, A—1)
NASA announced selection of 8 scientists as a team to develop experiments for a proposed unmanned lunar mission in 1980, under study at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The mission would use a low-cost instrumented polar-orbiting spacecraft with a smaller companion subsatellite, launched together from Cape Canaveral on a single Delta vehicle, to orbit the moon for a yr and examine nearly the entire lunar surface from pole to pole, on both near and far sides, to expand knowledge gained from the small areas visited by previous U.S. and Soviet missions to the whole of the moon. This first U.S. lunar mission since Apollo 17 in 1972 would also be the first global survey of a body other than earth. The 8 experiment areas would provide measurements for scientists to determine the moon’s gravity, magnetism, and heat flow, and the chemical and mineral composition of the moon’s surface. Advanced remote sensing—gamma-ray, x-ray, and reflection spectroscopy—would be used in 3 of the experiments to create chemical maps of the lunar surface; a fourth experiment, spectrostereo imaging, would provide photographic data to match these maps with individual features of the lunar landscape. Magnetometer and electron reflector experiments would map electrical and magnetic properties of the lunar surface and subsurface; the remaining 2 experiments—heat flow and gravity field—would provide information on the deep interior of the moon. The gravity field would be mapped by tracking the polar-orbiting spacecraft circling at an altitude of 100 km above the lunar surface; the subsatellite, in a higher orbit up to 5000 km, would track the orbiter when it was hidden from earth by the moon. Mascons (mass concentrations) on the near side of the moon had been discovered by analyzing similar tracking data during the early lunar-orbiter flights in the l960s; the proposed experiment would determine whether such mascons existed on the far side of the moon, besides providing information on the lunar interior. Principal investigators named were: gamma-ray spectrometry, Dr. James R. Arnold, Univ. of Calif, at San Diego; spectrostereo imaging, Merton E. Davies, RAND Corp.; electron reflection, Dr. Robert P. Lin, Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley; infrared spectrometry, Dr. Thomas B. McCord, MIT; microwave radiometry, Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman, CalTech; gravity and altimetry, Dr. Roger J. Phillips, JPL; magnetometry, Dr. Christopher T. Russell, Univ. of Calif, at Los Angeles; x-ray spectrometry, Dr. Jacob L. Trombka, Goddard Space Flight Center. Each of the 8 principal investigators would be accompanied by groups of coinvestigators; the 71-member science team would be aided by JPL staff members. JPL scientist in charge of the study was Dr. T.V. Johnson. (NASA Release 76-119)
Grover Loening, pioneer aeronautical inventor and first person to receive an M.A. degree in aeronautics from an American university, died at the age of 87 at his home in Fla. after a long illness. In 1913, after working for an aeroplane builder in N.Y., Loening became assistant to Orville Wright and manager of the Wright brothers’ factory in Dayton, 0. In 1914 he was appointed chief aeronautical engineer of the Army Signal Corps aviation section. As vice president of Sturtevant Aeroplane Co., he pioneered the first U.S. steel-frame airplane in 1915; later he formed his own company and developed the M8 2-seat Pursuit monoplane using rigid strut bracing, which he patented. After World War I, Loening produced the Flying Yacht which established world records and won him the Collier Trophy in 1921; his next success was the Loening Amphibian, with the first practical retractable carriage. A member of the Aviation Hall of Fame, Loening was one of the first directors of Pan American Airways and a member of the Smithsonian Institution board for about 20 yr. Awarded the Presidential Medal of Merit and nearly every U.S. aviation medal, he had been selected 3 wk ago to receive the Smithsonian’s Langley gold medal for aerodromics. (WStar, 3 Mar 76, B-5) During February: Water hyacinths thought to be environmentally affected by the location of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, proved to have unexpected benefits for space-age processes and byproducts, when NASA scientists monitoring the effects of wastes discharged into nearby streams found that the water plants had a peculiar ability to absorb and concentrate toxic metals, and to metabolize various other chemical pollutants, while they continued to produce massive amounts of plant material. For a year, biochemists at NSTL had worked with the plants as a filtration system for purifying polluted waters, as a source of biogas for fuel, as a protein and mineral additive to cattle feed, and as a soil fertilizer and conditioner. The vascular plants could absorb and metabolize large quantities of nutrients and pollutants from domestic sewage waste waters. An installation of the size needed to meet pollution standards at the nearby community of Orange Grove would have cost about $500 000; stocking the sewage lagoon with enough water hyacinths to purify up to a half million gallons of sewage outflow daily cost only a few thousand dollars. Plants taken from sewage lagoons had been dried and ground into feeding rations for beef cattle, producing a meal rich in minerals and protein, and added to corn silage fed to a herd of steers at the nearby agricultural experiment farm operated by Miss. State Univ. A 4-mo study resulted in weight gain comparable to that on a diet fortified with cottonseed or soybean meal. The high cost of fuel for drying the plants after harvesting led to construction of a prototype solar dryer at NSTL that was designed to dry 18 tons of wet material each 36 hr; the dryer might prove a solution for agricultural problems other than drying of grains and forage. Another use of the plants was as a source of methane gas and fertilizer, using an anaerobic fermentation process with a yield of nearly 57 000 cu.m. (2 million cu. ft.) of gas from an acre of water hyacinths. A state like La., with more than a million acres of unwanted water hyacinths, might produce more than enough methane gas to fuel 2 million homes in the New Orleans region annually. Another study showed a remarkable ability of the plants to filter out “heavy” metals (cadmium, mercury, nickel, lead, silver) and other toxic organic substances common in industrial waste waters. Although plants harvested from these sites could not be used for animal feed or fertilizer, they could be used to produce methane gas; researchers found that biogas generated from plants containing trace metals yielded a higher percentage of methane than plants free from metals. Spinoff projects resulting from worldwide interest in the NASA findings included a survey by NASA investigators of water hyacinths blocking up the White Nile, requested by the Sudanese government; a plan to use hyacinth plantings as a detection system for assessing heavy-metal pollution in waters near thermonuclear installations; and use of the plants in a system to recover millions of tons of gold “tailings” left over from mining and present in streams near disused mines in the western U.S. (NASA Release 76-36)
A Soviet-American symposium of oceanography experts in the Black Sea town of Yalta ended as scientists agreed on a 2-yr program of joint effort in the Atlantic aimed at compiling a theoretical model of the ocean. The model would aid in more accurate weather forecasting, in predicting climate fluctuations several yr in advance, and in combating environmental pollution. Cooperating in the work would be 10 Soviet and American vessels, earth satellites, and meteorological ground stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, 27 Aug 76)
NASA announced a first-time use of satellite relay of medical data from a moving ambulance to a hospital. Scientists and engineers at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) at Bay St. Louis, Miss., worked with General Electric’s Science Services Laboratory to develop a special portable transmitter and antenna that could continuously transmit voice and medical data—including electrocardiograms—from a moving ambulance to the satellite and down to a hospital receiving station. During demonstrations of the system on a highway near Bay St. Louis, communications from the ambulance had been received as far away as N. Mex. The NSTL system, using the data-collection system on Goes 3, was similar to a telemedicine system being demonstrated by Johnson Space Center at the Papago Indian Reservation in N. Mex., and use of the Ats 6 for medical communications in Alaska. Use of an inexpensive receiver at the medical center could make remote health care economically feasible; the system might eventually lead to development of a special medical satellite to relay emergency data from remote hospitals, ships, offshore oil platforms, and other remote locations to major medical centers for consultation. (NASA Release 76-86)
A communications satellite system to serve more than 200 U.S. public television stations within the next 2 yr was proposed by the Public Broadcasting Service and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting in a report prepared for managers of PBS member stations before the annual meeting in Los Angeles next month. If the member stations approved the proposal and the Federal Communications Commission followed with its approval promptly, the system could be in operation within 21 mo, putting PB ahead of commercial networks by renting circuits on satellites operated by Western Union Telegraph Co. instead of leasing land lines from American Telephone & Telegraph at $12 million a yr. The $38-million satellite system would offer 3 or 4 channels instead of the single land line; expense of additional land lines had precluded additional transmissions to special audiences, such as Spanish-speaking populations in major cities and the U.S. Southwest; the cost of the land lines would increase yearly; and the cost of adding other stations to the PB satellite system would he limited to the cost of a simple ground receiver. (W Star, 28 Jan 76, A-l; W Post, 29 Jan 76, A-7)
Johnson Space Center announced signing of a supplemental agreement with Lockheed Electronics Co. of Houston for $2.57 million, for additional scientific and technical support at the Slidell Computer Complex of the Earth Resources Laboratory in La. The supplemental agreement brought the total value of the contract to $7.1 million. (JSC Release 76-49)
The Air Force announced that its third prototype B-l bomber successfully completed its maiden flight, having left Air Force Plant 42 at Palmdale, Calif., at 3:37 pm PDT and landed at nearby Edwards AFB after a flight of 2 hr 9 min. Since its rollout 11 May, the prototype built for USAF by Rockwell International’s B-l Division had undergone fuel and propulsion-system checkout, subsystem tests, low- and high-speed taxi tests, and a complete review of flight readiness. The B-l was the first large swing-wing aircraft to complete a complex 8-mo series of structural integrity testing so early in its design life. The third B-l’s primary flight-test objective was to acquire data to verify predicted design loads in test missions at both subsonic and supersonic speeds. Highest altitude reached during the maiden flight was about 3 km, with top speed at .45 mach. Crew members were Doug Benefield of Rockwell, pilot; AF Lt. Col. Ed McDowell, copilot; and Rockwell flight-test engineer Jack Baldwin, who was riding in the B-l for the first time. (USAF release 14 June 76)
Responses of Presidential candidates Ford and Carter to questionnaires submitted by U.S. physicists and engineers emphasized their “differing viewpoints,” wrote Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. One set of l6 questions was from 24 professional engineering societies claiming a combined membership of one million; the other, dealing with three broad issues, was submitted by the American Physical Society’s president, Dr. William A. Fowler. To a question regarding overseas sales of nuclear fuel and equipment, President Ford replied that the U.S. must maintain the role of major supplier “for peaceful purposes—so that we can influence others to accept controls to minimize the threat of proliferation.” Candidate Carter replied that it was “absolutely essential” to halt such sales “even with safeguards” to prevent use of the materials in producing nuclear weapons. Physics Today, publishing the replies to Dr. Fowler’s questions in the Oct. issue, noted editorially that both candidates were committed to more support for basic research and “a strong voice for science in the Administration’s decision-making.” (NYT, 5 Oct 76, 33)
A new manmade fiber stronger than nylon for possible use in drogue parachutes had been tested in the 5-m transonic tunnel at the Arnold Engineering Development Center in Ohio, the Air Force announced. The material, called Kevlar, had been developed by DuPont for use in tires, and could be woven into parachute materials twice as strong as nylon with only half the weight and volume of nylon counterparts. The AEDC tests used 4 ribbon-type parachutes 2 m in diameter, tested to destruction; one was 100% nylon, another 100% Kevlar, and the remaining two were composed of different blends of the two substances. 'The tests measured dynamic loads as the chutes were deployed at about 966 km per hr at simulated altitudes from 15 to 115 km; steady-state loads were also measured at those altitudes for speeds of from 640 to 1440 km per hr. The material-evaluation tests were a novelty for the tunnel, normally used for aerodynamic studies of large-scale models or engine compatibility with flight hardware. (AF OIP 003.76)
Addressing the Utah Air Force Association’s Bicentennial program in Salt Lake City, NASA’s Deputy Administrator George M. Low gave a status report on ongoing projects such as Landsat, Viking, and the Space Shuttle, then speculated at length on accomplishments in space that might be celebrated on the occasion of the U.S. Tricentennial. Referring to “the beginning of the industrialization of space,” using the first-generation reusable space-transportation system called Shuttle to set up the first factories in space, he said “the real breakthrough” would come with energy collected from the sun and beamed down with microwaves to provide all the electrical needs of a major city. None of this technology, he added, was beyond today’s knowledge. He then forecast a cleanup of earth’s environment, communications applications of all kinds, and exploration of outer space made possible by discoveries using the Space Telescope, ending with descriptions of space colonies that would “become the real frontier.” He concluded by stating that “all of my projections are overly conservative” and could all become reality long before the end of America’s third century. (Text)
Alternative “super safe” landing sites for the second Viking spacecraft scheduled to arrive on Mars were being investigated by NASA, Dr. Harold Masursky told the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington. Masursky, an astrogeologist with the U.S. Geological Survey, said the prime landing sites had been carefully selected and should present no problem. However, in case of trouble with the first lander, scheduled to touch down early in July, the second lander now scheduled to descend in a less well known area would proceed to a less challenging site to ensure salvaging the mission. The prime site, in the Chryse region at the mouth of the largest channel system identified on Mars, was of special interest because scientists thought areas with highest probabilities of water would be most likely to harbor life as known by man. The scheduled second landing area, called Cydonia, had the highest recorded atmospheric water content during the season when the Viking would land, but was in an area not accessible by radar from earth and was therefore not as well known. Giant radar telescopes in the U.S. and at Arecibo, P.R., were scanning areas near the Mars equator that would be safer than the prime sites, even if not as scientifically productive. (NYT, 18 Apr 76, 25)
Dr. Maxime A. Faget, director of engineering and development at Johnson Space Center, had been chosen to receive awards from both the American Astronautical Society and the Instrument Society of America, the JSC Roundup reported. Dr. Faget, one of the original 35 members of the NASA Space Task Force Group, received from the AAS its Space Flight Award, given for the greatest contribution to the advancement of space flight and space exploration. Dr. Faget had received AAS’s Lovelace award in 1971. The ISA had selected him for the Albert F. Sperry Award, for “advancing spacecraft, laboratory and biomedical instrumentation through technical and engineering leadership of manned space flight programs.” Dr. Faget in 1969 received NASA’s medal for exceptional service and distinguished service medal—the agency’s highest award—and had been inducted into the Natl. Space Hall of Fame. (JSC Roundup, 8 Oct 76, 1)
Kennedy Space Center announced award of a $2 250 000 contract to the Beech Aircraft Corp., Boulder, Co., for development of a Space Shuttle orbiter fuel-cell servicing system. An orbiter would carry 3 fuel cells using cryogenically stored hydrogen and oxygen to provide electrical power; each cell would connect to a separate power bus, but only 2 cells would be used during minimum power load. Peak or average power load would use all 3 cells. The contract called for Beech to design, fabricate, test, and deliver a complete cryogenic remotely controlled unit that would provide liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen for the fuel cells, delivery to be completed by 1 Dec. 1977. (KSC Release 333-76)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery and acceptance of the Sperry Rand computer system, Univac 110/46, that would drive the Shuttle mission simulators. Dr. Bruce B. Johnson, technical manager of the contract, said that JSC had tested the computer complex round the clock for 30 days before its acceptance, and that the complex had demonstrated reliability “far in excess of contractual requirements.” Completed 3 wk ahead of schedule, the Univac 1100/46 contained 10 processors, making it one of the most powerful digital computers built to date, with 900 000 36-bit words in the main memory and 2 billion characters in mass storage capacity. The computer would simulate a wide range of mission situations—prelaunch, ascent, aborts, orbit rendezvous and docking, entry, and landing—in the process of training flight crews and ground personnel in all phases of the Shuttle program. Total cost of the computer complex was $7 934 876. (JSC Release 76-47)
Cost of the Air Force B-l bomber might run more than $11 billion over original estimates because of inflation and higher prices, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), adding that total cost increases on the B-l would be around $1 billion while inflation would be responsible for another $10 billion increase. Three research contracts on the B-l had already run $129 million higher than expected, he said, and those represented only money spent for models, engines, and electronics. By the end of 1976, Congress would have to decide whether to go ahead with the bomber, intended as a replacement for the aging B-52. (LA Times, 22 Mar 76, 11C)
President Ford announced his intention to nominate Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, to succeed George M. Low as Deputy Administrator. Lovelace had occupied his position since September 1974. Before coming to NASA, he had been director of research and development for the Air Force Systems Command at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., 1967-1972; director of science and technology for Air Force R&D, assigned to Andrews AFB; and acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Research and Development for the Air Force in October 1973. The nomination required Senate confirmation, but no opposition was expected; if the Senate did not act by the end of the week, before its 4 July recess, confirmation might be delayed until after 19 July. (Pres Doc, 21 June 76, 1072; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 21; NASA Release 76-118)
Laser beams had become the latest major tool in manufacturing aircraft, the Aerospace Industries Association announced, reporting on a year-long series of tests of the numerically controlled laser cutting-arm technique. The test objective was to define effects of a laser on physical characteristics of the parts produced, such as corrosion and fatigue. The cutting arm was coupled with a computer data bank that chose the best method of positioning parts on flat thin aluminum sheets, saving both time and money and reducing aluminum scrap by 30 to 50%. Usual methods such as blanking, routing, and sawing had been used since World War'll. The Air Force was funding a program to use thicker sheets of metal and higher power lasers in an application of new technology to aircraft manufacture, (aia Release 76-4)
In an address to the American Institute of Industrial Engineers, meeting in St. Louis, W.F. Rockwell, Jr., chairman of Rockwell International Corp., warned that the U.S. in its search for energy independence should not “go driving up the wrong street” but should make use of nuclear power. Claiming that solar power, nuclear fusion, or other exotic power sources were solutions for the distant future, Rockwell described nuclear energy as “the bridge that will allow us to make a smooth transition to those future energy sources” and as being “safe, clean, abundant and economical.” Rockwell noted the 6- to 10-yr period needed between the concept and the start-up of a power plant, adding that today’s Americans have roughly 36 mo to “get it all together if we’re going to have enough power in 1990.” (Rockwell Release R-20)
Johnson Space Center announced that NASA had awarded the Singer Co. Simulations Products Division, Binghamton, N.Y., a $6.5-million 2-yr contract for maintenance, modification, and operational support of JSC’s simulation complex at Houston to be used in training flight crews for the Space Shuttle program. Initially, the simulation complex would consist of the Shuttle procedures simulator and the crew procedures evaluation simulator; later, an orbiter aeroflight simulator would be added, followed by the Shuttle mission simulator. In addition to systems and hardware engineering, configuration control, installation and tests of modifications, and development, drafting, and illustration of software, the contract would require maintenance, servicing, and operational support of the equipment as well as documentation and logistics support. Extensions of 24 and 6 mo would be optional. McDonnell Douglas Corp. also negotiated for this contract (see 10 May). (JSC Release 76-48)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of 3 yr of test and evaluation on a production-engineered version of a laser-guided bomb kit designed for easy mounting on standard unguided bombs. AFSC noted that, during the Southeast Asia conflict, laser-guided bombs were 200 times as likely to reach the target as manually released unguided bombs, and had outscored computer-aimed bombs by 50 to 1. The USAF described the LGB as “one of the most effective technological advances” in weaponry, one LGB costing less than 12 standard unguided bombs and offering additional savings in fewer missions flown, fewer crew losses, increased storage life, and greater reliability. (OIP Release 241.76)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Pan American Technical Services, Inc., Cocoa Beach, Fla., of the first contract to modify KSC facilities for Spacelab processing as part of the Space Shuttle program. The $129 627 contract included architect and engineer services to design the modifications of the Operations and Checkout Bldg., including changes in utilities (gaseous nitrogen, helium, high-pressure air, water and airconditioning) and adaptation of Apollo equipment acceptance and checkout rooms to make them compatible with ground-support equipment provided by the European Space Agency for automated Spacelab testing. Spacelab—to be carried into space by the Space Shuttle orbiter—was being designed, developed, and built by 9 member nations of ESA at a cost of $300 to $400 million. At the end of each mission, the Spacelab would be removed from the landed orbiter and prepared for the next mission. The engineering model to be used for facility and orbiter checkout was scheduled to arrive at KSC in July 1978; the first flight model was due in June 1979. (KSC Release 128-76)
Dr. Mary Helen Johnston, metallurgist at MSFC, was principal guest speaker at the Federal Women’s Day program at Wallops Flight Center. Dr. Johnston, who said she wanted to be one of the first American women chosen for space flight, participated in 1974 as part of an all-women crew of experimenters in a 5-day tryout of the general-purpose laboratory at MSFC, a cylindrical mockup of the Spacelab being built in Europe for Space Shuttle flights. Using the neutral-buoyancy simulator, a working area for handling experiment packages in a zero-gravity environment, the crew developed techniques for use on Spacelab. As principal investigator for three scientific experiments and co-investigator on another, Dr. Johnston had planned the work in hopes of going on orbital missions in the 1980s. Also on the program was Audrey Rowe Colom, director of women’s activities for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and current president of the Natl. Women’s Political Caucus. Besides the speakers, the program included jskits by WFC employees and a costumed narration of “Two Centuries of American Women on Parade.” (WFC Release 76-15)
NASA announced appointment of Robert A. Newman as Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, effective 26 July. Newman was vicepresident of community affairs for TRW, Inc., and president of the TRW Foundation at Cleveland, 0. In his new NASA post, he would be responsible for all information services of the space agency except for technical publications. He had received bachelor’s degrees in journalism and sociology from the Univ. of Mo., served in the USAF during the Korean War, and had been a member of the board of directors of the Air Force Academy Foundation. (NASA Release 76—131; Fletcher anno.
The Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, reported that a long-winged U-2 aircraft on loan to NASA had successfully completed tests in the “icy grip” of the main chamber at McKinley Climatic Laboratory during which it underwent exposure to temperatures as low as —57°C. The laboratory, operated by the USAF Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin AFB, Fla., conducted the tests at NASA’s request to isolate flight-control malfunctions occurring in the cold temperatures of high altitude. The U-2, a single-seat single-engine jet designed to operate at altitudes above 21 km, had been used by NASA as an earth-resources survey tool, making observations in astronomy, high-altitude atmospheric physics, and geophysics in addition to supporting general earth-resources programs. (AFSC Newsreview, July 76, 6)
Cosmonauts from 8 “socialist member-countries of the Intercosmos program” would join crews from the USSR in space beginning in 1978, the official Soviet news agency Tass announced. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, chief of training for the cosmonaut program, said that timing of such flights would depend on the readiness of technology and preparedness of the crews: the crew commander would be a Soviet flyer, and the flight engineer and research engineer would represent another participating country. Crewmembers from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia would train at the Yuri Gagarin Center near Moscow where Soviet cosmonauts have trained. Intercosmos is an association of Communist nations that had already cooperated in launching 16 unmanned satellites, the New York Times noted; the only men in space so far had been either Soviet or American. (FB1S, Moscow Tass in English, 15 Sept 76; NYT, 15 Sept 76, 72; W Post, 15 Sept 76, A-14)
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld announced that the Ford administration had decided to authorize construction of the controversial B-l bomber, under a contract arrangement that would allow the incoming Carter administration 5 mo to review the $22.8-billion program. Rumsfeld’s announcement said that B-l testing was complete and that it was “in the national interest” to proceed with production. During the campaign, candidate Carter had said he was opposed to immediate production but held out the possibility of further research on the bomber, which the Pentagon now declared completed. The unusual contract arrangement of month-by-month funding until the end of June was an extension of the 1 Feb. deadline set by Congress for commitment of funds for the program; the Air Force awarded contracts totaling $704.9 million to Rockwell Inti., General Electric, and the Boeing Company for the first three production models of the bomber, plus procurement to make eight more. The contracts, however, limited government liability to a monthly total of $87 million through June. Air Force Secretary Thomas C. Reed said at a news conference that keeping the B-l in the research state was unnecessary and wasteful, and that “it would be irresponsible not to initiate B-l production at this time” in view of the expansion of Soviet strategic forces. A manned bomber, he said, was the third part of a triad—including land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles and missile-bearing submarines—that would present “an insoluble problem” to the USSR and make it a losing proposition to attack the U.S. because of retaliation that would follow. The swing-wing B-l, although only two-thirds the size of the B-52, could carry twice the payload, was faster in takeoff and flight, and carried electronic systems more difficult to jam than those of the B-52. Opponents claimed that $ 100 million apiece was too high a price to pay for a bomber in the age of antiaircraft missiles, and suggested alternatives such as loading a commercial Boeing 747 with cruise missiles that could be fired while the plane was a safe distance from enemy defenses. (NYT, 3 Dec 76, A18; W Post, 3 Dec 76, A—1)
Payload responsibilities for the first 6 flights of the Space Shuttle had been allocated by NASA, according to Aviation Wk and. Space Technology magazine. The first 6 orbital missions scheduled for 1979-1980 would be verifications of the overall Shuttle system; the first flight would carry no payload except a 45 000-kg data-analysis system, but the other 5 flight-test missions would carry scientifically meaningful payloads. NASA had assigned the second and fifth flight tests to its Office of Applications; the fourth and sixth, to the Office of Space Science; and the third, to the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. The Office of Applications would be involved with space-processing hardware, and the Office of Space Science would oversee the use of existing research instruments; the OAST had been considering a space “workbench” on which various instruments could be deployed for 3- to 9-mo periods. The orbital flight-test missions would begin with a duration of only a few orbits, which should increase to about 7 days by the sixth flight mission; the first 4 flights would land at Dryden Flight Research Center, and the latter 2 at Kennedy Space Center. {AvWk, 17 May 76, 21)
The U.S. Navy Dept, selected General Dynamics Corp. to develop its cruise missile, under a $34.8-million contract that would cover costs of integrating systems into the prototype. GD won the award after 2 yr of competition with Vought Corp., a unit of LTV; the Navy recently finished a series of tests comparing prototypes made by the 2 companies. Last week the Navy had ordered Vought to stop work on its version, after the company had reported cost overruns and the missile performed badly under testing. The cruise missile, a jet-powered weapon with an advanced guidance system, would fly at low altitudes to make detection difficult. The sea-launched version could be put into submarine torpedo tubes and fired from under water as well as from ships. In both the Navy version and the Boeing missile being tested by the Air Force [see 5 Mar.], McDonnell Douglas Corp. was maker of the guidance system and Williams Research Corp. the engine manufacturer. (WSJ, 18 Mar 76, 2)
Dr. John L. Me Lucas, head of the Federal Aviation Administration, predicted that the U.S. would produce a second-generation supersonic transport, probably in cooperation with the Europeans, as a followup to the Concorde program. Speaking at a luncheon of the Air Force Association and in a subsequent interview with the New York Times, Dr. McLucas said that Congress probably would enact legislation to sharply reduce aircraft noise over the next 6 to 10 yr by modifying and replacing present aircraft. Biggest question would be how much financial help the airlines would get to carry out the plan: McLucas predicted that the airlines would have to settle for loan guarantees rather than outright subsidy. Calling the aviation industry “an endangered species,” he said it was threatened by low profits, lack of capital for new equipment, and absence of a national aviation policy; he asked for more cooperation between industry and government, and exploration of joint projects with European partners. “A joint effort to advance . . . the design of the next-generation SST would be in keeping with this new spirit of international cooperation,” he added. Dr. McLucas was secretary of the Air Force until President Ford transferred him to head the FAA. (NYT, 17 June 76, 49)
Gerald D. Griffin, Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in NASA Hq’s Office of Space Flight, had been named Deputy Director of the Dryden Flight Research Center effective 1 May, NASA announced. Griffin joined NASA in 1964 and served as a flight controller at Johnson Space Center during the Gemini program before being named an Apollo flight director in 1968; he served in that position on all 11 Apollo missions, and was lead flight director on Apollo missions 12, 15, and 17. He went to NASA Hq in 1973 and had previously been Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs. He had served in the Air Force and was an aerospace engineer with Lockheed and with General Dynamics before coming to NASA. (NASA Release 76-66; DFRC Release 5-76)
Johnson Space Center announced “the most successful balloon flight of its type ever conducted” when a football-field-sized balloon carried a scientific instruments package at a 40-km altitude across the central Texas night sky for 12 hr to gather information on far distant giant and super-giant stars. The 589-kg package known as BUSS—for balloon-borne ultraviolet stellar spectrometer—gathered data on 16 separate stars, including Arcturus, a giant star in constellation Bootes; super-giant Antares (alpha Scorpii); Vega (alpha Lyrae); and Spica (alpha Virginis), super-hot star and one of the brightest observed during the flight. Of special interest was super-giant Deneb in constellation Cygnus, 1400 light years distant, whose light recorded by BUSS was emitted before the Anglo-Saxons settled in England; Deneb was so large that, if the sun were located in its center, the earth would orbit the sun entirely within the star’s outer limits. The BUSS payload was the culmination of a 3-yr international collaboration between JSC and the Space Research Laboratory of Utrecht in the Netherlands. Dr. Yoji Kondo of JSC was U.S. coprincipal investigator, with Dr. Thomas H. Morgan and Dr. Jerry L. Modisette of Houston Raptist University; the Dutch team was led by Dr. Cees de Jager. Purpose of the balloon flights in a series of star studies that began in 1971 was to evaluate the experiment systems for use on the Space Shuttle; the BUSS package was designed to obtain data on spectral variations of a variety of stars and aid scientists in determining their structure and evolution. Previous flights had obtained some information but only a fiftieth of the spectral range covered by the BUSS payload. The package was landed by a parachute about 26 m in diameter, similar to those used on the Apollo command module; the payload, chute, and balloon were recovered between Abilene and Ft. Worth by NASA engineers who returned the material to Houston. The data would be analyzed by the U.S. team and by the Dutch scientists, who had returned to Holland, in preparation for another balloon flight scheduled for the fall of 1976. (JSC Release 76-39)
The Concorde supersonic airliner, making regularly scheduled flights between London, Paris, and the Dulles airport outside Washington, D.C. since 24 May, had been lending its distinctive sonic waves to atmospheric research by Columbia Univ. monitors, the New York Times reported. Dr. William L. Donn, senior research associate at Columbia’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and his colleagues Nambath Balachan-dran and David Rind had derived surprising data on daily variations in the supposed prevailing winds in the upper atmosphere, and were anticipating new data on dispersal of atmospheric pollutants and the content of the rarefied reaches of earth’s atmosphere. The sound waves, inaudible to the human ear but detectable by sensitive microphones registering changes in air pressure, contained atmospheric information up to as far as 120-km altitude, through reflection from the thermosphere. Precise knowledge of the Concorde’s elevation and location along its flight path had aided in interpreting data on atmospheric temperatures and wind conditions depending on the exact strength and path of the sound waves, Dr. Donn said. (ATT, 17 Dec 76, A-18)
Fred W. Haise, Jr., astronaut on the Apollo 13 lunar mission of April 1970 that nearly ended in disaster, would command the first free-flight test of the Space Shuttle, Johnson Space Center officials announced. A research pilot for NASA since 1959, Haise worked at Lewis Research Center and the Flight Research Center before his selection as a civilian astronaut in 1966. He was technical assistant to the manager of the Shuttle orbiter project from April 1973 to January 1976. With Haise on the test Shuttle flight would be Air Force Lt. Col. Charles G. Fullerton, appointed astronaut in 1969, who had never flown in space. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly piggyback in 1977 on a modified Boeing 747 jet transport, then in free-flight testing and landing after release at about 8-km altitude. Haise and Col. Fullerton would guide the Shuttle to an unpowered landing at the Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, to demonstrate handling and reusability. (B Sun, 25 Feb 76, A-7; W Post, 25 Feb 76, B 5; NASA Release 76-35; JSC Release 76-17)
The USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center operated in Tenn. by the Air Force Systems Command announced that it was using infrared equipment, designed in Europe to locate tumors in the human body, for studying heat patterns on the surface of the Space Shuttle manned orbiter vehicle under simulated flight conditions. Infrared cameras were known to detect a tumor because its heat-radiation characteristics differed from those of normal tissue. In the USAF tests, a model heated in a wind tunnel’s supersonic airflow produced infrared radiation received by a camera and transferred to a detector that could record infrared radiation from 7000 points in the field-of-view. Earlier Shuttle tests had shown the need for a protective system when the vehicle plunged into the dense atmosphere and for data on expected temperature levels, important to the selection of structural materials and to the design of internal parts. Ceramic-like tiles had been used in a scanning test to see the effect of a slight misalignment on the overall heat distribution on the orbiter’s underside; the resulting data had demonstrated advantages over more traditional methods. Standard procedures required the application of surface coatings—either a paint that changed from solid to liquid at a specified temperature, or compounds whose ultraviolet radiation changed with temperature—but such materials could create a surface roughness that would alter the results. Also the melting-paint technique required washing and repainting the model after each test. The infrared camera could transmit its findings to a computer for analysis within minutes, and could provide a permanent color record if required. Use of mechanical heat-measuring devices was limited by the number of sensors that could be installed, and the time required to do so. (Although the infrared system would minimize the need for mechanical instrumentation, tests calling for simultaneous temperature data from all portions of the model surface would still require installation of sensors.) About 90% of the system used at AEDC was off-the-shelf hardware; computer programs and methods of interconnecting components were devised by ARO, Inc., the center’s operating contractor. (OIP 114.76)
Atomic reactor waste buried in the Ural Mountains had exploded in 1958, killing hundreds and affecting thousands with radiation sickness, according to an exiled Soviet scientist whose article in the British New Scientist was reported by Associated Press. Zhores Medvedev, a biochemist and geneticist who had been a wellknown dissident in the Soviet Union, had been allowed to go to Britain in Jan. 1973 but became an exile when Soviet authorities refused to allow him to return. His article said that reactor waste buried for many years in a deserted area had overheated and erupted “like a violent volcano,” and that strong winds had blown the resulting radioactive clouds for a long distance; however, no one had been evacuated from the area until after symptoms of radiation sickness appeared. Many Ural towns with medium to high levels of radiation had never been evacuated, he said, adding that the area was among several that were off limits to Western correspondents. Medvedev said several biology research stations had been built in what was “the largest area of gamma radiation in the world” to study the damage to plant and animal life. In 1974, a Soviet official denied reports of explosions at the the Shavchenko nuclear power station on the Caspian Sea, at the same time that Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper, was assuring the public that radioactive wastes had been stored safely. Another Soviet disaster had occurred in Oct. 1960, Medvedev said, when then-Premier Nikita Krushchev ordered the launch of a moon rocket to be timed with his arrival in New York City for a session of the UN General Assembly. When the ignition button was pushed, nothing happened; under normal procedures, Medvedev said, workers would drain the fuel from the rocket before inspecting to find the cause of the failure. However, Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, then head of Soviet rocket forces, felt himself “under an obligation to fulfill the ambitious order” issued by Krushchev and decided to investigate immediately. While dozens of engineers and other experts were examining the rocket and its support systems, the ignition suddenly started to work, but the rocket could not take off because of “the forest of inspection ladders.” The rocket toppled over and turned the Soviet cosmodrome into a holocaust, killing many persons in the area, including “some of the best representatives of Soviet space technology,” Medvedev said. AP noted that the Soviet media routinely ignore all disasters, whether natural or manmade. (WPost, 7 Nov 76, A-1; WStar, 7 Nov 76, B-8; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 20)
First of 4 U.S.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar. and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field data gathered by NASA’s Ats 6. The payloads, largest and most complex to be fired on sounding rockets, would he the first flown on the new Aries rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NYT, 28 Mar 76, 21)
As he assumed the presidency of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. William D. McElroy (chancellor of the Univ. of Calif, in San Diego, and former director of the National Science Foundation) said he planned to reorganize the AAAS journal Science, involve the association more deeply in government and industry activity, and quadruple the membership. Dr. McElroy, called the “leading world authority on the biochemistry of firefly light,” said he hoped to stop the publication of pure research papers in Science, as more specialized scientific journals could do this more efficiently, and to promote a free flow of ideas between the universities and the industrial community by Four of the comsats in NASA's 1976 launch schedule: A, Comsat General’s Marisat, launched 19 Feb.; B, NATO in—A, launched 22 Apr.; C, Comsat General’s Comstar 1A, launched 13 May; D, Indonesia's Palapa, launched 8 July. including more articles of interest to users in industry and engineering, and paying more attention to science issues in government policy. He referred to the “unfortunate separation” between industry and university after World War II when science gained new nonindustrial financial support; by increasing the circulation of Science magazine, he would expand the AAAS membership, as the magazine is available only to members. (NYT, 2 Jan 76, 10) 5 January-4 February: Permission to fly the British- and French-built Concorde supersonic transport into the U.S. was the subject of a hearing called by Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, Jr., in Washington to help him decide the matter within 30 days. Basic arguments pro and con were not new, observers agreed, as they had all been thrashed out in a bitter 1971 congressional fight that halted U.S. efforts to build an SST after about $1 billion had been spent on the project. The case against the Concorde had been that it was too noisy and that its emissions polluted the atmosphere and depleted the stratospheric ozone shield. Spokesmen for the Concorde cited its benefits in speed of travel and technical achievement. At the hearing, representatives of the Va. state government called for approval of Concorde landings at Dulles, in view of the airport’s significance as Virginia’s international gateway; these advocates found themselves opposed to the views of the local Va. jurisdictions which did not want the SST landing there. Gov. Hugh Carey of N.Y. opposed the Concorde’s coming into JFK Airport because of the noise. On 6 Jan. the Environmental Protection Agency reversed its previous stand, calling for a total ban on commercial operations in the U.S. of the British-French SST. On 13 Jan., the Aerospace Industries Assn.—U.S. manufacturers of aerospace vehicles and components— submitted a letter deploring the cancellation of the U.S. program and supporting Concorde’s application to operate. On 29 Jan., the Am. Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, claiming to represent 22 000 engineers and scientists, called for a limited-operations trial period to collect data as the basis for a final decision on giving Concorde access to U.S. airports. The Concorde had begun regular passenger service 21 Jan. between Paris and Rio de Janeiro, and between London and Bahrain, as the climax of 14 yr of technical cooperation between Britain and France and a joint investment of more than $3 billion. DOT Secy. Coleman announced 4 Feb. that he had granted the Concorde “limited scheduled commercial flights” into the U.S. for a period not to exceed 16 mo under precise limitations. British Airways and Air France could send up to 2 flights per day into JFK and Dulles airports, but the permission could be revoked upon 4 mo notice or immediately in case of emergency. The limitations included prohibitions on landing or takeoff in the U.S. before 7 am or after 10 pm local time, and on flying at supersonic speed over the U.S. or any of its territories. In his 61-page decision with 36 pages of appendix, Coleman said the 16-mo period should be long enough to demonstrate the validity of his judgment. Upon hearing of the secretary’s decision, 2 members of the Senate Commerce Committee were narrowly defeated in an attempt to ban the Concorde from landing in the U.S. by attaching such a ban to a bill authorizing funds for airport development. The Concorde’s only supersonic competitor was the USSR’s Tupolev-144, in service since 26 Dec. 1975 within the Soviet Union as a freight plane. (NYT, 5 Jan 76, 1; Av Wk, 5 Jan 76, 26; W Star, 6 Jan 76, A-3; W Post, 6 Jan 76, A—1; AIA Aerospace News Release 76-1; text, AIAA letter to DOT, 29 Jan 76; NYT, 21 Jan 76, 16-17; WStar, 21 Jan 76, A-3; B Sun, 28 Jan 76, A-6; NYT, 1 Feb 76, 3-1; DOT Release 09-76, 4 Feb. 76; NYT, 5 Feb 76, 1, 16, 32M; W Post, 5 Feb 76, A-l, A-18; B Sun, 5 Feb 76, A14)
A reorganization of the NASA office (NaPO) located at the contractor-operated Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena became effective. NaPO would no longer report to the Associate Administrator for Center Operations at NASA Hq in Washington, D.C.; a resident legal office would report to the NASA General Counsel, and a resident procurement office would report to the NASA Assistant Administrator for Procurement at Hq. E.S. Groo, the Associate Administrator for Center Operations, said the change was made to relate the NaPO functions more directly to the functions performed by their Hq counterparts, or by certain NASA field centers. NaPO’s cryogenics procurement activities and personnel would be relocated to the MSFC resident office at Canoga Park, Calif., and would be functionally responsible to MSFC; the Delta procurement activities and personnel would remain at JPL but would be functionally transferred to GSFC at Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Release 76-50; Groo anno. 15 Mar 76)
Kennedy Space Center announced a broad program of research projects to use the KSC spaceport and its resources to obtain information on thunderstorms and the hazards they offered to launch operations. Meteorological and electronics scientists from the U.S. and abroad converged on the center for sessions of observing the thunderstorms, whose incidence is high in Fla. during the summer months. More than 70 scientists, many of them graduate students, would participate in experiments under the program; 19 principal investigators would represent organizations such as the Naval Research Laboratory, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s environmental research laboratory, the Atlantic Science Corporation, Mass. Institute of Technology, N. Mex. Institute of Mining and Technology, S. Dak. School of Mines and Technology, and the Universities of Miami, Arizona, Florida, New York at Albany, and Manchester (England). NASA’s Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight center also were participating. Experiments would investigate precipitation formation, lightning behavior, air motions in thunderstorm clouds, and intracloud electrical discharges, among the numerous projects beginning this June and continuing through the summers of 1977 and 1978. Experimenters would provide their own instruments for the experiments, but much KSC equipment and material would be available, such as the instrumented aircraft used in previous lightning studies; weather radars; the detection and ranging system and electric-field measuring system used to monitor buildup of electrical charges that might interfere with launches; a weather-information network display; a satellite imagery acquisition system, with equipment for processing weather pictures, and an automatic picture-transmission (APT) recording system with timing and camera devices. An earlier program in 1948 studied dynamics of thunderstorms; the current program would emphasize electrical characteristics. (KSC Release 279-76)
More trouble developed for the DOD’s “controversial” F— 111 and F-14A jet fighter planes, the Wall Street Journal reported, as the Air Force announced grounding of 183 General Dynamics F— Ills at Nellis AFB, Nev., and Cannon AFB, N.M. The groundings, ordered after inspections showed defects in fan blades, would continue to midmonth and would not affect F— Ills stationed elsewhere. A General Accounting Office report on the Grumman F-14A, 14 of which had crashed at a loss of $161.6 million, questioned the plane’s ability to cope with attacks by antiship missiles. The GAO said that problems with equipment and inadequate supplies of parts had reduced the readiness of the F-14A to 37.2% during 1975, and that the electronic equipment’s reliability was extremely low, some of the major systems exhibiting only 6% to 14% of the desired objective. Cost of the F-14A had risen from $18.2 million each in 1973 to $20.2 million. Designed to defend the Navy against assaults by antiship missiles, the F-14A could engage current Soviet fighter jets, said GAO, but the Navy itself feared the plane’s ability to cope with the missiles might be “marginal.” (WSJ, 9 Aug 76, 11)
The $100 million spent by the U.S. on a search for life on Mars had produced only disagreement over the findings, Viking project scientists said at a JPL press conference. Four of six Viking scientists said they did not know whether life existed on Mars; one denied that Viking had found life; the sixth said he felt Viking had found “primitive microbes” in the Mars soil samples. All six agreed that Viking had found nothing at either the Chryse or the Utopia landing site representing fossils that would have confirmed a previous existence of life on Mars, Washington Post writer Thomas O’Toole reported. Dr. Klaus Biemann of MIT, who designed the instrument to look for dead organic matter, noted that nothing had been detected, and explained readouts from other instruments as the result of an exotic chemistry catalyzed by some superoxidant in the surface of Mars and activated by solar ultraviolet rays that penetrated the Mars atmosphere all the way to the surface. Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. disagreed, saying that the failure to find dead organisms did not outweigh the activity detected by the biology instruments, which produced readings at a lower temperature and lost them when the sample was heated. This result “smells more like biology than any chemistry I can think of,” Sagan added. Vance Oyama of ARC favored a chemical explanation; Dr. Gilbert V. Levin of Biospherics said he leaned toward a biological explanation. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of Calif. Inst, of Technology, who designed the photosynthesis experiment, favored the biology explanation but regretted the absence of fossils. Dr. Harold P. Klein of ARC said the Viking results “do not rigorously prove there is life on Mars, nor do they rigorously disprove it.” New York Times reporter John Noble Wilford described the failure to detect on Mars the organic compounds essential to life processes on earth as “a major surprise,” causing most of the confusion over interpretations of the data; a NYT editorial noted that the Mars findings had forced a new look at theories about the origins of life on earth, which “seems neither so certain nor so inevitable as it did before the Viking landings . . .” (IV Post, 10 Nov 76, A-9; NYT, 10 Nov 76, A— 16; 18 Nov 76, 42)
Aviation Week magazine reported that the State Superior Court of Ariz. had found against aeronautical chartmaker Jeppesen Sanderson, sued by insurance underwriters for failing to include on the map of the Philippines a peak near Manila—Mt. Kamunay, nearly 1050 m high—where four crewmen were killed in July 1971 when a Pan American Boeing 707 flew into the mountain. More than $5.8 million was awarded in damages for value of cargo and aircraft in a ruling called a “landmark in product liability litigation.” The suit had been brought originally by three of the four widows, whose damage awards had not been set. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 47)
Eventually there will be an American SST program,” Dr. John L. McLucas wrote in a letter to the Phila. Inquirer. Dr. McLucas, Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, agreed with an Inquirer editorial that stated, “Concorde hasn’t made it yet,” but pointed out that costs of research and development and other expenses of producing a new aircraft had virtually halted the introduction of new aircraft designs “suitable to the major airlines.” New transport aircraft would offer advantages such as greatly reduced noise, a high level of safety, and 30% improvement in fuel efficiency; however, continued development of new planes and their purchase by the carriers “is moving beyond the financial scope of private investors singly or collectively,” Dr. McLucas wrote. Some combination of government and private initiative would be needed to finance the next generation of air transports; “it’s more likely to be the result of a cooperative American-European effort,” Dr. McLucas concluded. (P Inq, 20 July 76, 1-E)
Johnson Space Center announced delivery of the first of 2 training aircraft to Ellington AFB, Tex., for JSC’s use in training Space Shuttle crews. The aircraft (STA) was a modified Grumman twin-engine Gulf-stream II jet designed to simulate flight characteristics of the Space Shuttle orbiter, using thrust-reverser engines and direct lift control to vary the jet plane’s dynamics to resemble those of the orbiter. After JSC personnel conducted a receiving inspection on the plane, it would be returned to Grumman at Bethpage, N.Y., for installation of an electric aileron-trim system; this modification should take about a week. The second STA, scheduled for delivery in late July, would remain at Bethpage to ensure that the plane could duplicate the various landing flight modes of the orbiter during the flight tests. Remaining tests would verify STA’s ability to match orbiter trajectory during the period from 10-11 km altitude through touchdown and would check out recent engineering changes. (NASA Release 76-108; JSC Release 76-38)
MSFC announced completion of 2 of 8 major facilities for production of Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket motors at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Brigham City, Utah. Thiokol was selected as prime contractor by MSFC for development of the solid-fuel rocket motor, main element of the reusable solid-fuel rocket booster being developed by MSFC. The 2 completed units were a nozzle-bearing test facility, used to test a flexible bearing allowing the rocket-motor nozzle to turn up to 8° in any direction for thrust-vector control in steering, and an x-ray facility for inspecting propellant after casting into the motor-case segments. A case-preparation building, where motor cases would be prepared for propellant loading by sandblasting, cleaning, refining, and painting, was reported 95% complete. Three facilities for loading the propellants— casting pit 1, a casting house, and casting-pit covers—were about half completed. A case-refurbishment facility to handle the motor cases after recovery would be under construction shortly. (MSFC Release 76-151) 15 August: In an attempt to predict the weather on the planet Jupiter, Dr. Gareth P. Williams, researcher at NOAA’s Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at Princeton Univ., applied a computer model of earth’s atmosphere to Jupiter and found that it not only reproduced patterns known to exist there but also provided new explanations of visible features such as the Great Red Spot and horizontal stripes, as well as revealing a 4-yr cycle of heat transfer. Using a set of equations describing physical processes that produce atmospheric behavior on earth, Dr. Williams fed in conditions known to exist on Jupiter—the planet’s enormous size, amount of sunlight it receives, and rate of rotation (which dominated the behavior of the Jovian atmosphere)—and found that the basic behavior of atmosphere was “quite similar.” The purpose of atmosphere, he said, was to transfer heat from the equator to the poles; the terrestrial heat cycle took about a month, but the NOAA model revealed a corresponding cycle on Jupiter that took 4 yr. Whereas the earth received its heat from the sun, Jupiter received only 4% as much solar heat as earth, but the infrared measurements showed that the planet was warmer than it should be if its only heat source were the sun. Scientists believe that the planet generates heat of its own in an amount about equal to what it receives from the sun; this extra heat complicated the job of modeling Jupiter’s atmosphere because there was no way of telling how it might be distributed, but it also provided a confirmation for the model. Atmospheric motions on Jupiter tended to perpetuate themselves instead of dying out, as they do on earth because of interaction with the earth’s surface. Jupiter has no “surface” as we know it, Dr. Williams noted; “it just gets denser toward the interior and motions gradually dissipate downward....” Circulation patterns producing eddies in the planet’s atmosphere seem to be stable; the Great Red Spot had been apparent since the 17th century, when it was first sighted. The researchers hoped that Pioneer 11, now about halfway between Jupiter and Saturn, might provide a positive test of the Princeton model; “we think Saturn is like Jupiter, but we don’t know,” said Dr. Williams. “Maybe it has a red spot.” (NOAA Release 76-170)
Kennedy Space Center announced that Mae Walterhouse, coordinator of the Federal Women’s Program at KSC and recently elected national president of Federally Employed Women, Inc. (FEW), would participate in the 1976-1977 Career Development Program at NASA Hq. Ms. Walterhouse would report to Washington 7 Sept, for a yr of experience in the Office of Resources Management. The NASA program would assist the centers in developing potential supervisors and managers at all levels throughout the agency, foster understanding of Hq functions on the part of center personnel, and provide training in specific disciplines or functional areas. Ms. Walterhouse, who received a national award this summer for service to the FEW organization, planned to return to KSC and join the Administration Directorate after the yr at NASA Hq. (KSC Release 376-76)
NASA announced it would use starlight that left the surface of a nearby star 200 yr ago to signal the lighting of a giant 200-candle Bicentennial birthday cake at the new Superdome stadium in New Orleans just before midnight on 3 July. Photons of light that left Gamma Bootes just before midnight 3 July 1776—when the signers of the Declaration of Independence were officially witnessing the birth of the U.S.—would arrive on earth to activate a 1000-cycle tone at the Goddard Space Flight Center. The tone, transmitted to New Orleans on commercial telephone lines, would signal the lighting of the cake. GSFC’s orbiting astronomical observatory Copernicus, passing over Hawaii in its 740-km orbit, would receive the photons on its star detector and transmit a digital signal to the NASA ground station in Hawaii; this signal, retransmitted to the West Coast and via microwave to GSFC, would activate a relay connecting the tone to New Orleans, where it would be heard on the stadium’s public address system for 1 min before the candles would be lighted. Astronaut Story Musgrave would participate in the Superdome activities. (NASA Release 76-121)
The National Aeronautic Assn., at its annual meeting in Washington, D.C., announced its selections for Elder Statesmen of Aviation for 1976. The award, established in 1954, honored outstanding Americans over the age of 60 who had made significant contributions to aeronautics. The three persons chosen were: J. Leland Atwood, 72, leader in aviation for more than 50 yr, who headed North American Rockwell (now Rockwell Inti.) until his retirement in 1970 and originated the design concept for the P-51 Mustang; Clifford W. Henderson, 81, originator of the Bendix and Thompson trophy races and the Power Puff Derby, and manager of the National Air Races 1928-1939; and Blanche Wilcox Noyes, 76, who learned to fly in 1928 and won the national closed-course race in 1929, the Miami All-American air race in 1931, and the Bendix trophy for a cross-country flight in 1936. (NAA release 9 Nov 76)
The U.S. had the smallest Air Force since the beginning of the Korean War, General, William J. Evans told a luncheon of the National Security Industrial Association in Los Angeles. Gen. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, said that the Air Force, in an effort to reverse this trend, was in the midst of the greatest modernization period of its short history, citing “the effective combination” of “land-based terminals and spaceborne satellites to provide attack warning, weather data, communication links, and positioning and navigation for American forces wherever they may be.” The U.S. was building a modern Air Force “with inefficient equipment that would be at home in a museum,” he said, calling on industry for more investment in modern equipment and advanced technology. Contractor testing had not been realistic, and performance of contractor products had failed to meet operational requirements; the government presence in contractor plants, to which industry objected, could be reduced with better designs, streamlined operations with better visibility, and measures such as greater use of computers to reduce inefficiencies. (AFSC Release OIP 152.76)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, published a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested. Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites, the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth’s seas, and the volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas. (Goddard News, July 76, 3)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command announced that its space and missile systems organization (SAMSO) had completed tests at MSFC to define effects of sound waves and shock waves on the Space Shuttle during launch, using a 6.4% scale model of the launch pad proposed for Vandenberg AFB. The model launch pad, measuring roughly 13m long by 6.5 m wide by 2 m high and weighing more than 27 000 kg, underwent engine-induced overpressure and noise environments simulated by Tomahawk solid-fuel rocket motors and high-pressure gaseous hydrogen-oxygen engines. Shock waves from rocket-engine ignition interacted with exhausts on the launch pad to direct overpressure back to the launch vehicle; the flow rate also created an acoustic field causing turbulence in the surrounding atmosphere. The altered environments were modified during testing by altering the configuration to produce the most acceptable design of launch vehicle and payload. (AFSC Release OIP 170.76)
President Ford named Shuttle Orbiter 101 the Enterprise, over the objections of NASA officials who preferred the name Constitution and had planned the Orbiter rollout ceremonies for 17 Sept., Constitution Day. NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had paid a 45-min visit to the White House to brief the President on the Shuttle program and to discuss the naming. The name Enterprise, illustrious in U.S. naval history, had been given to the first nuclear-powered carrier, to a World War II carrier, and to an American sloop in the Revolutionary War. The name Constitution had met with objections that the Shuttle was considered an international effort in which several countries would participate. Aviation Week magazine commented on the “power of an aroused involved public—especially in an election year” in getting nearly 100 000 fans of the TV series Star Trek to sign letters and petitions asking the White House to have the first Orbiter named Enterprise (after the space ship in the series) rather than Constitution, the name favored by NASA officials. Av Wk said the officials were concerned about commercialization of the name Enterprise in association with the TV show. The Washington Star in an editorial said it was “pathetic” that the public desire for drama in outer space had not been killed by the mundane discoveries on Mars, Venus, and the moon, and predicted that “nothing exciting will happen in the real-life Enterprise,” even though the naming incident confirmed a public desire “to associate space with adventure and suspense.” (WPost, 9 Sept 76, E-9, A-2; WStar, 19 Sept 76, E-l; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 26; 27 Sept 76, 11; Marshall Star, 15 Sept 76, 1)
Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) charged that the U.S. Navy planned to spend $187.6 million to repair F-14 Tomcat jet-fighter engines that it planned to replace at an additional cost of up to $1.9 billion. “. . . The Navy hopes to pull a double whammy on the taxpayers by replacing the repaired engine with a brand new one,” Aspin said. The Navy conceded that replacing engines in the jet fighters would cost $1.6 to $1.9 billion, but claimed the planned repairs to current engines would cost only $86 million. The Navy said it wanted new engines for installation beginning in 1981. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) A New York Times story 30 July said that a breakfast meeting with Secy. Reed for a group of Senate aides had been paid for by the Air Force Association, a private group with 155 000 members—largely retired Air Force personnel—and chartered as a veterans organization not required to register as a lobbyist. The Air Force Legislative Liaison Office, which arranged the breakfast, seemed to have been “concerned that it might be engaged in a form of lobbying of doubtful legality,” said the NYT, pointing out that a 1948 law “specifically provides that no funds appropriated by Congress can be used by a Government agency directly or indirectly ‘to influence in any manner’ the vote of a member of Congress.” (NYT magazine, 25 July 76, 7; W Post, 26 July 76, A-13; C Trib, 29 July 76,10; NYT, 30 July 76, A6; Av Wk, 26 July 76, 23)
Johnson Space Center announced receipt of delivery on the second of two Space Shuttle training aircraft. The first had been delivered 8 June 1976. The modified Grumman Gulfstream II twin-engine jet, flown to Ellington AFB from the plant in N.Y., would simulate Shuttle Orbiter handling qualities, performance, and flight-control procedures during subsonic flight phase, from 10.6-km altitude to simulated Orbiter touchdown. Crew training for approach and landing tests of the Shuttle Orbiter would begin late in Oct. (JSC Release 76-58)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Lockheed-built photoreconnaissance satellite into a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB on a Titan IIIB-Agena D. Initial orbital elements were 342-km apogee, 132-km perigee, 96.4° inclination, and 89.2-min period. The spacecraft was a 3000-kg cylinder 8m long and 1.5m in diameter. The last previous satellite of this type, launched 22 March, had reentered 18 May. (Av Wk, 4 Oct 76, 26; USAF anno. 15 Sept 76; Sf March 1977, 117)
Forecasts of NASA activity in 1977 included plans to launch 19 missions, with a possible four backup spacecraft in case of trouble with current missions. The 19 included eight comsats (NAT0-3B; Palapa-B; OTS, an operational test satellite developed by ESA; Intelsat IVA-C; Sirio, an Italian experimental spacecraft; Intelsat IVA-D; FLTSATCOM, part of a Navy-Air Force operational near-global system for command and control of all DOD forces; and Japan’s CS, a comsat to be placed in synchronous orbit); six scientific satellites (HEAO-A, a high-energy astronomical observatory; CEOS, an ESA mission to study geomagnetic phenomena from synchronous orbit; MJS-A and -B, two Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn,’and possibly Uranus; ISEE, a two-spacecraft international sun-earth explorer mission developed by NASA and ESA; and IUE-A, the international ultraviolet explorer spacecraft also developed jointly by NASA and ESA); three metesats (COES 2, to be launched for NOAA into synchronous orbit; CMS, a Japanese geosynchronous meteorological satellite; and Meteosat, ESA’s synchronous-orbit weather spacecraft, scheduled for 0° longitude); one navigational satellite, the Navy’s Transit 19, with R&D modifications not common to other Transits; and one applications satellite, Landsat-C, third in its series of earth resources technology spacecraft. The backup launches to be scheduled only if replacements were needed were comsats RCA-C and a spare OTS; navsat Transit 20; and metesat ITOS E-2, on standby in case of trouble with Noaa 4 or Noaa 5, already in orbit. Of the 19 scheduled launches, all but two would be from Cape Canaveral, using 12 Delta rockets, 3 Atlas-Centaurs, and 2 Titan III-E-Centaurs. The other two launches, both from Vandenberg AFB, would use one Delta and one Scout rocket. MSFC forecast for 1977 that facilities for assembling and testing the Space Shuttle orbiter would be completed, as well as test firings of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel motors and main engines. (Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 26; KSC Release 492-76; MSFC Release 76-218)
An around-the-world auto race planned for mid-1976 as part of the U.S. Bicentennial celebration would feature a 1914 Model T Ford, tracked by a NASA satellite from the starting point in Paris to its termination in New York City, NASA announced. The car, driven by Goddard Space Flight Center employee Robert H. Pickard, would carry a 13.6-kg electronics package that would transmit the car’s ground speed to the random-access measuring system (RAMS) carried on NASA’S Nimbus 6 meteorological satellite that covers the entire globe once every 12 hr. Nimbus 6 would relay information to GSFC through a ground station in Alaska. The auto race would demonstrate use of the RAMS system for ground tracking applications where transmissions could encounter various kinds of interference; normally, RAMS would collect data from instruments on moving platforms such as balloons or buoys to allow calculation of wind or sea-surface movements. Pickard, a car enthusiast, had worked in the space program since the Vanguard days and was presently project manager for the comsat-metesat system called GOES (geostationary operational environmental satellite). (NASA Release 76-23)
Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and landing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of Johnson Space Center, had received the highest honor given by the government of France to a citizen of another country: the insignia of the Knight of the Legion of Honor, the JSC Roundup reported. The award was given for Kraft’s “tireless efforts toward better understanding and cooperation between the people of the United States and France.” He had also received the Natl. Civil Service League’s career-service award for 1976, as one of ten chosen for “excellence in the public service.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, former director of JSC, was one of 35 space pioneers inducted into the Space Hall of Fame 5 Oct. during the dedication of the new facility at Alamogordo, N.M. At a JSC ceremony 18 Oct., astronaut Donald K. Slayton received the American Heart Assn.’s 1976 Heart of the Year award for inspiring millions of Americans by “overcoming a heart problem that had grounded him for 10 years, enabling him to resume his distinguished participation in America’s space program.” (JSC Roundup, 22 Oct 76, 1)
The largest American flag ever painted would be exhibited on an outside wall of the Vehicle Assembly Building at Kennedy Space Center as part of KSC’s preparation for the Bicentennial exposition Third Century America, scheduled from 20 May through Labor Day 1976. The flag, measuring 64 m by 33.5 m, would be painted on the VAB—world’s second largest building—along with a huge Bicentennial symbol 33.5 m in diameter. More than 1900 liters of specially formulated paint had been donated by the Montgomery Ward paint laboratories, and the Bicentennial administration would pay for the painting. The 160-m-high south wall of the VAB would be washed down, rinsed, and primed with white before the finishing coat of white could be added and the design overlaid in red and blue. KSC had been chosen by President Ford to house the Third Century America exposition, featuring exhibits by 16 federal agencies and many U.S. industries, the only such exposition to be sponsored by the government during the Bicentennial year. (KSC Release 112-76)
The “hotline” between Washington, D.C. and Moscow had changed into a Direct Communications Link using two independent sets of orbiting satellites, and eliminating any actual wire between the two capitals, the Christian Science Monitor reported. A spokesman for the Army Communications Command at Ft. Huachuca, Ariz., where the U.S. portion of system was designed and built, said it could be put into use whenever diplomats from both countries made the final arrangements. The $ 15-million system would be located at Ft. Detrick, Md., near Washington, the spokesman said. (CSM, 15 Dec 76)
Johnson Space Center awarded a $96 000 contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace Co. of Denver for a study of equipment needed to construct a solar-power satellite (SPS) in geosynchronous orbit, in or about 1990. The 9-mo contract called for conceptual design and system definition of equipment to support construction of large space systems in orbit, assuming use of the Space Shuttle, and for defining development and maintenance costs of such equipment. (JSC Release 76-62) —JSC selected Alpha Bldg. Corp. of Houston for negotiations leading to award of a $1 369 000 cost-plus-award-fee contract for construction support services at the Center, including minor construction and other site work—alteration of laboratory systems, facilities, utilities, roads, sewers, walks, etc.—required by space programs and normally for projects estimated at $10 000 or less. The contract would begin 1 December 1976 and end 30 November 1977, with the option for the government to extend the contract for two additional 1-yr periods. (JSC Release 76-63) November 1976
McDonnell Douglas Corp. would join Aerospatiale and Dassault-Breguet of France in a transatlantic consortium to develop and market a new medium-range jetliner for the 1980s, announced France’s Transportation Secretary Marcel Cavaille at Toulouse, capital of the French aerospace industry. Tentatively named Mercure 200, the 160-to 180-seat twin-jet aircraft would have a range of about 3000 km; a modification of the current Mercure plane, it was estimated to cost about $240 million to develop, whereas a totally new plane would have cost more than $1 billion. The new plane, designed to save about 20% of fuel costs over the current Mercure, would be powered by a CFM 56 engine jointly designed by General Electric and France’s government-owned Snecma (Societe Nationale d’Etude et de Construction de Moteurs d’Aviation). Aerospatiale—the state-owned National Society of Aerospace Industry—would get 40% of the construction work, which would cushion it from layoffs when construction of the Concorde ended this year; Dassault, the private company that designed the plane, would get 5%, probably the final assembly. McDonnell would get 15%, the rest to be offered to other European manufacturers. Including McDonnell Douglas in the consortium would give the Mercure 200 an unprecedented entry into the American market, which amounted to half the world market, noted the New York Times. Although the new aircraft would compete with Boeing’s 727 and 737, which previously had a monopoly on the medium-range market, exploratory talks with Boeing had come to nothing because French officials feared the size of Boeing’s operation would relegate the French to little more than a subcontractor, the preliminary agreement with McDonnell Douglas awaited a McDonnell promise not to build a plane competing with the French-German passenger-transport Airbus. (NYT, 13 Aug 76, D3; WSJ, 13 Aug 76, 4)
The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about $300 million. (ATT, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, .3)
Solar power would charge batteries in 2 electric vehicles used by the National Capital Parks, Dept, of the Interior, during this summer’s Bicentennial Festival of American Folklife in Washington, D.C., NASA announced. The golfcart-like vehicles, each equipped with 6 standard traction batteries, would get energy from photovoltaic cells capable of providing 1.7 kwh of electricity during peak sunlight; the array was prepared by Lewis Research Center as one of several demonstrations of solar energy it was conducting as manager of ERDA’s photovoltaic test and demonstration project. Cells were provided by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, to which ERDA assigned responsibility for the low-cost silicon solar-array project. The solar-powered vehicles would be used from July through Sept, at the festival, one for transportation of festival workers, the other fitted with a vacuum cleaner for refuse pickup. (NASA Release 76-129;,ERDA Release 76-218)
Part of a Soviet satellite—the rocket body from Cosmos 854, tracked by North American Air Defense Command radar—had fallen in Montana earlier this week, DOD sources reported. The rocket body, which had not been recovered, looked like a meteor as it passed over Washington State and Idaho and fell south of the Canadian border. DOD said debris from Soviet space vehicles had dropped on the U.S. previously, but usually in small pieces. (WStar, 10 Sept 76, A-5; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 30)
NASA announced that it would simulate the drop of the main probe of its planned 1978 Pioneer Venus mission into the Venusian atmosphere, by dropping the probe from an Air Force balloon at 32 km altitude over the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The drop, scheduled for a date between 13 and 16 Dec., would be the first of two tests, a second being scheduled for early 1977. Flight events to be simulated just before the probe’s descent into the dense hot lower atmosphere of Venus—deployment of the probe parachute, separation of the heat-shield, and (after a 17-min parachute descent) separation of the parachute—would occur at an altitude of 16 km, where the temperature and density of earth’s atmosphere and the velocity of the probe would be much the same as those on Venus. The instrumented vessel would contain special equipment to monitor system performance, and movie cameras on the balloon platform as well as telescopic still and movie cameras on the ground would record the test. (NASA Release 76-192; ARC Release 76-84)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 067 113 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Teledyne McCormick Selph of Hollister, Calif., for unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine, a chemical used in Titan missiles and NASA-USAF space boosters. The contracting activity was the San Antonio Logistics Center at Kelly AFB, Texas. (DOD Release 223-76)
An article in the Baltimore Sun magazine reported that more than 3000 amateur radio operators—“hams”—in 90 countries had pooled their efforts to design, build, and finance the ham satellite series known as OSCAR, for orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio. The first OSCAR rode into space from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., 12 Dec. 1961, sixtieth anniversary of the first transatlantic wireless transmission, as a piggyback payload on the Thor-Agena carrying the USAF Discoverer 36 into orbit. Oscar 1 weighed about 4.5 kg and consisted of a battery, a small transistor, and an antenna packed into a metal case; constructed by radio hams working for companies building satellites, it operated on a tenth of a watt power and transmitted the greeting “hi” in Morse code before it stopped functioning 3 wk later. NASA agreed to provide launches as deadweight ballast for government satellites to advance public interest in space science, after the hams pointed out the OSCAR’s potential use in educational programs and emergency communications. In 1959 the hams had formed the Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. based in Washington and affiliated with the American Radio Relay League, national association of ham radio operators. After launch of Oscar 4, satellite activity shifted east, where AMSAT members working for GSFC and ComSat were eager to undertake assembly projects. By using volunteer efforts and parts donated as tax-deductible contributions by various companies, the hams could produce a satellite for about $60 000, compared to the commercial cost estimated at $2 million. Oscar 6, oldest active ham satellite, was about to celebrate its 4th anniversary; Oscar 7, most recent (and largest, at nearly 30 kg), had been in use for nearly 2 yr. Baltimore engineer Jack Colson, an employee of the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory, had received an award as the first amateur to be in touch with hams in all 50 states; he took 8 mo to achieve this, 4 mo for Hawaii alone because the satellite path permitted communications with the islands for only 2 min every 3 wk. Colson had also talked with hams in 43 countries and had bounced signals off the moon; he estimated that his ham contacts over the past 25 yr numbered about 30 000. The 750 000 radio amateurs all over the world came from all walks of life and ranged in age from 8-yr-olds to elderly men and women; about 20 000 amateurs were joining the U.S. ham network every year, the article said. Use of the satellite was free to all hams, whether or not they belonged to an amateur organization; OSCARs had transmitted medical data, weather bulletins, and emergency communications such as search-and-rescue mission information. Although shortwave radio could outdo the satellite on sheer distance, its transmissions—unlike those of the satellite—could be upset by atmosphere conditions or solar emissions. To improve OSCAR’s time and distance limitations, AMSAT members were working on a new satellite that could transmit continuously over a greater geographical area for up to 10 hr, because of a higher elliptical orbit. Launch was planned for 1980. (B Sun Magazine, 29 Aug 76, 10) 30 August: The Peoples Republic of China launched its sixth satellite, referenced as China 6, from its facility at Shuang-Cheng-Tze into a highly elliptical orbit with 2147-km apogee, 193-km perigee, 69.1° inclination, and 108.7-min period. An announcement from the China press agency Hsinhua said the satellite was functioning normally, but gave no details on the spacecraft or its mission. (ATT, 31 Aug 76,7; SBD, 8 Dec 76, 203; SSR, 31 Aug 76, 31; SF, Feb 77, 78)
The Air Force’s P76—5 satellite was successfully launched by NASA from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle at 0041 am PDT. The 72.6-kg spacecraft, designed to evaluate propagation effects of disturbed plasmas on radar and communications systems, was placed in a near-circular sun-synchronous orbit with apogee at 935 km and perigee at 863 km, inclination of 99.6°, and period of 105.9 min. The launch was requested by the Air Force Nov. 75 and agreed to by NASA 3 Dec. 1975, under a 1962 memorandum of understanding on joint NASA-DOD use of the Scout vehicle, and costs of the launch would he borne by the USAF. Mission objectives would be achieved, according to a postlaunch report. (MOR M-490-602-76-01, 21 Apr 76, [prelaunch] 5 May 76, [postlaunch] 24 Sept 76)
NASA announced selection of IBM Corp., Gaithersburg, Md., for award of a $24-million 44-mo cost-plus-award-fee contract to supply a Space Shuttle data-processing complex for the mission control center at Johnson Space Center. The complex would consist of 3 computers and peripheral equipment for support of the Shuttle program; work to be performed would include design, fabrication, delivery, installation, and checkout of the computer complex and associated software. Control Data Corp. of Minneapolis also submitted a proposal. (NASA Release 76-104; JSC Release 76-37)
NASA announced award of an $8.8-million extension for 1 yr of a contract with Northrop Services, Inc., of Houston for operation and maintenance of lab and test facilities at Johnson Space Center. Northrop had provided these services to JSC for the past 3 yr; the extension would bring the value of the contract to $37 416 742. Northrop had used 425 employes to maintain and operate the life sciences and engineering labs and the lunar curatorial lab. NASA also announced award of a $6.8-million extension for 2 yr of a contract with the Charles Stark Draper Labs., Cambridge, Mass., for technical support of Space Shuttle orbiter avionics software development. Draper had provided this support to JSC since 1974. The effort, employing 55 people, would include software design, verification, simulation, requirements formulation, and analysis as required for programming the guidance, navigation, and control computer for the Shuttle orbiter. (JSC Releases 76-12, 76-14)
Flight tests by the Air Force had confirmed the concept called LATAR (laser-augmented target acquisition and recognition) that would permit a pilot in a high-performance single-seat fighter to fly the aircraft and operate its weaponry at the same time. The LATAR pod, mounted under the fuselage of an F-5E directly beneath the cockpit, contained a laser-target designator, a spot tracker, and an electro-optical sensor. The spot tracker was a device that finds a laser “spot” from another target designator operated from another aircraft or on the ground; initial target identification could be either visual, by radar, or by a helmet-mounted sight system that integrated sight control with movement of the pilot’s head. The flight tests were conducted at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards AFB, Calif. (OIP Release 308.75)
Johnson Space Center employees Herbert A. Zook and Richard W. High received a patent this week for invention of a “capture cell,” a device to capture meteoroids traveling through space and preserve them for scientific analysis. The cube-shaped cell had an open side covered by a thin membrane; a meteoroid striking the membrane would enter the cell and shatter, but the remnants and any vapor created by the heat of impact would remain inside the cell, which was constructed of a material like polyethylene. Large arrays of the cells would be exposed on a spacecraft for a long time, up to a year, to allow time for a number of strikes to occur. Interest in the composition of meteoroids springs from the possible information on larger bodies such as comets or asteroids on which they originated. (NYT, 31 July 76, 27) Daring July: Scientists at JPL completed a list of “purple pigeons”—bright birds of the future—as unmanned planetary missions considered feasible for the period 1980-1990. In hopes that Viking l’s successful landing on Mars might prompt wider support for such missions, JPL proposed 7 advanced missions that would probably be reduced to 3 or 4 to be forwarded to NASA Hq. The list includes: return to Mars with rover vehicles to extend exploration of the Martian surface; a lander for one of Jupiter’s moons, accompanied by a satellite around the planet; a similar mission to Saturn and its moon Titan; asteroid rendezvous and near-range photographic mission; a radar-mapper satellite for Venus; flight to Halley’s Comet with a solar-sailer satellite (propelled by solar radiation); and establishment of an automated station on the moon for extended study of the lunar environment, probably by an international scientific group. (Av Wk, 26 July 76, 16)
The Air Force launched the first Block 5D advanced meteorological satellite from Vandenberg AFB on a Thor-Burner 2 at 1:01 am local time into an orbit with 848-km apogee, 818-km perigee, 98.6° inclination, and 101.5-min period. The RCA-built research satellite was a 450-kg cylinder 6.4m long and 1.7m in diameter. USAF later reported that a power-system failure had apparently occurred because no communications were coming from the Ams 1; no cause of the malfunction had been determined, and “chances of correcting it are grim,” USAF said. {SSR, 31 Oct 76, 31; SBD, 21 Sept 76, 24; Av Wk, 27 Sept 76, 26)
NASA announced award to Owen Enterprises, Inc., of Wilmington, Calif., of an exclusive patent license for production of a solar-energy concentrator invented by JPL’s Dr. Katsunori Shimada that focuses the sun’s rays from almost any angle without the need for a tracking mechanism. The concentrator—a special arrangement of multifaceted Fresnel lenses— magnifies solar energy tenfold, heating a fluid in channels beneath the lenses, which is released through a thermostat when the proper temperature is attained. A series of the devices could be set up, depending on the specific energy requirements of a structure. Suitable for residential, commercial, or industrial applications, the concentrator had proved much more efficient than other solar-collector units on the market. Owen Enterprises, Inc., the licensee, is an American Indian-owned firm that planned to assemble the device at facilities on the Rincon Indian Reservation near Escondido, Calif. The firm would invest $200 000 to develop the concentrator for the market, and pay 1% royalty to the U.S. Treasury on its gross sales. (NASA Release 76-209)
Rockwell Inti, announced award to the Aerostructures Div. of Avco Corp. of a contract valued at more than $50 million for long lead-time production work on outer wings of the B-l bomber. Work would cover the first three operational B-ls produced for the U.S. Air Force. The Aero-structures Div. would design and fabricate tools and prepare for actual building of the outer wings. Rockwell Inti, had assembled outer wings for the first three B-l prototypes, which had already accumulated more than 350 hr of flight tests at Edwards AFB, Calif. Outer wings on each side of the B-l would constitute a shipset—one of the largest sections of the B-l—weighing more than 13 000 kg, and measuring more than 18 m long and 4.5 m wide. Fuel would be stored inside the wing structure. (Rockwell Release LA-5)
DOD announced plans to sell West Germany 500 Sidewinder missiles and support equipment valued at $43 million. The announcement was one of several made by the Pentagon on foreign weapons sales, since law required that Congress must be notified and have 20 days in which to disapprove such sales. DOD also planned to provide $26 million in pilot training under a Northrop Corp. contract to upgrade the Saudi Arabian air force, through the sale of F5E jet fighters and construction of support and training facilities. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 3)
FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced that the agency would sponsor a conference in Washington, D.C., 16 Nov. to foster the use of metrics in aviation, in accordance with national policy set forth in the Metric Conversion Act of 1975. The conference would hear presentations by FAA, other federal agencies, aviation users, and the public, and would run into a second day if necessary. Subjects to be discussed would include air-traffic control, operations, and aeronautical charts and navigation aids, as well as design of aviation products and the impact on the aviation community of a transition to the metric system. McLucas noted that FAA had already begun to use metric measurements in areas such as standards for airport design and construction. (FAA Release 76-106)
The Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International Corporation was awarded a $6.9 million contract by Goddard Space Flight Center to produce RS-27 engine systems for the Delta launch vehicle. The contract called for delivery of 10 engines between March and Sept. 1977. NASA had returned 12 Rocketdyne-built H-1 engines for use in producing the new RS-27 systems. (Rockwell Release RD-6)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced that a team of fishermen, engineers, physicists, oceanographers, biologists, and computer specialists had used a satellite to find fish off the coast of Louisiana in a government-industry cooperative program begun by NOAA last year. Water turbidity, measured by Landsat sensors as variations in color, would reflect the distribution of fish; the fishing vessels, working with spotter aircraft, confirmed the presence of fish in most areas predicted by the Landsat data. This technique of locating concentrations of fish would aid in better understanding of coastal fishery ecology and better resources assessment and management, NOAA said. On 19 July, Landsat 1 had passed over a selected study area, sending multispectral scanner data to Goddard Space Flight Center; the data tapes were hand-carried to NASA’s Earth Resources Laboratory in La. for processing. Less than 21 hr after the scan, the spotter pilots and fishing-vessel captains were being called to check their findings with predicted locations. The satellite reports were valid, NOAA said. Installation of an operational system would require 3 to 5 yr to develop special computer programs and facilities. (NOAA Release 76-196; JSC Release 76—50; JSC Roundup, 10 Sept 76, 4)
A Pentagon group charged with making decisions on weapons programs—the Defense Systems Acquisition Committee—held its first meeting to consider production of the controversial B-l bomber and scheduled another meeting for 6 Jan. 1977 to decide on consolidation of cruise missile programs backed separately by the Air Force and the Navy. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld had stated—apparently with approval from the transition team of the incoming Carter administration—that he was responsible until 20 Jan. for making weapons decisions that came up for scheduled consideration; however, he had also told subordinates that DOD should exercise restraint in passing on programs that the incoming administration might review or change. President-elect Carter had questioned the necessity for a B-I bomber program. The controversy over cruise missiles arose from Air Force advocacy of an air-launched missile that could be used only with a B-l or B—52 bomber; this restraint offered the verification possibility, acceptable to the USSR, of controlling the number of cruise missiles by counting the bombers carrying them. However, the Navy had advocated its Tomahawk missile which could be launched from a submarine torpedo tube as well as from a surface ship or a bombing plane. The Navy’s preference would thwart verification of future arms-limitation agreements, since all attack submarines as well as surface ships and bombers could be potential platforms for launching the Navy missile. The Carter transition team was concerned, said the New York Times, that the Navy might be trying to lock in the new administration with a pre-inauguration decision that would complicate future negotiations with the USSR. Both the Navy and the Air Force programs were started after a 1972 agreement with the USSR that placed a 5-yr limitation on strategic ballistic missiles; the $ 15 million design studies had grown into $300 million development programs, and had reached the point where a decision was needed on proceeding into costly engineering development. Observers pointed to the Army’s plan to award contracts in the next week or so on its $7 million programs for troop-carrier and attack helicopters as a decision that would make it difficult for the incoming administration to re-examine its predecessor’s policy. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 23)
Robert G. Deissler, technical consultant to NASA’s Lewis Research Center, received the 1975 Max Jakob Memorial Award at the 16th National Heat Transfer Conference in St. Louis. The award, established in 1961 by the American Society for Mechanical Engineering and the American Institute for Chemical Engineering, commemorated a pioneer in the science of heat transmission, and was given for distinguished service in the field of heat transfer. Deissler, who joined Lewis in 1947 and gained early recognition for work in turbulent flow and heat transfer of variable-property fluids in pipes or tubes, was cited for “outstanding contributions to the theory of turbulence and turbulent transport...for his ability to perceive and derive the fundamental theory required to advance applied research and development in convective heat transfer.” Author of about 70 technical papers, Deissler had received an Exceptional Service Award in 1957 from NACA, NASA’s predecessor. (LeRC News, 6 Aug 75, 1; Cl PD, 10 Aug 76)
A “Big Bird” reconnaissance satellite, built by Lockheed, was launched by the USAF from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., on a Titan HID. A previous Big Bird launched 4 Dec. 1975 had remained in orbit until 1 Apr. 1976. (Av Wk, 19 July 76, 243)
Observations from NASA’s airborne Kuiper observatory by a group of Cornell University scientists reported the first occultation, or eclipse, of a star by a planet observed from above the lower layers of earth’s atmosphere. The occultation was observed from an altitude of 12.4 km over the Atlantic near Bermuda, using the 1 -m telescope to view the passage of Mars between the earth and the star Epsilon in the constellation Gemini. Light from the star passed through the Martian atmosphere before reaching earth; changes in the light after it passed through the planet’s atmosphere would give astronomers new information about the density and composition of that atmosphere, thought to consist of argon rather than water and carbon dioxide which had been frozen into the Martian polar caps. The two unmanned Viking spacecraft scheduled for Mars landing later this year would also measure the argon present in the Mars atmosphere. (NSF Release PR76-36)
The Johnson Space Center announced award of a 1-yr extension of the Pan American World Airways contract for plant maintenance and operations services at the Center. Pan American had been selected 13 Feb. 1974 to receive a cost-plus-award-fee contract for operation of all utility systems and maintenance of utilities, buildings, roads, ditches, and special equipment at JSC; the current award represented the second of 2 planned extensions and would extend the effective period through 12 Feb. 1977. Annual estimated amount of the contract was $7.4 million. (JSC Release 76-25)
A new computer program developed at Johnson Space Center from Landsat digital data could compile maps on any scale desired showing water surfaces in excess of 0.024 sq km, said specialists in the Earth Observations Division at JSC. Nations needing an inventory of their water resources could obtain maps of their lakes and reservoirs, and state governments could use the service in choosing between recreational and industrial use of available water supplies. The program, called Detection and Mapping (DAM) Package, required only $300 worth of computer time to map more than 33 800 sq km. As the two Landsats cover about 95 percent of the earth’s land mass, the system could produce surface-water maps for virtually all populated regions with almost 100% accuracy for water areas as large as 0.04 sq km; position accuracy—the degree to which the maps match the terrain—would be within 90m of dead center. User training would be typically no more than a day, and the system would need no experts to implement it. (NASA Release 76-4; JSC Release 76-01)
Physicians at Johnson Space Center were gathering data on female physiological performance and tolerance limits as a basis for establishing criteria in recruiting NASA’s first women astronauts. Women employees of the center were asked to volunteer for testing on a treadmill and in a lower body negative-pressure device, to see whether women responded differently from men of comparable age to treadmill exercise and to stresses on the circulatory system induced by decreased pressures on the lower body. On the treadmill test, researchers would monitor the subject’s heart rate and blood pressure as they varied the speed and tilt of the moving treadmill. The pressure device, encasing the subject from the waist down, would have the pressure reduced while researchers monitored the reaction of the cardiovascular system to the change in pressure. NASA had issued a call for at least 30 Space Shuttle astronauts (15 pilot candidates, 15 mission specialist candidates) in July 197 6, with a closing date of 30 June 1977. Selection would be completed by December 1977. (JSC Release 76-65)
NASA announced it had completed negotiations with Owens-Illinois, Inc., for replacement of a mirror blank for the Infrared Telescope Facility being built at Mauna Kea, Hawaii. The 126-cm-dia. replacement would be ready for processing at the Kitt Peak National Observatory that would turn it into a telescope mirror. Opticians at Kitt Peak had cut a center hole in the original disc preparatory to grinding it when a fracture was detected last Sept.; the crack, extending radially more than 86 cm from the center hole, rendered the mirror blank useless. The original and replacement were cast from Cervit, a transparent ceramic material obtained by NASA for testing as part of the Space Telescope. When a different material was decided on for the Space Telescope, the Cervit blank was transferred to the infrared telescope project. Cervit had practically zero thermal expansion, making it ideal for telescope materials, and had been used in 2 of the world’s 5 largest telescopes. Under the new agreement, Owens-Illinois would provide a replacement lens for $200,000 and return of ownership of the damaged blank to the Ohio firm. (NASA Release 76-42)
Ruth Bates Harris, NASA’s deputy assistant administrator for community and human relations, announced that she would leave the agency effective 15 Oct. Mrs. Harris said she would return to New York “to attend to pressing personal family needs,” but would “spend an number of months continuing to work as a consultant” to NASA, in order to complete some unfinished community and human relations projects. She had been a deputy assistant administrator since Aug. 1974, the first woman to reach that position in NASA, and had earlier been the first director of NASA’s Office of Equal Employment Opportunity. Before joining NASA, Mrs. Harris had been director of human relations for the public schools in Montgomery County, Md., and had been director of the Human Relations Commission in Washington, D.C. She had received more than 50 awards and citations for her work in human relations. (NASA Release 76-170)
Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 spacecraft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third time U.S. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s program of research on extraterrestrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of vibration and performance tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center on a small solid-propellant rocket motor scheduled to boost the Inti. Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft into orbit in 1977. The motor, Thiokol Corp.’s TE-M-604-4, would be fired about 24 hr after launch to move the IUE into a near-synchronous orbit at altitudes of from 24 000 to 48 000 km. IUE, a cooperative research program shared by NASA, ESA, and the U.K. Science Research Council, would carry a 45-mm-diameter ultraviolet telescope to investigate characteristics of stars and planets. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 76, 4)
Launch complex 14 at KSC—used for John Glenn’s orbital flight in Feb. 1962 and other manned launches untd 1966—was blown up with plastic explosives by an Army demolition team after the Air Force decided the rusty and obsolete towers constituted a hazardous area and should be demolished. The scrap metal would be sold to the highest bidder. News reports noted that a stainless steel memorial would remain to mark the place where the seven original astronauts took their first steps into space. (WStar, 2 Dec 76, A-3; CBS News transcript, Cronkite-Dean, 1 Dec 76; NBC Nightly News, Brinkley, 1 Dec 76)
Under a 3-nation agreement announced by Britain, West Germany, and Italy, the Tornado MRCA (multi-role combat aircraft) dubbed “the spearhead of Europe’s coming offensive against the United States for equality in the skies” would go into production and would be operational by 1980. The agreement provided for construction at a total cost of $ 10 billion of 809 swing-wing “wonder weapon” planes that could fly just under the speed of sound at treetop level, and twice the speed of sound at higher altitudes; it was designed to replace 2 of the most profitable planes ever produced by U.S. makers, the Phantom used by Britain’s RAF and the F104 Starfighters used by West Germany and Italy. The Tornado carried terrain-following radar that could fly it under enemy radar, and could vary its wingspan from 8.5 to 14m. Panavia (consisting of British Aircraft Corp., Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm, and Aeritalia) would build the Tornado airframe and Turbo-Union (Rolls Royce, Motoren-und-Turbinen Union, and Fiat) would build the engine. The U.S. press noted that, for the first time, American aerospace firms would be facing a competitor as formidable as themselves. (WPost, 15 Aug 76, A-14; W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-4)
KSC announced award to Norflor Construction Co., Orlando, Fla., of a $284 000 construction contract for an airlock to provide a clean-room environment in the spin-test facility of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to be used in preparing Delta-launched spacecraft and later for Space Shuttle payload processing. Construction would be completed within 160 days after contractor’s notification to proceed. The airlock installation would include a 5-ton crane, air conditioning, personnel airlock, and lines for electricity, vacuum, compressed air, and gaseous nitrogen. Present clean-room facilities were occupied by elements of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn spacecraft scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977. Delta payloads scheduled for launch in the spring and summer of 1977 included Geos (ESA), April; Goes, May; OTS (ESA), June; Japan’s GMS metesat, July; Sirio, an Italian comsat, August; and Meteosat (ESA), Sept. (KSC Release 490-76)
The U.S. Air Force announced production of a new material with electrical properties suitable for solid-state laser applications: anisotropic yttrium aluminate doped with neodymium (Nd:YA10:i), a substance difficult to make into high-quality single crystals. The new material would replace neodymium YAC in solid-state lasers because it loses less heat than conventional lasing materials, requires no external component to polarize the laser light, and stores more energy for electro-optical switched-laser operations. The USAF sponsored the research at a pilot plant of Lambda-Airtron Division of Litton at Morris Plains, N.J. which produced 40 rods of the new material; the longest, about 100 mm long, was valued at $4000. The high cost resulted from the cost of the raw materials and the iridium crucibles used in production, as well as the large amounts of power needed. The Air Force Materials Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., would lend the tested rods to qualified government agencies and contractors. (AFSC Release OIP 118.76)
Food preparation and packaging techniques developed by NASA to feed Apollo and Skylab crews during space flight had been used in a pilot program to provide balanced nutrition to elderly persons living alone, the Johnson Space Center announced. The program, called Meal Systems for the Elderly, was part of JSC’s Technology Utilization program to apply space-developed technology to solution of earthbound problems. The goal was to provide a meal system that could be opened, cooked, eaten, and cleaned up by older people living alone; each meal would provide at least a third of the daily diet allowance for an older person, and a field demonstration had been scheduled that would evaluate the meal design and delivery methods by the end of 1976. The JSC team developing the program would aim at a shelf-stable, multimeal package that could be distributed by several methods—even parcel post—to senior citizens living beyond the range of hot-meal delivery or to those in areas where meals were not provided. (NASA Release 76-6; JSC Release 76-02)
NASA announced delivery of experiment hardware for the first of three High Energy Astronomy Observatories (HEAO) to the prime contractor, TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif. The hardware consisted of 4 experiments to survey and map x-ray sources during the 6-mo mission of HEAO-A in 1977. A Naval Research Laboratory experiment (Dr. Herbert Friedman, principal investigator) would use a large-area survey instrument to locate x-ray sources and obtain data for studying the physics and evolution of energy sources. An experiment built by Goddard Space Flight Center with assistance from the Calif. Institute of Technology would measure emissions and absorptions of diffuse x-rays and correlate results with radio and visible light ray emission; principal investigators were GSFC’s Dr. Elihu Boldt and Caltech’s Dr. Gordon Garmire. A third experiment, for the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and MIT, was a scanning modulation collimator to determine precise celestial positions of selected x-ray sources and investigate their size and structure; principal investigators were SAO’s Dr. Herbert Gursky and MIT’s Dr. Hale Bradt. The fourth experiment, for the University of Calif, at San Diego and MIT, would determine the position, spectrum, time variations, intensity, and other properties of hard x-rays and low-energy gamma rays; principal investigators were UCSD’s Dr. Laurence Peterson and MIT’s Dr. Walter Lewin. Data gathered by the HEAO missions could lead to new theories about energy production and high-density nuclear matter. Marshall Space Flight Center, which would manage HEAO for the Office of Space Science, directed TRW in designing and building the observatories and integrating and testing the overall system, including the experiments. (NASA Release 76-100; MSFC Release 76-86)
NASA announced selection of the initial crew of the Boeing 747 shuttlecarrier aircraft that would carry and launch the Space Shuttle orbiter in approach and landing tests. Pilots would be Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry, both of Dryden Flight Research Center; flight-test engineers would be Victor W. Horton, also from Dryden, and Louis E. Guidry, Jr., of Johnson Space Center. All the men chosen were civilians. The ALT flights, scheduled for early 1977, would carry the orbiter to an altitude of 7.5 km, where it would separate from the 747 and the orbiter crew would pilot it to a glide landing. Unmanned and manned captive flights would precede initial free flights. (DFRC Release 3-76)
U.S. airline traffic increased more than 12% in the first half of 1976, the Air Transport Association reported; increasing numbers of passengers plus increased fares and cost-cutting would produce better profits for the airlines. Analysts said Americans were flying in unprecedented numbers because they felt the recession was over; even “ailing international carriers” like Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines were trimming their operating losses and might show some profit for the year, the Wall Street Journal reported. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 15)
NASA announced that the rollout of Orbiter 101 had been set for 17 Sept, at the Rockwell Int’l Space Div. assembly plant at Palmdale, Calif, [see 11 Aug.]. First of NASA’s Shuttle spacecraft olf the assembly line, OV-101 was not yet scheduled for orbital flight: its first job, beginning in Jan. 1977, would be as a test vehicle. It would be launched from a modified Boeing 747 jetliner on which it was riding piggyback, in a series of approach and landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center. It would then be ferried early in 1978 to Marshall Space Flight Center for ground vibration tests. Mated in a test stand to the 46-m external tank as if for an actual launch, Orbiter 101 would undergo extended vibration and stress loading equal to that experienced during a launch phase, when all the main engines—OV-lOl’s three main engines and the two solid-fuel boosters—would produce up to 30 million newtons of thrust. After the testing at MSFC, Orbiter 101 would be-returned to Calif, to be prepared for space flight; Orbiter 102 would be used in initial orbital flights from Kennedy Space Center, scheduled for 1979. Under construction since June 1974, the Orbiter’s main parts came from various contractors: crew module and aft fuselage from Rockwell at Palmdale, mid fuselage (cargo bay) from General Dynamics in San Diego, wings from Grumman Aerospace in N.Y., and tail assembly from Fairchild Republic in N.Y. Orbiter’s three main engines (each providing 211 500 kg of thrust at launch) were constructed by Rockwell’s Rock-etdyne Div. under contract to MSFC. (NASA Release 76-143; Marshall Star, 8 Sept 76, 1)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
The Dept, of Defense announced its first successful powered Bight test of a bomber-launched cruise missile, prototype of a weapon the USSR had sought to curb in strategic arms talks. The Boeing-made missile, basically a pilotless jet drone resembling a small plane with airbreathing engines, could carry nuclear warheads at low altitudes to evade detection by enemy radar. The successful test, in which the robot-like craft was launched from a B-5 2 at an altitude of about 3 km and flew for 11 min. over the White Sands range, was viewed as a step in final development of a highly strategic weapon for the U.S. Control of cruise missiles—both air- and submarine-launched types—had been a major issue in negotiations with the USSR. The Air Force missile just tested would be an aid to bomber penetration of enemy defenses, whereas the Navy’s cruise missile would be a tactical type for use against enemy ships rather than a strategic type aimed at land targets. The first test scheduled for 26 Feb. had been canceled because of problems with the B-52’s airconditioning unit. Later tests would try out the programmed guidance system. (WPost, 6 Mar 76, A-12; WStar, 6 Mar 76, A-2; B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A— 1; NYT, 6 Mar 76, 18)
Johnson Space Center announced on 21 Sept, modification of a costplusaward-fee contract with IBM, Gaithersburg, Md., to cover software for ground-based computing and data-processing systems at JSC. IBM would develop computer programs for Space Shuttle vehicle management and flight operations, and related scientific and medical operations. Value of the modified contract would be $19 463 000. (JSC Release 76-59) —NASA contracted 22 Sept, with Aeronutronic Ford Corp. for support services for the Mission Control Center and other ground-based data systems at JSC, including data hardware and software systems engineering and maintenance, as well as logistics, reliability, and quality assurance. The cost-plus-award-fee contract would cost about $46 550 000 from July 1976 through 30 Sept. 1978. (JSC Release 76-60) —JSC announced 24 Sept, selection of Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a contract for development and production of a portable oxygen system for Space Shuttle crew and passengers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, costing about $1.9 million, would run from 13 Nov. 1976 to 13 July 1979. The system, designed to meet four special Shuttle needs (emergency oxygen in case of cabin-atmosphere contamination, prebreathing before spacewalks, life support during rescue, and emergency oxygen after landing in case of landing-area contamination), would be capable of operating independently or connected to the Shuttle oxygen'system. The contract would call for delivery of ten units and 50 recharge kits for NASA use in certification, training, and flight, plus ground-support equipment and manpower; it would contain options for 62 additional units and 310 recharge kits. (JSC Release 76-61)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission, probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at Johnson Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions. Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to provide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC Roundup, 13 Feb 76, 1)
A new device developed by the USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards AFB, Calif., would permit an annual “physical examination” of the motors of intercontinental ballistic missiles while the missiles were still in the silo. The practice of removing the motors for inspection had resulted in high costs for handling and transportation as well as high risk of damage to the motors. The AF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) at Los Angeles asked AFRPL to find a compact, safe, and economical means of inspection, and acoustical holography was selected. The system when fully developed would be able to scan the outside of an intact missile top to bottom, probing the propellant inside its motors. The device worked much like sonar, transmitting high-frequency sound waves and registering reflected vibrations; the reflected waves, processed electronically, would reproduce any flaws in the propellant on a cathode-ray tube for instant viewing or photographing, and the information would be stored in a computer for later evaluation. Future uses of acoustical holography might be made in medical science, improving on current x-ray techniques. (AF Release OIP 174.75) the advantages of space environment—earth overview, zero gravity, vacuum, heat and waste disposal, and uninterrupted solar energy—for future uses, concluding with a prediction of a growing tourist industry in space. The symposium concluded 26 May at the annual banquet of the Ala. AIAA with an address on “Space Industrialization as a Concept” by Dr. Krafft Ehricke, science advisor for North American Space Division, Rockwell International Corp. Sessions of the symposium dealt with space habitation, space transportation, space processing of materials, and space power. The symposium was organized to disseminate recent information on expanded space operations after the advent of the Space Shuttle to all segments of the scientific and technical community; participants included NASA centers, other government agencies, industry and universities. (NASA Release 76-81; MSFC Release 76-64, 76-79; Disher text)
The B-l bomber was vital to U.S. security, said Gen. William J. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, in a speech to the Rockwell Management Club at Los Angeles, Calif. As part of a strategic triad—SLBMs, ICBMs, and bombers—constituting three distinct types of retaliatory weapons, the B-l would help complicate defense efforts of potential enemies. Although the U.S. now had “a rough equivalence” of strategic strength, Gen. Evans noted that the Soviet Union was engaged in an effort to upset “the present equilibrium” and gain military advantage. Along with deterrent value, the B-1 should be considered a flexible, reusable, appropriate weapon in a conventional tactical role as well as in a nuclear strategic role. A future conflict might start not through “a surprise storm of nuclear missiles,” but through “daring but limited acts of provocation” to which the U.S. should be able to respond with at least a show of force or be “perceived as a paper tiger.” Gen. Evans congratulated Rockwell and other contributors to the development of the B-l and urged continuation of the program. (OIP Release 231.76)
NASA announced that a series of aircraft flights from Alaska to Argentina between January and May of 1974 had provided information on the transport and distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere from the tropic seas to the higher latitudes, as well as vertically to the stratosphere, important to an understanding of earth’s ozone layer and possibly of earth climate. Previous studies of water in the stratosphere, made from aircraft and balloon flights, had not provided data on latitudinal transport. Ernest Hilsenrath of GSFC, who reported this first mapping of water-vapor distribution in both northern and southern latitudes in a paper at the American Geophysical Union meeting 8 Dec., noted that the 1974 flights had confirmed an increase in the amount of atmospheric water vapor since 1964. The experiments, flown on an Air Force RB-57, were managed by GSFC under contract to DOT as part of its Climatic Impact Assessment Program. (NASA Release 76-201)
Dr. Alexander M. Lippisch, designer of the first operational rocket-powered fighter aircraft, died in Cedar Rapids, la., at the age of 81. As chief of design after 1939 at Germany’s Messerschmitt Company, his speed research led to development of the ME 163B, world’s fastest airplane at that time, which had a speed of nearly 1015 km per hr and could climb to 9 km in 3 min. As director of research at the Airplane Research Institute in Vienna after 1943, he was rounded up in Operation Paperclip by the Allies, who put him to work for the U.S. Air Force technical intelligence section and sent him to the U.S. in 1946 to work at W right -Patterson Field in Ohio. He had left government service in 1957 and gone to work for Collins Radio, where he headed the company’s aeronautical laboratory. In 1965 he left Collins to form his own group, the Lippisch Research Corp., and at his death was developing an airfoil boat and an aerodyne (wingless aircraft) for the West German government. (ATT, 13 Feb 76, 34)
Ames Research Center announced that 18 scientists representing eight institutions would fly on NASA’s Galileo II airborne research laboratory on a 3-wk study of atmospheric pollution that would take them nearly pole to pole across the central Pacific Ocean, north to south. Between 28 Oct. and 19 Nov., the scientists in eight teams would measure changes in the upper atmosphere caused by jet aircraft exhaust and would investigate the effect on the upper atmosphere of fluorocarbons and halocarbons from aerosol sprays and other sources. The experiments at many latitudes from far north to far south would gather data in both northern and southern hemispheres to note changes in upper-atmosphere composition and pollutants between altitudes of 10.6 km and 12.1 km. Measuring would begin in Alaska, then proceed at Hawaii, Samoa, Australia, New Zealand, and Antarctica. Observations near Hawaii would be coordinated with similar measurements at about 18-km altitude by NASA’s earth-resources survey aircraft, also based at Ames. The jet-pollutant study was part of a 4-yr cooperative effort between ARC and the Lewis Research Center, which had included experiment packages carried on jets operated by Pan American, United, and Qantas airlines; the Galileo II flights would measure pollution over remote areas not covered by commercial aircraft. The aerosol pollution measurements were part of a broader program by NASA and other agencies to ascertain the constituents of the upper atmosphere in a nonpolluted condition, in order to define changes with time in proportions of ozone, fluorocarbons, water vapor, carbon monoxide, and other compounds, and to determine whether such changes were manmade. Galileo II data from both types of measurements would be coordinated with data collected by NOAA stations in Alaska, Hawaii, and Samoa, as well as by stations of the meteorological services of Australia and New Zealand and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. (ARC Release 76-79)
Dr. John F. Clark, scheduled to retire 1 July as Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, had been selected to serve after that date at NASA Hq as special assistant to the Associate Administrator, according to an announcement by Dr. Robert S. Cooper, GSFC deputy director and Dr. Clark’s successor. Dr. Clark agreed to stay at GSFC through 14 August to review actions needed to finalize design activities associated with a stability problem in the Delta second-stage engine, Dr. Cooper said, and would also serve as adviser on the Delta’s readiness for the Palapa and Itos launches later in 1976. (GSFC announcement 1997)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, professor of planetary science at California Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. William H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960, Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers, including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
International golfing great Arnold Palmer was scheduled to pilot a Learjet 36 “business aircraft” from Denver, Colo., for an assault on the speed-around-the-world record that had not been surpassed for 10 yr. A Learjet 24 had circled the earth in 1966 in 65 hr 38 min 39 sec elapsed time, at an average speed of better than 563 kph (50 hr 20 min actual flying time) including 17 intermediary stops. The National Aeronautic Association had sanctioned the new attempt, designating journalist Robert Serling as official onboard observer. Two additional pilots would accompany Palmer and Serling on their 2-day flight, scheduled to cover nearly 37 000 km, under the auspices of the Aviation Space Writers Association. Nine stops were planned for the new flight: Logan Airport at Boston; LeBourget at Paris; Mehrabad Airport at Tehran, Iran; Band-anaraike International Airport at Colombo, Sri Lanka; Kemayoran Airport, Jakarta, Indonesia; Manila International Airport; Wake Island; Honolulu International Airport; and Arapahoe County Airport, Denver. Besides NAA sponsorship, the flight was sanctioned by the American Revolution Bicentennial Association and the Aviation Historical Foundation. (NAA newsletter, May 1976, 1)
A giant Air Force antenna at Hamilton, Mass., that had shared in transatlantic communications with the Jodrell Bank Observatory in England by way of moon reflections would be dismantled and moved to Westford, Mass., for use by the Lincoln Laboratory of MIT in radar studies of earth’s upper atmosphere, the AFSC Newsreview announced. The big dish, nearly 46 m in diameter, had been used by the USAF Geophysics Laboratory since 1962 for ionospheric and radioastronomy studies, as well as in auroral studies using satellite beacons. Continuing USAF research at Hamilton’s Sagamore Hill Observatory would use the facility’s 25.6-m antenna and smaller receivers. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 76, 10) October 1976
Ground-based equipment incorporating computers that would work with components aboard a Shuttle orbiter to guide it to a safe landing had been shipped from the contractor, Cutler Hammer’s AIL Division, NASA announced. The equipment, called a microwave scanning-beam landing system (MSBLS), would be installed on a runway at Dryden Research Center, where initial flight tests of the orbiter would begin in mid-1977; a second set would be installed on a newly constructed runway at Kennedy Space Center, where initial Shuttle orbital missions would be launched in 1979. Both locations would be equipped for approach from either direction, and each system would be fully redundant, including a comprehensive monitoring system with automatic switchover and an uninterruptible power supply. As the Shuttle orbiter would descend in a steep glide moderated to a soft touchdown, onboard computers would direct the vehicle through commands to the control surfaces and must know the vehicle’s precise position at every instant; standard instrumentlanding electronics could not provide this information, so that the type of beam created by the MSBLS would be needed. The MSBLS system would cover a total field of positions through all possible paths the orbiter would take, instead of providing a single straight path for the orbiter to follow; its scanning beam would sweep a wide flat course across the landing sector, and pulses from a ground transmitter would be coded to identify the exact angle at which the beam pointed at each instant of the sweep. A receiver in the descending orbiter would pick up the pulses and decode them to determine the track; the onboard computer would accurately compare the orbiter’s location with the desired location and automatically correct any discrepancy. The MSBLS would provide an unprecedented degree of position-guidance accuracy. (NASA Release 76-97; JSC Release 76-35)
NASA issued a call for Space Shuttle astronaut candidates— 15 pilots and 15 mission specialists—to be selected by Dec. 1977. Applications would be accepted through June 1977, and candidates would report to Johnson Space Center in July 1978 for 2 yr of training. Appointment as an astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of training. Minority and women candidates were encouraged to apply. NASA spokesman Bob Gordon said the agency expected no problems if a woman were selected; the Space Shuttle was “designed to accommodate women astronauts... the waste management system is the only problem really and that has been designed for both males and females.” Since the astronaut program began in 1959, 73 pilots and scientists had been selected; 31 persons were available as Space Shuttle crew, 28 astronauts assigned to JSC and 3 holding government positions in Washington, D.C. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would maintain vehicle systems; mission-specialist astronauts would coordinate orbiter operations in flight planning, use of consumables, and management of the payload. (NASA Release 76-122; JSC Release 76-44; DOD Release 310-76; NYT, 8 July 76, 12)
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
NOAA announced award of a $1 441 116 contract extension to Management and Technical Services Co., Daytona Beach, Fla., for technical support in operating NOAA’s geostationary environmental satellite system. The extension would continue the company’s work in processing and distributing environmental data. Two GOES satellites at altitudes of 35 800 km were transmitting imagery and other information to receiving stations at Wallops, Va., and Suitland, Md., for communication to NOAA centers in Washington, D.C., Miami, Kansas City, and San Francisco. (NOAA Release 76-227)
