The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
The Natl. Space Club announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, appointed NASA chief scientist Nov. 8, would speak at its Dec. meeting and present awards to Washington-area high school students in American Univ.’s 19th summer research program. Dr. Naugle had been NASA associate administrator since 1975 in charge of much of the agency’s R&D work. (NSC newsletter Dec 77)
MSFC reported that the contractor for the first high-energy astronomy observatory (HEAO-A), TRW Systems of Redondo Beach, Calif., would ship the spacecraft to Kennedy Space Center on Mar. 7. HEAO-A, a 2660kg unmanned mission scheduled for launch Apr. 15 into low circular earth orbit, would survey celestial x-ray sources and gamma-ray flux. (MSFC Release 77-32)
A television relay satellite 22 000 miles in space was the focus of an experiment Jan. 25 in using TV transmissions to conduct judicial proceedings, reducing the travel time and cost of witnesses and lawyers, and to increase the efficiency of the courts, the New York Times reported. The project, result of a yr’s planning between the Univ. of Maryland law school in Baltimore and that of Ohio Northern in Lima, was only partly successful because the yr-old communications technology satellite Cts orbiting over the equator south of Denver repeatedly sent to Baltimore the jagged horizontal lines of TV “snow” during the closing arguments of the mock hearing at Lima. Also, the voice-activated TV cameras, two at each location to cover the two pairs of lawyers and judges, would take over the projection screen whenever anyone wearing a lapel microphone coughed or cleared his throat. The Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting, which sponsored the experiment, had paid nothing for use of the system, and the Cts project leader (Herbert Nunelly of Westinghouse Electric Corp.) operating the teleconference for NASA said he could not compute the cost of an hour’s or day’s use of the satellite. The American Bar Assn, had approved the mock appeals hearing before Judge Joseph F. Weis, Jr., of the U.S Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and three lawyers before whom law school students were arguing the case. Judge Weis’s ABA project director, Howard Primer of Chicago, cited several actual trials conducted with TV assistance. (NYT, Jan 26/77, B-l)
NASA announced it had appointed Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of Dryden Flight Research Center since 1976, to be deputy director of Kennedy Space Center as of July 1. He would replace Miles Ross, who resigned from NASA in May. Griffin had worked at NASA Hq for 3yr, as asst, administrator for legislative affairs, then as deputy associate administrator for operations in the Office of Space Flight. At Johnson Space Center, Griffin had been a flight controller during the Gemini program, a flight director on all 11 Apollo missions, and lead flight director on Apollo 12, 15, and 17. Among his awards were NASA exceptional service medals for his work on Apollo 12 and 15, the presidential Medal of Freedom group achievement award for Apollo 13, and the Hq creative management award. (NASA Release 77-109; DFRC Release 20-77)
NASA announced that a team of astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics using data from NASA’s Uhuru satellite had discovered what seemed to be “superclusters” of galaxies more than 150 million light-years in diameter, bounded by areas of extremely hot gas acting as x-ray sources. The mass of gas required to produce x-rays would be 5 to 10 times greater than all material seen at other wavelengths, and would suffice to bind the galaxies into superclusters. Primarily hydrogen and helium, the gas was thought to be “primordial material” from an explosion that created the universe. In the debate over origins, “open universe” theorists supported the idea of a big bang 20 billion yr ago expanding outward forever; “closed universe” advocates said gravitational collapse would halt expansion and the material would fall back on itself, perhaps to repeat the cycle. Traditional optical and radio techniques had not found enough material in space to supply the gravity needed to “close” the universe; the new data indicated the missing mass might exist as vast amounts of hot gas between galaxies. Uhuru, first of a series of small astronomical satellites (SAS) for studying cosmic x-rays, had been launched Dec. 12,1970, as Explorer 42. The astronomers had noted the x-ray emissions while compiling the fourth Uhuru catalog from observations in the early 1970s. The project was managed for NASA by Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Release 77-138)
Direct-readout equipment for GOES, the geostationary operational environmental satellite, installed in the USAF global weather center at Offutt AFB, Neb., to support Air Force meteorology requirements, would improve the center’s forecasting and accuracy, AvWk reported. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
Nature reported that a May 13 meeting of the Royal Astronomical Society in London had discussed Mars’s moons Phobos and Deimos, the 100th anniversary of whose discovery would occur in Aug. Observations, both ground-based and from satellites, had revealed oddities: Phobos, the only satellite in earth’s solar system that circled its central body faster than that body could spin on its axis, would appear to an observer on the planet’s surface to rise in the west and set in the east, whereas its fellow Deimos would appear to rise in the east and set in the west like earth’s moon. Also, the orbit of Phobos was coming nearer to the surface of Mars (a body approaching within 8700km would be pulled apart by differential tidal forces, the article said). A Soviet astrophysicist, I.S. Shklovsky, had claimed in the 1950s that the low density of Phobos indicated it was a hollow artificial satellite produced by an advanced civilization on Mars. Viking spacecraft images had shown that the moons were blackish gray rather than the red of Mars, indicating different composition; astronomer Joe Veverka of Cornell Univ. concluded that the moons had originated in the asteroid belt. Viking had found that the lOkm-diameter Stickney crater on Phobos covered 40% of the maximum diameter of Phobos itself. The two Mars moons had almost identical shapes (triaxial ellipsoids) and both rotated synchronously with their orbital periods and their long axes pointing directly at Mars (Nature, June 30/77, 758)
Johnson Space Center confirmed that NASA would turn off science instruments on the lunar surface and would dismantle the JSC control center for Apollo lunar-surface experiment packages (ALSEP) as of Sept. 30. The five stations still operating were put there by Apollo missions 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17. In July 1969 the original moonwalkers of Apollo 11 had left behind a prototype station with a design life of only 14 days; it had survived for 45 days and quit when its power supply failed. Specifications for the remaining five had included a lyr design life for 4, and 2yr for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its eighth year,” NASA noted. Built to record and transmit long-term lunar-surface data, the stations with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of data from only one seismometer at a time, for instance, the group had operated as a sensor network, greatly enhancing available information on the moon’s internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles in its environment, and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts. Although the experiments would be terminated, the transmitters would continue to operate, serving earth as an astronomy reference point. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such as astrometrics and spacecraft navigation or monitoring the motion of the lunar orbit against a background of extragalactic stars to test gravity theories. The lunar stations had had problems: The Apollo 14 ALSEP ran for 4yr, quit for 2 days in March 1975, started up again, and had repeated this 6 times since. Understanding the trouble (temperature fluctuations resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in designing future science stations. (JSC Release 77-47; NASA Release 77-203)
NASA reported that Dr. Herbert Frey, a NASA-Univ. of Md. scientist working at GSFC, had prepared a paper for presentation June 2 at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., suggesting that asteroid bombardment more than 4 billion yr ago that created earth’s ocean basins had resulted in the development of life on this planet. Building on the work of other scientists, including that of GSFC’s Dr. Paul Lowman on earth’s crustal evolution, Dr. Frey used data from Apollo lunar landings and photography from spacecraft studies of the moon, Mercury, and Mars to show that during the reference period all the inner bodies suffered heavy asteroid impacts which must have affected earth as well. The impacts led to geological changes on earth that resulted in plate tectonics and the formation of seabeds. If the presence of life had eventuated from catastrophic bombardment by asteroids, the paper noted, then life elsewhere might also depend upon such events. (NASA Release 77-105)
Prof. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. reported sighting a large number of objects—possible satellites of Uranus, the seventh planet—while he was using the 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper Airborne Observatory flying above the Indian Ocean. Another U.S. astronomer, Dr. Robert Millis of the Lowell Observatory in Ariz., reported similar observations while viewing Uranus from Perth in Australia. Each of the scientists claimed that the planet might have as many as 100 satellites ranging from 18 to 24mi in diameter. If confirmed, the new observations would give Uranus more satellites than any other planet in the solar system. (NYT, Mar 3/77, 77; C Trib, Mar 12/77)
NASA announced that ARC had awarded two San Francisco Bay area firms a $2.3 million contract for managing construction of a major modification to the largest wind tunnel facility in the western world. Turner Construction Co. and Lord Electric Co. would modify the ARC 40-by 80-ft wind tunnel built in 1944 by adding a new 80- by 120-ft (24 by 36m) test section and increasing drive power from 36 OOOhp to 135 OOOhp. The modifications should enable ARC to handle new types of aircraft, especially large helicopters and vertical- and short-takeoff and landing aircraft. (NASA Release 77-191)
Nature magazine reported further on the recognition of ring systems around the planet Uranus announced earlier by Dr. James L. Elliot of Cornell Univ. [see March 31]. The occultation (shutting off from view) by Uranus of a bright object (star SAO 158687 in Libra) had been predicted by the Royal Observatory at Greenwich as visible only from an area on earth extending from equatorial Africa across the Indian Ocean to western Australia. No useful observations of a Uranian occultation had been made before; astronomers considered such observations important because they could furnish data on the size of the planet or stellar object, on limb darkening, and on extent and composition of any atmosphere, as well as an accurate measurement of the object’s position, valuable in calculations of celestial mechanics. Heavy rain at Johannesburg prevented observations there on March 10, but astronomers on the Kuiper observatory plane flying over the southern Indian Ocean east of Kerguelen Is. were able to see an occultation lasting about 25min with secondary occultations lasting 8 to 9min before and after. Observers at Madras and Perth also viewed the event and decided independently that the extended occultation resulted from satellites forming a belt about 48 000km from the center of Uranus. The belt was apparently circular, lying in the plane of the planet’s equator, and about 12 000km wide. Nature reported that Dr. Elliot was continuing detailed study of the event, and that direct observation of the belts might be possible with a sufficiently large telescope. (Nature, April 14/77, 587)
Timothy Leary, once described by the media as “high priest of LSD,” visited Washington, D.C., on behalf of his latest enthusiasm, space migration, according to a story in the Washington Star. Leary, at his first press conference in 7yr, described “a raging epidemic of hope in this country” and said it was time to find a new frontier. He wanted his support taken seriously, and cited the studies by Gerard K. O’Neill of Princeton Univ. and those of the L-5 Society. “Soon people will find it cheaper to build a new world than to fight over an old one,” he added. When would space migration become a reality? “Ten years after people stop laughing about it,” Leary replied. (W Star, Jan 25/77, D-3)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
Dryden Flight Research Center announced it had scheduled four ferry-test flights of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise mated to its Boeing 747 carrier for Nov. 14, 15, 17, and 18 to prepare for the orbiter’s cross-country ferry flight in March 1978 from DFRC to MSFC for ground-vibration testing. Later flights would ferry orbiters from Rockwell Intl.’s facility in Calif, to Kennedy Space Center in Fla. for launch. Besides determining the best speeds and altitudes for the ferry flights, the test would measure holding-pattern and engine-out performance in cruise and landing/takeoff. The 747 crew would be Fitzhugh Fulton, commander, and Tom McMurtry, pilot, with Victor Horton and Skip Guidry as flight engineers; the 4 had flown the 747 in recent approach and landing tests. (DFRC Release 37-77; NASA Release 77-233; JSC Release 77-74) •
NASA announced plans to launch NATO III-B, second in a new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase III series, funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space Flight Center that would put NATO III-B in orbit had successfully launched three previous NATO satellites: Nato II-A and -B, in March 1970 and Feb. 1971, and Nato III-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)
The Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., counted its 7 millionth visitor, Mrs. Elizabeth Weber of Queens, N.Y. However, she and many other visitors exemplified the fading public interest in space: none of them recognized the date as the 16th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s historic feat, man’s first spaceflight. A NY Times article contrasted the festive feeling at the museum (the capital’s largest tourist draw) and the almost melancholy mood at NASA Hq across the street. NASA employees had cause for despair, said the article, with a space program rarely in the public eye and funding that had delayed long planned projects. Even President Carter, during a cursory 30-minute inspection of the museum, omitted mention of the space program or the space agency. (NYTApr 13/77, D-10)
The Washington Star reported that U.S. and European scientists were planning a two-spacecraft mission to an unexplored area of space to get a first look at the sun and its solar system from a new perspective. No spacecraft had as yet ventured off the so-called plane of the ecliptic (the solar equatorial plane) by more than 15° latitude relative to the sun. Using two spacecraft, one below the plane of the ecliptic and the other in the usual latitude relative to the sun, scientists could learn more about solar physics and conditions responsible for variations in earth’s climate. The mission would use two unmanned spacecraft weighing 6S0 to 8001b each, launched by a Space Shuttle. The report said NASA would request funds for the “solar polar” (or out-of-ecliptic, OOE) project in its next budget, giving engineers time to meet a favorable 10-day launch period in Feb. 1983. ESA, whose members included most western European nations, was said to be ready to share in the mission; it would build one of the vehicles, the U.S. the other. JPL would manage NASA’s part of the mission, estimated to cost about $141 million. (WStar; Oct 31/77, A-6) During October: The USAF reported that the first two-seater F-16 airplane, a fighter-trainer version known as F-16B, had made a successful first flight at General Dynamics Corp.’s Ft. Worth, Tex. facility. The test flights were to evaluate the handling of this version, weighing 6001b less than the standard single-seat F-16 when fueled, and to use rear-cockpit controls to put it through takeoff and landing, formation flying, and roll and pitch. The one- and two-seat versions of the F-16 were almost identical in size and appearance, each 48ft long with a 300ft2 wing area, but the F-16B had a larger canopy to cover the second pilot and would carry 1100 fewer gallons of fuel. Development of the new plane, first fighter designed to withstand forces up to 9g, was managed by the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 77, 1) •
The Dept, of Defense announced plans to begin full-scale development of cruise missiles made by Boeing Co. and General Dynamics Corp., with the first to be available in 1979, the Wall St. Journal reported. Cruise missiles (small low-flying pilotless jet planes designed to evade enemy radar) could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads and could be launched from ships, planes, or trucks, or submerged submarines. Boeing and General Dynamics had each developed a cruise missile: Boeing the Air Force version, and General Dynamics, the Navy version called the Tomahawk, designed for launch from submarines and surface vessels. Although the two versions used different airframes, they used the same engines, guidance systems, and warheads. After reviewing both versions, the DOD decided to continue both, and established a joint program office under the direction of Navy Capt. Walter Locke, whose orders required maximum cooperation with the Air Force. In addition to its “short” cruise missile, 1083cm long with a range of 1127km, the Air Force supported development of a stretch version 1470cm long with a range of 2254km for more distant targets. The DOD also expressed support for advanced technology to refine missile accuracy and for a supersonic version to exceed present speed of 885kph. It had asked Congress for $402.7 million for the programs in FY 1978, up from $198.7 million in 1977. (WSJ, Jan 19/77, 38)
Industrial exploration had made sweeping changes in today’s society, ranging from thumbnail-size computers to Space Shuttles operating with the regularity of commercial airlines, Rockwell Inti, chairman W.F. Rockwell, Jr., told the annual Explorers Club dinner in New York City. A microprocessor small enough to balance on the end of a thumb could compute 10 times faster than a 30-ton device introduced in 1946, and would cost $15 to $20, compared to the millions of dollars that the old computer cost, he said. Forecasting the potential of the Shuttle, being developed largely by Rockwell for NASA, he reviewed possible payloads including solar power satellites and navsats; he ended by comparing explorers setting out in search of new discoveries and new knowledge with the explorers in industry searching to improve products and service. (Rockwell Release R-18)
The Chicago Tribune reported that A. Thomas Young, NASA’s head of lunar and planetary programs, had presented to the Washington, D.C. meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union a planetary-exploration plan to launch two roving vehicles to Mars in 1984, a possible robot-vehicle landing on Mercury, and flights to Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Halley’s Comet, and four asteroids. The plan also included launch of automated ships to Mars in 1990 to collect samples of rock and soil and return them to earth. (C Trib, June 7/77, 4-16)
LaRC announced that the Charles W. Swain family of Tallahassee, Fla., would move into the Tech House Aug. 15 for a yr-long demonstration of NASA designed systems in and around the house to save energy and water and make the home more secure. They would pay a prorated rent and all utilities during their stay. Dr. Swain, a humanities professor at Fla. State Univ., would work with LaRC personnel in career counseling and employee relations. Mrs. Swain, a registered nurse, hoped to continue in her profession while living at LaRC. Their two children would attend local high schools. LaRC had chosen the Swains from a list provided by the American Council on Education, a nonprofit organization sponsoring university professors for lyr assignments to the federal government. (LaRC Release 77-37)
ERDA announced that the world’s largest aircraft would airlift one of the heaviest loads ever transported by air June 19 when a USAF C-5 Galaxy carried a U.S.-built 40-ton magnet from Chicago to Moscow for tests of an experimental magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) process for generating electricity. The USSR’s U-25 facility near Moscow, operated by the Soviet Institute for High Temperatures, was the largest MHD test facility in the world. Dr. William D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD program, said that using the Soviet plant would speed commercialization of the process in the U.S. at reduced cost to the American public. The magnet would aid in tests conducted jointly for about 2yr under the U.S.-USSR Energy Agreement of 1974. (ERDA Release 77-100)
NASA announced that a disaster simulation in Texas using the communications technology satellite—world’s most powerful comsat—had turned into an actual emergency operation providing communications between Red Cross headquarters in Washington, D.C., and flood-stricken Johnstown, Pa. ComSatCorp and the Red Cross had set up an experiment to demonstrate emergency use of satellites in natural disasters; the Texas results had led Red Cross officials to ask for assistance in the actual emergency at Johnstown. The Cts equipment transferred from Houston to Johnston July 23 and set up at a vocational high school near the Univ. of Pittsburgh was a portable station with a 4ft antenna to send and receive signals to and from the synchronous satellite orbiting over the equator just west of South America. During the emergency it had sent messages through the Cts to ComSat offices in Clarksburg, Md., connected by land line to Washington. The disaster-related communications included requests for medical and physician services, supplies and administrative services, and transmission of situation maps. Johnstown’s residents also could use the Cts link to communicate with relatives around the U.S. when the Red Cross was not using the lines. The emergency had preempted Canadian and U.S. experiments scheduled for July 25-26. (NASA Release 77-157)
ESA announced that NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, had signed at a meeting in ESA headquarters a memorandum of understanding on cooperation in NASA’s space telescope program. The European contribution would include a faint-object camera for high-resolution imagery in the ultraviolet, visible, and near-infrared portions of the spectrum, with associated photon-counting detector, to be left in orbit as long as considered scientifically useful; the solar array to power the scope; and support of a scientific operations center to be established by NASA for managing the observatory. ESA would get 15% of the observing time for the duration of the program in return for its participation, and would share data with astronomers in its member states and the international community. NASA would develop and integrate the telescope, launch it into orbit on the Shuttle, supply tracking and data-acquisition services, and maintain the telescope throughout the program. MSFC would manage the space telescope, Goddard Space Flight Center would manage instrument development and observatory operation, and the European Space Technology Center (ESTEC) would manage the ESA effort. (ESA Release Oct 7/77; NASA Release 77-212)
The U.S Air Force Systems Command announced plans to experiment with dispersal of cloudcover by sowing minute amounts of silver iodide into supercooled clouds over a sparsely populated area of Michigan, using two small civilian aircraft, one to dispense the chemical and the second to photograph effects of the treatment. North American Weather Consultants of Goleta, Calif., contractor to the AF Geophysics Laboratory, would conduct the experiments to disperse cloudcover that could interfere with military or civilian flight operations. The experiments, aimed at clearing specific areas of cloud during landings, would occur only on days that were overcast with little or no precipitation, said Bruce A. Kunkel, project scientist for AFGL. Clouds sought for the tests would be supercooled (consisting of water drops remaining liquid though below freezing temperature) so that they would form ice crystals when treated with the chemical and would fall from the sky, clearing up to a few square miles for up to an hour. Some snow might reach the ground, but most should evaporate after falling from the cloud, and the amount of silver iodide needed would be extremely small notwithstanding its visually dramatic effect. (OIP Release 004.77)
KSC reported that the number of visitors in the first 3mo of 1977 was 283 734; the number in March, 114 845, highest so far this yr was 2.8% below the March 1976 level. The 3mo total was 9.3% less than the first 3mo of 1976. The visitor center had displays, exhibits, space science lectures, and space movies, plus a new hall of history opened in 1976. Visitors could see the vehicle assembly building for Space Shuttle preparations and the Apollo Saturn on display nearby, drive around Pad A where Shuttle operations were in progress, and visit the Cape Canaveral Air Force station. (KSC Release 87-77)
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had loaned its hyperbaric chamber to the Univ. of Fla. College of Medicine at Gainesville, for use in research. KSC had installed a hyperbaric (or recompression) chamber in its operations and checkout building to treat astronauts affected by decompression sickness (the “bends”) during manned altitude-chamber tests of the Apollo spacecraft. Conditions such as the bends, embolisms, carbon monoxide poisoning, or gas gangrene might require administration of hyperbaric oxygen (under increased pressure in a sealed chamber) for periods up to 24hr. The end of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975 had ended NASA’s immediate need for the altitude or the hyperbaric chambers, but KSC had kept them for possible use in Space Shuttle training. (KSC Release 101-77)
JSC reported the first 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants were due for screening. Center Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said that the quality of the applicants would make it “difficult to narrow the field . . . paring that number will be a real challenge.” (NASA Release 77-161) * NASA announced it had appointed Isaac T. Gillam, IV, deputy director of DFRC, succeeding Gerald D. Griffin, recently appointed deputy director of Kennedy Space Center in Fla. Gillam, who had directed Shuttle operations at Dryden in the current approach and landing tests, had joined NASA in 1963 after serving in the USAF as a pilot, missile launch Jcrew commander, and ROTC instructor. After receiving a B.A. from Howard Univ., he had done graduate work at Tenn. State Univ. and had been assistant professor of air science there. NASA had appointed him assistant manager of the Delta program in 1966 and program manager in 1968. In 1973, he became program manager for small launch vehicles, and had gone to DFRC in 1976. He had received NASA’s distinguished service medal for his work with launch vehicles. (DFRC Release 27-77; NASA Release 77-164; NASA anno Aug 4/77)
Johnson Space Center announced that a sixth group of 20 Shuttle astronaut applicants would report this week for individual interviews and physical examinations. This group, all mission specialist applicants, included one woman. (JSC Release 77-56; NASA Release 77-215) •
KSC announced it had awarded to Planning Research Corporation, McLean, Va., a $25 720 364 contract extension for engineering support services to the Space Shuttle program and other activities where the design-engineering directorate at KSC had design responsibilities. The 12mo cost-plus-award-fee extension through May 1978 had brought the value of the contract originally awarded in May 1974 to $72 616 061. The company employed more than 1100 workers at KSC and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Fla., and at DFRC and KSC’s Western Launch Operations Division in Calif. (KSC Release 111-77)
LaRC announced it would dedicate on July 19 the site of a new wind tunnel, the National Transonic Facility, scheduled for completion in 1980 at a cost of about $85 million. The only facility of its kind in the world, the tunnel would use cryogenic nitrogen to test aircraft models in a realistic flight environment; cooling the medium to - 300°F would permit accurate simulation of Mach numbers and atmospheric-density ratios. Although NASA and DOD would be principal users of the tunnel, the schedule would be shared by other federal agencies, private industry, and the scientific community. Speakers at the dedication would be Dr. John J. Martin, assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development; Donald F. Hearth, LaRC director; and Oran W. Nicks, LaRC deputy director. A display of aircraft developed from LaRC transonic research would include a B-747 freighter; a wide-bodied DC-10 passenger plane; USAF fighters F-14, F-15, and F-106; a Learjet business aircraft; LaRC’s B-737 flying laboratory; a T-38 jet trainer; and a UH-1H helicopter. (NASA Release 77-144; LaRC Release 77-29)
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
NASA announced that on Nov. 29 it would present first results of the scientific experiments on high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1 launched Aug. 12. Dr. Noel Hinners, associate administrator for space science; Dr. Frank B. McDonald of Goddard Space Flight Center, project scientist; and principal investigators for the experiments would report findings on pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Scientific instruments on the observatory offered highly sensitive detection and resolution of x-rays emitted by stellar sources throughout the universe; the spacecraft, rotating end over end, could survey the entire sky within 6mo. (NASA Release 77-242)
MSFC employees Alfred G. Orillion, Advanced Projects Office, and James E. Downey, III, deputy director for program develapment, received special awards for the Alabama section of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the AIAA honors banquet in Washington, D.C., Jan 13. The awards were for a 1975 space industrialization symposium at MSFC of which Downey was general chairman; Orillion was chairman of AIAA’s Alabama section. (MSFC Release 77-9)
Reporting on the end of the Inti. Aeronautical Federation’s 28th conference in Prague, FBIS quoted “American scientist O’Neal” [Gerard K, O’Neill] on whether “his project of big settlements on near-terrestrial orbits was not too remote from reality”: “Mankind will never give up the idea of settlements in space . . . The question is only how fast will space industry and rocket technology reach the necessary level to enable people of the earth to start building the first cities in orbit.” The congress discussed for the first time the efficiency of space research, concluding that spacecraft created in different countries would inevitably have a uniform appearance, depending on their use. The idea of merging engineering ideas was “a dominant one.” Marcel Barrere of France was reelected president of the organization. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 1/77)
NASA announced it would share with the city of Hampton, Va., the cost of building a refuse-burning, steam-producing plant to serve the city and four federal agencies in the Tidewater area. First of this type of community facility to be jointly sponsored by a city government and federal agencies, the project was the result of studies at Langley Research Center on better use of potential energy sources and improvement of the environment. Cost of the plant, about $8 million, would be shared by Langley Air Force Base, the City of Hampton, and LaRC, and should be amortized within 20yr. Beginning in 1979, it would consume about 70% of the city’s waste and all refuse from LaRC, the air force base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the VA hospital in Hampton, and would produce about 306 million lb of steam per yr. Built on NASA-owned land, the plant would remain the property of NASA though leased to and operated by the city for at least 20yr. Ash produced through special incineration at up to 1800°F would be sterile, nonorganic, and nonpolluting, amounting to a seventh of the refuse biirned. (NASA Release 77-8)
NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Anthony Calio as Hq associate administrator for applications as of Oct. 1. Dr. Calio had served as deputy associate administrator for space science since Nov. 1975. He had begun working for NASA in 1963 at the electronics research center in Cambridge, Mass., then at NASA Hq. In 1968 he transferred to JSC and in 1969 became its director for science and applications. He had previously been a nuclear physicist with Westinghouse and the American Machine and Foundry Co., and was in the U.S. Army Chemical Corps from 1954 to 1956. Among his honors were NASA medals for exceptional service, 1969; exceptional scientific achievement, 1971; distinguished service, 1973. (NASA anno Sept 20/77; NASA Release 77-200)
MSFC announced that the state of Georgia would be first in the nation to have its own Landsat digital-analysis system, under a contract between the Georgia Institute of Technology and MSFC enabling state planners to assess land-resources usage and to monitor changes, and to set up a standard data base for a statewide land-use program. The two Landsat satellites now in near-polar orbit would provide images and recorded magnetic tape transmitted to a ground receiving station. A data-retrieval system developed by Johnson Space Center would help in establishing a state organization structure to distribute the data to regional, county, and local users. A local official could find out how a tract as small as 10 acres was being used, merely by dialing a central computer at Ga. Tech and getting a printout by telephone into a local terminal. (MSFC Release 77-8)
DFRC reported it had made further study of the effect of insects sticking to the leading edges of aircraft wings [see A&A76, Nov. 23] by flying a small jet transport from four airports (Los Angeles, San Francisco, Sacramento, and San Diego) to study actual environments from which long-range commercial flights would be made. The program, conducted jointly with Langley Research Center, was part of NASA’s aircraft energy-efficiency program to achieve 20 to 40% fuel savings in a 1985 long-range transport aircraft. Such a craft would probably use laminar flow-control technology, depending on smooth airflow over the leading edge of the wings; insects adhering to the wings had made the airflow turbulent, canceling the fuel savings achieved with the laminar flow. NASA had equipped the wings of the test aircraft with a modified leading edge consisting of 5 panels of different materials, to demonstrate changes in the airflow caused by insects adhering to the different surfaces; it had also added a water cleaning system to study its ability to either wash off or keep off the insects encountered during takeoff and climb. It had then flown the plane over alfalfa fields and sewage ponds, and at Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, to encounter as many different quantities, kinds, and sizes of bugs as possible. Bob Baron, DFRC project manager, said results indicated a need for some sort of washing system to reduce effects of insect impacts on the laminar-flow surface. (DFRC Release 40-77)
The Dept, of Commerce reported that a Boeing 747 in regular passenger service for Pan American World Airways had been doing double duty as a flying laboratory for 2 government agencies, NASA and NOAA, carrying an electronic package collecting data from the plane’s instruments to show that ordinary planes could get weather information in flight and relay it to the ground. This yr, five more packages would be put on planes of international carriers. The prototype package, weighing about 18kg and the size of an electric typewriter, used about 200w power and transmitted at 401.7MHz. LeRC had built the package under technical management from GSFC to tap into the inertial-navigation systems of widebodied jets like the 747 and DC-10 series, recording data on air temperature, wind direction and speed, and aircraft location and altitude. The package converted the data to a format transmitted hourly to the ground through NOAA’s Goes 1. The idea was to enable planes flying over areas where such information was sparse or unobtainable to collect and transmit the data as a help to aircraft operations as well as to weather prediction and analysis. NOAA had begun negotiations with foreign weather services and international airlines to put the packages on their aircraft, especially those flying over equatorial regions. (NOAA Release 77-91)
JSC reported it had signed a contract valued at $200K with American Airline’s maintenance and engineering center at Tulsa, Okla., for maintenance and operations support of NASA’s Boeing 747 Shuttle-carrier aircraft NASA 905. Work would be done primarily at DFRC, site of the first atmospheric and glide-flight landing tests of the Shuttle or-biter. Eventual value of the contract could reach $806K. (JSC Release 77-13) During February: Japan, one of five countries that previously had agreed to be major investors in a $200 million international maritime satellite organization (Inmarsat), had declined to participate in a preparatory committee set up to act until formal documents were ratified, AvWk reported. Forty countries would be Inmarsat members; besides Japan, the other four major shareholders were to be the U.S., the U.K., the USSR, and Norway. The preparatory committee had met in London in Jan. under sponsorship of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, an arm of the UN, and had set up three panels: one on satellite-system parameters; one on economic, marketing, and financial matters; and one on organization procedures, all of which were to meet in the interval before the next committee meeting set for Oct. 1977. Japan gave no reason for withdrawing. {AvWk, Feb 7/77, 23) March l: NASA announced the first use of a link between the communications technology satellite Cts and the portable earth terminal (PET): a teleconference between Housing and Urban Development Secretary Patricia Roberts Harris in Washington, D.C., and a group of California mayors at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, Calif. Mrs. Harris conferred with the mayors from the PET bus parked outside the HUD building. Cts, a joint effort between the Canadian Dept, of Communications and NASA, had been built and integrated by Canada; NASA provided the 200w transmitter and developed the PET at Lewis Research Center. The PET bus, based at LeRC, would travel around the U.S. demonstrating how to save money through teleconferencing. (NASA Release 77-40)
Recent photographs of the inner Martian satellite Phobos, obtained by the Viking 1 orbiter in Feb., had revealed “the nature of that satellite in unprecedented detail,” said Scientific American. Earlier pictures by Mariner 9 or the Viking 2 orbiter were at a distance of 880km; the new pictures were taken at a distance of 660km to as little as 100km, with resolution that permitted distinguishing objects smaller than 10m across. The surface of Phobos was known to be pitted with craters from the impact of meteorites; the new images showed chains of irregular craters like those seen on the surface of the moon, although Phobos’s crater chains paralleled the plane of its orbit around Mars. Pictures from Viking 2 had shown grooves on Phobos concentrated near its northern pole; the new pictures defined the grooves as crater chains possibly caused by objects hundreds of meters across. Further study of the images should reveal more about the nature of Phobos, the magazine said. (SciAm, Apr 77, 57)
Langley Research Center announced it would dedicate Oct. 11 the site of Project RECOUP (refuse-consuming utility plant), first jointly funded federal and municipal project of its kind, to generate steam from burning refuse [see Jan. 19]. Construction would begin in 1978 and be completed in 1980; NASA would share the $8.4 million cost of the plant with the US Air Force and the city of Hampton, Va. The plant would burn more than 80% of the refuse from Hampton, LaRC, the Langley Air Force Base, the Army’s Fort Monroe, and the Veterans Administration hospital; in a 24-hr operation, it would burn about 200 tons a day, doubling the capacity of Hampton’s landfill. LaRC would use the steam generated by the plant to augment its present heating system, saving about 2.4 million gallons of oil per yr. (LaRC Release 77-46)
The U.S. Air Force launched a pair of “jam-proof’ Triple-7 defense satellite communications system spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 10:27am on a Martin Marietta Titan 3C booster, largest developed by the USAF, into an elliptical parking orbit with 35 943km (22 333mi) apogee, 285km (177mi) perigee, and 26.6° inclination. At 5:30pm the USAF confirmed that the two 13001b spacecraft had separated and had been fired by the Titan third stage into stationary orbit at about 22 300mi where they would remain for 2mo above the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific for system checkout. The two satellites (fourth attempt in 6yr to launch a Triple-7 package, but only the second successful one), with a DSCS already in orbit and another pair scheduled for launch in November, would form a global communications network that the USAF had been trying to establish for several yr. A Titan 3C malfunction in 1975 had prevented an earlier pair of spacecraft from achieving orbit. {Today, May 12/77, 12A; May 13/77, 1A; C Trib, May 14/77, 1-9; NYT, May 11/77, 19; AvWk, May 16/77, 19)
In a W. Post column, science writer Daniel S. Greenberg commented on the “leaky embargo system that is supposed to deny the Soviets western technology of strategic value.” The principal feature of a new DOD plan drawn up for State and Commerce Dept, approval before presentation next spring to the Coordinating Committee of Nations (“NATO minus Iceland, plus Japan”) on restricting strategic export to Communist bloc nations was that “it isn’t confined to hardware,” Greenberg noted. The new embargo scheme, he said, was aimdd at technological know-how; its enforcement would admittedly encompass “the entire span of advanced American technology. . . . Hardware can be stopped at the loading dock, but know-how, being intangible or confined to paper, calls for different barricades.” The truth about the embargo, Greenberg charged, was that “virtually no one is interested in it except certain military and industrial elements in the U.S. Furthermore, most of what we won’t sell is easily available from sales hungry producers elsewhere. And, finally, there is ample evidence that ... the Soviets, despite their many technological shortcomings, can home produce whatever they deem necessary.” The proposed embargo, Greenberg concluded, might retard the Soviets a bit, but the presence of DOD “gumshoes in the American scientific and technological enterprise is a stiff price to pay” for that delay. (WPost, July 12/77, A19)
NASA reported it had scheduled 25 launches in 1978, 11 on Deltas and 8 on Atlas Centaurs. It would provide support for 3 Atlas-F launches from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. KSC would launch 10 of the Deltas and all the Atlas Centaurs; one Delta would go from the Western Test Range at VAB. Paying customers would subsidize 15 launches: ESA, ComSatCorp, the U.S. Navy, Japan, NOAA, the U.K., and Canada. Whereas most of its 1977 launches were in the area of applications (communications, environmental, navigation, meteorological, earth resources, or geodetic), its 1978 mission would divide between applications and scientific missions almost equally. Scheduled in Jan. would be Intelsat IV-A F-3 for ComSatCorp, FltSatCom-A for the Navy, and its own IUE; the Intelsat IV-A F-6 would follow in Feb. March would see launch of NASA’s Landsat-C and Japan’s experimental broadcast satellite BSE. In April NASA would launch its own heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM) and Comstar-C, as well as the backup OTS for ESA. May would see 4 launches: GOES-C, and NASA’s TIROS-N, Pioneer Venus-A, and SeaSat-A. Scheduled in June would be GEOS-B for ESA and a backup satellite for Japan. In July NASA would launch from Wallops on a Scout the UK-6 to measure radiation particles, and from KSC its own ISEE-C. August would see launch of NASA’s Nimbus-G and Pioneer Venus-B. In Sept. NASA would launch NOAA-A; a navsat for the Navy; and comsat NATO-IIIC. NASA would launch its own HEAO-B in Oct. Two launches set for Nov. would be Canada’s Telesat-D and FltSatCom-B for the Navy. George F. Page, KSC’s director for expendable vehicles, noted that the center’s workload would be heavy with a schedule calling for 3 launches in Jan. and 2 each in some other months. (NASA Release 77-256; KSC Release 211-77) •
Defense had been at odds over the Mojave desert airspace, and “the military is winning,” the paper said. Twice in the past 6mo a B-l bomber had narrowly missed the multimillion-dollar tracking antennas, and over the past yr USAF planes with electronic devices had been jamming space signals to and from Goldstone. In the July 8 incident, all bombs from the USAF planes had fallen no more than half a mile from the 5 big-dish antennas serving as the sole links to satellites in orbit around the earth, the sun, and the planet Mars and to one spacecraft headed for the planet Saturn. The commandant of the Marine base at El Toro, where the planes came from, had grounded the pilots for 2wk, blaming the incident on “navigation error” and misreading of the target. However, on July 22, the B-l bomber that had previously buzzed the Goldstone station flew with its chase plane low over the heads of station technicians to check the sky for radio interference from other military craft. According to JPL officials, the B-l was “far off the course it normally flies on a test run.” Fighter planes from the Georgia air force base had interfered “no fewer than 60 times” with Goldstone radio links to its space vehicles. Last Oct. a fighter pilot had “accidentally” turned on an electronic device and disrupted contact with the Viking orbiter at Mars for more than an hour. Had the spacecraft been in a maneuver or an emergency, the mission would have been lost, the Viking scientists said. {Today, Aug 20/77, 1A) NASA later reported the gyro was working and data transmission was satisfactory. The boom, which was supposed to deploy 53min into the flight, had not extended and locked. To determine its position, controllers 12hr after launch had activated a plasma instrument on the scan platform and combined its readings relative to a known axis and the direction of the solar wind (data supplied by GSFC) to show that the boom had extended to within 2° of full deployment. JPL reported Aug. 22 that the spacecraft had been stable since 3pm EDT Aug. 20, except for a pitch and yaw disturbance at 5am Aug. 21; flight controllers were investigating. It reported Aug. 25 that the craft had undergone another disturbance like that of Aug. 21; controllers had ruled out the propulsion module’s having bumped the spacecraft. On the morning of Aug. 29, JPL calibrated the sun sensors and removed the dust cover on the infrared interferometer spectrometer. It had tried Aug. 26 to move the science boom to the locked position, but the computer system had aborted the command, showing that a problem existed. Controllers tried jettisoning the dust cover while reorienting the spacecraft, to jolt the assembly enough to open the boom hinge and lock it into position, but this was unsuccessful. JPL had decided to put Voyager 2 on hold to allow controllers to concentrate on the launch of the other Voyager Sept. 5. (Voyager mission status bulletins 3 through 6)
KSC’s Spaceport News reported on Center efforts to recover launch-vehicle and payload wreckage from the “unprecedented” back-to-back explosions of a Delta and an Atlas Centaur carrying an OTS and an Intelsat spacecraft. In “the most comprehensive and painstaking recovery in the Space Center’s history,” land, sea, and air crews searched every foot of the 50mi2 impact area. Two Patrick AFB helicopters and a private chopper worked to spot scattered wreckage from the air; the USAF crew made 19 flights in 2wk, with a total of 88hr in the air, covering a 12mi2 area and locating about 95% of the wreckage recovered. Ground crews in armored personnel carriers and sea crews in Navy and private craft then took over to retrieve and identify each piece, check it for live ordnance, and catalog its recovery location. USAF ordnance disposal personnel often had to penetrate thick, snake-infested vegetation to reach Delta and Atlas Centaur fragments. Personnel from Port Everglades and the Navy’s harbor-clearance unit using an Air Force landing craft-utility (LCU) boat retrieved the Delta’s solid-fuel motor #1 from the water as prime suspect in the OTS launch failure. The teams worked from early morning to dusk, even over weekends, and recovery work for the Delta was still under way. Hundreds of persons helped on the recovery, from directors to office clerks. Personnel from KSC had the aid of representatives from McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, Patrick AFB, and Pan American Airways operations in the extensive ground search. To reward the combined efforts, KSC would present a group achievement award to the Delta 134/Atlas Centaur 43 recovery team at an awards ceremony Nov. 22. (Spaceport News, Nov 11/77, 4)
The U.S. Air Force announced plans to launch an Honest John-Hydac rocket from Santa Rosa Is. near Pensacola, Fla., after sunset on Feb. 22 to release a high-altitude multicolor cloud visible throughout the Southeast. Release of a 48kg payload of barium 72km above the Gulf of Mexico would reveal whether or not the resulting cloud would interfere with radio signals between an airplane and a comsat, a USAF spokesman said. A similar test Dec. 1, 1976, created a colored cloud visible as far away as Tennessee. (W Post, Feb 18/77, A23)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that the USAF industry team that produced and demonstrated the B-l aircraft system was 1976 recipient of the Collier trophy, rather than the NASA Viking project with its “spectacular success” in landing spacecraft and instrumentation on Mars. The AFSCNewsreview said that the B-l team represented the Air Force, Rockwell Inti. Corp., General Electric, Boeing Co., Cutler-Hammer’s airborne instruments laboratory division, and more than 3000 other subcontractors and suppliers. The NAA noted that 50yr earlier the solo flight of Lindbergh across the Atlantic, considered a shoo-in, had failed to receive the trophy given for “the greatest achievement in aviation in America, the value of which has been demonstrated by actual use during the preceding year”; that trophy committee had unanimously awarded it to Charles L. Lawrence, designer of the Wright Whirlwind aircooled radial engine that had powered not only Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, but also a number of other notable flights in 1927. (NAA newsletter, May 77, 1; AFSC Newsreview, May 77, 4)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported that Pan American Airways would mark the 50th anniversary of its first flight Oct. 28 by attempting a world-record round-the-world, over-the-poles flight in less than 48hr with a Boeing 747 jumbo jet. Carrying an official observer to certify record performance, the 747 would leave San Francisco, fly over the North Pole to London, then to Cape Town, South Africa, over the South Pole to Auckland, New Zealand, and back to San Francisco, a distance of 26 642 statute mi. A Boeing 707 had flown the polar route in 1965 in a record 62hr 27min 35sec. In May 1976 Pan Am’s 747 had set an east-west record, a bicentennial flight covering 23,137mi over a New York-Delhi-Tokyo-New York route in 46hr 50sec. That flight had carried 98 passengers, many of whom would be aboard the polar flight in Oct. Pan Am’s first flight had taken place Oct. 28, 1927, when a Fokker F-7 trimotor lifted off a dirt runway at Key West, Fla., for an hr-long flight over 90 miles of ocean to Havana, Cuba. (NAA newsletter Sept 77)
ESA announced that the U.S. delegation to an Aerosat Council meeting in Washington, D.C., Sept. 15-16, had notified it that lack of funds would prevent the Federal Aviation Administration from proceeding with the program as contemplated. The Aerosat memorandum of understanding had provided that ESA, the government of Canada, and a U.S. company (ComSatCorp was selected in 1974) would proceed with development, production, launch, and operation of the satellite, with ESA and the FAA (leasing from the U.S. firm) using the comsat capability in equal portions. (ESA Release Sept 19/77)
Dr. James L. Elliott of Cornell Univ. announced he had found 5 rings around the planet Uranus. Observations above the Indian Ocean with a 91cm telescope on NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory had revealed the rings during Uranus’s occultation of a bright star (SAO 158687). Dr. Elliott had concluded earlier [see Mar. 3] that Uranus was surrounded by 100 moons; during the occultation, the same objects appeared as rings, not moons. Uranus and Saturn were the only two planets in the solar system found so far to have ring systems. Dr. Elliott’s original mission was to check Uranus for atmosphere and diameter; discovery of the rings was unexpected. (NYT, Mar 31/77, 63)
The Natl. Geographic Society announced that Gen. William J. Evans would be recipient for 1976 of the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy given annually since 1961 to the USAF member, military or civilian, contributing most significantly to U.S. aerospace progress. Gen. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews AFB from Sept. 1975 to Dec. 1976, had played a key role in developing defense space systems. (NGS Release Nov 7/77)
The Marshall Star reported that, before the real Shuttle orbiter arrived in Ala. next year, a homemade orbiter constructed of scrap rocket parts and steel beams would stand in for it during practice lifts into the tower where the real thing would be tested. The stand-in would first make use of the device that would remove the Enterprise from its 747 carrier, then follow the route to be taken by the real orbiter, in order to check clearances on the sides. Its major tryout would come when MSFC engineers put it into the 430ft (131m) test stand to see what effect the wind would have on installation. The simulator, basically a motor casing from a Titan solid-fuel rocket 10ft (3.04m) in diameter and 80ft (24.39m) long with added framing, collars, nose and tail structures, and wings plus aluminum sheeting for the outer skin, would closely match the Enterprise in size, shape, weight, and center of gravity. After its performance at MSFC, it would go by barge to KSC to take part in launch-procedure checkouts, and from there to Vandenberg AFB for DOD use in preparing Shuttle launch facilities. (Marshall Star, Nov 23/77, 4) •
The NY Times reported that Capt. Edgar D. Mitchell, astronaut on the Apollo 14 mission, had taken 55 special stamp covers on his flight and had just sold the first for $4200. The San Francisco firm that auctioned the stamp earlier in Oct. said the buyer was a major stamp dealer in Italy. In 1972 NASA had reprimanded the Apollo 15 astronauts for smuggling 400 first-day covers to the moon and selling 100; the 300 covers not sold were turned over to the U.S. for “safe storage in the archives.” The Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 silver medals on the 1971 moon flight, keeping 150 for “private use,” but had not been reprimanded because none of the medals had been sold. The Calif, dealer said Mitchell, now a civilian living in Fla., had brought in the covers for appraised and was advised to find the market value by selling one. NASA said it knew Mitchell had taken the covers in his “personal preference kit”; when it asked about them, he replied “It’s,none of your business,” and a few days later had announced his retirement. Official NASA comment on the sale: “Unfortunate.” (NYT, Oct 23/77, 45)
Kennedy Space Center announced award to Inti. Business Machines Corp. of a $3 203 666 contract for a system to test Shuttle cargoes for compatibility with the orbiter before loading into the payload bay. The system, called CITE (cargo integration test equipment), would simulate the orbiter’s electrical and electronic environment, stimulate the payloads, monitor their response, and record the results. Keeping up with the fast turnaround time planned for Shuttle missions required payloads ready to plug into the orbiters without extensive onboard testing. The CITE would be mobile for use either in the assembly building to check out cargoes in vertical positions or in the operations building to check out horizontal payloads. (KSC Release 156-77)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command reported it had worked out a way to suppress noise of jet-aircraft engines during maintenance operations on the ground, as a means of reducing hearing loss in maintenance personnel and noise impact on the community. Fifty-eight Air Force bases worldwide had received the suppressor units, consisting of primary and secondary air intakes and enclosures, augmenter tube, exhaust muffler, and support structure to house controls and water pumps. After backing an aircraft into the secondary enclosure, workers would enclose the air intakes at the front in the primary-intake mufflers; the secondary enclosure, covering the aft fuselage and engine exhaust, would include openings to be sealed against the fuselage and stabilizers to keep noise inside. Inside the augmenter tube, secondary cooling air would mix with the exhaust, and spray bars in the tube would spray water at 800gal per min during afterburner operation. (OIP Release 284.76)
More than half the 1497 reports received under the NASA aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) in its second quarter of operations included unsolicited recommendations for solutions of a variety of air-traffic problems, NASA announced. The reports, dealing with air operations nationwide, reflected an increase in the quality of reporting for the period ending Oct. 14, 1976, the agency said. NASA’s ASRS had been designed as an “early warning system” consisting of voluntary reports submitted by pilots, air traffic controllers, and others in the national aviation system. During the first and second quarters, an average of 100 reports came in each wk; the number of reports from pilots declined during the second quarter, with reports from controllers now constituting half rather than a third of the total. At least three-fourths of all reports concerned incidents occurring in controlled air space, and some type of flight plan had been filed in 84% of the flights described. NASA had prepared and sent to the Federal Aviation Administration a total of 58 alert bulletins during the report period. NASA personnel had initially screened all ASRS reports to remove the names of persons reporting; the reports went for analysis to the ASRS office of Battelle’s Columbus Division in Mountain View, Calif. Attempts to verify information in 340 of the reports, by telephone contact with the reporter, were successful in 270 instances. Names of persons were removed to protect the right of free comment without fear of reprisal, and 80% of the reports were reviewed within 2 working days of their receipt. (NASA Release 77-30)
NASA announced it had selected Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group for negotiation of a $33 million contract to build, test, and deliver three geostationary operational environmental satellites, GOES-D, -E, and -F, as follow-ons in the synchronous meteorological satellite (SMS) series providing near continuous high quality observation of the earth and its environment. The GOES spacecraft would carry a visible infrared spin-scan radiometer atmospheric sounder (VAS) to obtain day or night cloud cover photos of the portion of the earth viewed from geostationary orbit, with temperature readings at various levels of the atmosphere; the $33 million contract did not include the three VAS instruments being produced under contract by Santa Barbara Research Center. They would also carry a space environment monitoring system of three separate sensors to monitor solar emissions. Goddard Space Flight Center would be project manager for the GOES systems developed and procured by NASA on a reimbursable basis for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which would operate the spacecraft after launch and checkout by NASA. (NASA Release 77-170)
Kennedy Space Center reported that NASA had awarded the Univ. of Ariz. a $50K contract extension to continue studying thunderstorm electrical fields and other phenomena in the Spaceport area. Total value of the contract, awarded in April 1974 and now extended to Jan. 15, 1978, would be $116 000. Under the direction of Dr. Phillip Krider of UA’s Inst, of Atmospheric Physics, scientists working with UA graduate and undergraduate students would use KSC’s sophisticated instrumentation during summer thunderstorms to study electrical-field changes and recovery curves created by lightning under varied conditions, and would create computer programs to determine and display the location of lightning discharges and thunderstorm characteristics. Techniques resulting from the study would help make Space Shuttle vehicle-processing, launch, and landing at KSC safe and efficient even in marginal weather. The U.S. studies would supplement a program known as TRIP (thunderstorm research international program), cosponsored by the Am. Geophysical Union and the Am. Meteorological Society, under which teams of atmospheric scientists would conduct research at KSC between 1976 and 1978. (KSC Release 33-77)
NASA announced that Dr. Hans Mark, former director of Ames Research Center, had been sworn in at the Pentagon, Washington, D.C., Aug. 9, as Undersecretary of the Air Force by Defense Secretary Harold Brown. Dr. Mark, ARC director from Feb. 1969 to July 1977, had taught nuclear engineering at the Univ. of Calif, at Berkeley and engineering at Stanford Univ.; he had also taught at Boston Univ. and the Mass. Inst, of Technology. Born in Germany in 1929, he had become a U.S. citizen in 1945 and had been a consultant to the Institute for Defense Analysis (1958-1961), the USAF Scientific Advisory Board (1969-1976), and other defense-related and scientific organizations. C.A. Syvertson would be acting director of ARC until a successor was named. (ARC Release 77-38; NASA anno Aug 15/77)
NASA reported that Goddard Space Flight Center engineers had tracked a sailboat through the Bermuda Triangle to test the use of satellites for small craft search-and-rescue missions. Signals from a small transmitter on the vessel, relayed by meteorological satellite Nimbus 6 and applications technology satellite Ats 1, allowed GSFC controllers to monitor the ship’s position. The experiment also successfully tested a push-button distress-alarm system designed by retired NASA engineer James L. Baker. (NASA Release 77-72)
The W Post reported conflict between the USAF and NASA not only over use of the Mojave desert area [see Aug. 20] but also over use of radio frequencies that NASA considered the key to contacting alien intelligences, and that the Air Force wanted for a satellite global-navigation system. The USAF wanted to use a band scientists called the “waterhole,” in which hydrogen and oxygen radiate natural radio signals into space (the combination of the two into water had given the band the name), thought to be the area in which alien civilizations might conduct a dialogue in space. The USAF had selected these frequencies for navigation signals as carrying less interference. Should the USAF have a navigation-satellite network in place by 1984, its signals would drown out any other signals on those frequencies. (fV Post, Aug 29/77, Al)
A new estimate of the cost of building three more Shuttle or-biters might run as high as $600 million apiece, Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post. NASA had told Congress 3mo ago that the remaining Shuttles would cost $550 million apiece; the increase had resulted from the rising price of aluminum and titanium, the two key metals in Shuttle construction. NASA had bought the materials for two vehicles 3yr ago when prices were lower but had held off buying for the last three. Only one of the five Shuttles presently proposed had been completed, at a cost of about $500 million. A second being assembled at the Rockwell Inti, plant in Palmdale, Calif., would cost just over $500 million. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC (the Shuttle-management center), said that NASA expected “by the end of this month a new proposal from Rockwell for the last three spacecraft. ... I don’t know how much Rockwell’s going to suggest but they’re for sure going to cost more than the last estimate we got.” NASA had hoped Congress would approve starting construction of the third Shuttle before the end of 1977. This vehicle was to be sent to Vandenberg AFB in March 1982 for Pentagon use. The fate of the last two Shuttles was not certain, since GAO had told Congress to delay further action on them. NASA and the USAF had expressed concern that delay would mean not only the shutdown around the country of contractor and subcontractor work forces that would be both difficult and costly to reestablish, but also further and more rapid escalation of prices: OToole quoted a NASA estimate that a 2yr delay would boost to about $1 billion the price of each Shuttle affected. (WPost, June 11/77, A-2)
The Natl. Space Club announced that the guest speaker at its Aug. luncheon would be Col. W. J. Mellors, head of the Washington, D.C. office of the European Space Agency (ESA) since 1973. Col. Mellors had begun his career with the British army in 1942 and had become commander of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in the Middle East by 1965. After joining ESA in 1970, he worked until 1973 with ESTEC, the technology center in the Netherlands. ESA had united the programs of its predecessor organizations, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Organization for Development and Construction of Space-Vehicle Launchers (ELDO); its members nations were Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. (NSC bulletin Aug 17/77)
Kennedy Space Center announced it would hold a symposium Jan. 15 on minority opportunities at the Spaceport, to include talks on KSC procurement, future construction plans, and explanations of the KSC affirmative action plan and equal employment opportunity program. KSC had invited representatives of minority business firms and the general public to attend the symposium. (KSC Release 2-77)
Johnson Space Center announced that the ninth group of Shuttle astronaut applicants would report Nov. 7 for physicals and interviews. The group, 21 mission specialist applicants and 2 pilot applicants, included 12 civilians; 2 were women, bringing the number of female applicants interviewed to 20. Of the military applicants, 5 were Navy; 4, USAF; and 1 each from the Army and Marines. NASA had screened 183 applicants so far, 79 seeking to be pilots and 104 mission specialists. (JSC Release 77-70; NASA Release 77-232) •
NASA announced that more than 8000 persons had applied for the 30 to 40 openings as Space Shuttle astronauts after a yr-long recruiting effort. Candidates selected would report in 1978 for a 2yr training period at Johnson Space Center. Of the 8037 applicants, 6735 were for mission specialist and 1302 were for pilot; 1142 of the applicants were women. NASA would announce selections in Dec. 1977. (NASA Release 77-145; JSC Release 77-39)
Comsat General, wholly owned subsidiary of the Communications Satellite Corp., announced that former FAA administrator Dr. John L. McLucas had been elected president and a member of the board of directors. ComSatCorp. president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk said the subsidiary would benefit from Dr. McLucas’s “long and distinguished career as administrator, engineer, and scientist.” Holding a Ph.D in physics and electrical engineering from Penn. State Univ., Dr. McLucas had been president of the Mitre Corp. before serving as assistant secretary general for scientific affairs of NATO, undersecretary and secretary of the Air Force, and FAA administrator before April 1977. Programs engaged in by Comsat General included Marisat (maritime satellite communications), Comstar (domestic satcoms), and Satellite Business Systems, in which it shared with IBM and Aetna Casualty plans for a U.S. domestic satcom system. (CGC Release 77-2)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
ARC reported that the Galileo memorial scholarship program established in 1973 by the San Francisco section of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and ARC would award a $750 scholarship and other prizes. The program was open to high school seniors planning a career in physical or natural sciences, engineering, or mathematics, residents of the area or children of employees or retirees at ARC or of Galileo crewmembers. The program was a memorial to the men who died April 12, 1973, in an accident involving the Galileo I (a modified Convair operated by ARC as a flying laboratory for research in aeronautics, astronautics, astronomy, and earth observation). (ARC Astrogram, Dec 29/77, 4) During December: NASA reported that Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., civilian test pilot for DFRC since 1966 and a 23-yr veteran of the USAF, had received from the Society of Experimental Test Pilots the Iven C. Kin-cheloe award as test pilot of the year for his work in the Space Shuttle approach-and-landing test program in which he piloted the orbiter on 13 test flights beginning in Feb. and ending in mid-Nov. 1977. Fulton was also flying the “triplesonic” YF-12 aircraft for NASA; in the past, he had flown the XB-70 and was launch pilot for the X-15 and other research vehicles. This award was the second top-level honor for Fulton, who won the Harmon Trophy in 1962 as an Air Force pilot in the B-58 Hustler test program at Edwards AFB that set an international altitude record. In his work for the Air Force Fulton had received 3 Distinguished Flying Crosses, plus another DFC and 5 air medals for 55 missions in Korea and scores of humanitarian missions during the Berlin Airlift of 1948-49. (NASA Actv Dec 77, 8) •
Cosmonaut trainees from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany had arrived at Zvezdnoy Gorodok, USSR, late in Dec. to begin training for flight positions on Soyuz/Salyut missions. Flight candidates from Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania were to arrive for training at the center during 1977. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 9) February I: NASA announced it had received 1147 applications for its Space Shuttle astronaut candidate program, with openings for at least 15 pilot and 15 mission specialist candidates. Deadline for applications would be June 30, 1977. Those selected would report July 1, 1978, to Johnson Space Center at Houston for 2yr of training and evaluation; appointment as astronaut would depend on satisfactory completion of the course. NASA had mailed 11 822 applications to persons outside the agency, and another 350 to employees at NASA centers. All the applications received so far had been from civilians; the astronaut selection board would receive applications from members of the military services just before the deadline. Most of the applications were for the mission specialist category: 922 for that group, 225 for pilot, and 118 for both. Pilot astronauts would control the Shuttle during launch, orbit, and landing, and would be responsible for vehicle systems. Mission specialists would be responsible for coordinating Shuttle operations with the commander and pilot in areas of consumables usage, experiment operations, and crew activities. Crews would number up to seven: commander, pilot, mission specialist, and as many as four payload specialists (who need not be NASA employees and would be nominated by sponsors of the payload being flown). Payload specialists would operate specific payload equipment needing special skills. NASA would seek especially to recruit qualified minorities and women as Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 77-18)
MSFC announced award of a 1-yr $450 540 contract to Sperry Univac, Washington, D.C., for on-site maintenance of the center’s Univac 1108 computer system. (MSFC Release 77-69) of scientific data. Although ESA officials had hoped to delay the orbit change until after a meeting of Geos experimenters scheduled for April 26, the spacecraft’s anomalous transfer orbit, caused by a malfunction during launch Apr. 20, had endangered its solar cell power supply. (ESA Release Apr 25/77) ESA officials and Geos satellite experimenters during a meeting April 26 at the European space operations center in Darmstadt agreed on a sequence for experiment activation and boom deployment. After increasing satellite “visibility” at the Odenwald ground station near ESOC by moving the Geos 1 apogee from 90°E to 35 °E, controllers planned to extend the short radial booms completely and the long booms to 10cm. If this ploy worked, the 20m-long radial booms would extend completely Apr. 30 to help establish the satellite’s moment-of-inertia ratio and dynamic stability. (ESA Release Apr 27/77) Scientists of Geos 1 believed its new orbit, whose apogee was high as that of the intended orbit, could salvage most of its scientific objectives, Nature reported. The new path would put Geos 1 where ESA had planned to orbit its spare “qualifications” geosynchronous satellite in 1979; launch costs had made use of the spare unlikely, the report said. (.Nature, Apr 28/77, 767)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
Aviation^Week reported that a controversy within the U.S. intelligence community had kept the U.S. National Security Council and the president from learning that the USSR had developed a directed-energy weapon designed to destroy U.S. intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missile nuclear warheads. (Directed-energy weapons was a term coined to include both laser beam weapons and high energy lasers.) Events that convinced some U.S. analysts that USSR weapons were nearing prototype test stage included: —	Detection by a USAF early-warning system of large amounts of gaseous hydrogen in the upper atmosphere with traces of tritium, considered relics of charged particle beam device tests carried out since 1975 at Semipalatinsk. —	USSR ground tests of a small high energy laser destined for spacecraft launch, possibly related to manned space station activities. —Tests of a new magnetohydrodynamic generator to provide power for a charged particle beam system near the Caspian Sea, monitored by a TRW early-warning satellite stationed over the Indian Ocean. —Establishment of a new test site at Azghir, the Caspian Sea location, under direct control of the USSR national air defense force. —Confirmation by a USAF-sponsored team of U.S. physicists and engineers that the USSR had achieved success in 7 areas of high energy physics needed to develop a beam weapon. —Admission by previously unconvinced U.S. physicists that the USSR could have developed the technology for a charged particle beam device. —Hints by a visiting Soviet physicist last summer that the USSR was far ahead of the U.S. in controlling fusion by compression of small pellets of thermal nuclear fuel, and thus in potential weapons based on fusion technology. The information given by Leonid I. Rudakov during his visit to the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory had later been classified top secret by DOD and ERDA. Maj. Gen. George J. Keegan (USAF, Ret.), former head of Air Force intelligence, had in 1975 reported to CIA head William Colby on Soviet beam technology; the CIA’s nuclear intelligence panel had written a report, no copy of which was ever given to USAF intelligence. AxWk said Colby just before a meeting on strategic arms limitation had notified then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger of a Soviet facility “related to nuclear functions that were unknown”; except for that, no mention of the beam weapon potential had ever been made to the president, the secretary of state, or the National Security Council. AxWk also charged that influential U.S. physicists had sought to discredit Gen. Keegan’s report, their general attitude being that “if the U.S. could not successfully produce the technology to have a beam weapon, the Russians certainly could not.” (AxWk, May 2/77, 16) The next issue of AxWk quoted President Jimmy Carter’s reply to a query from the Washington Post's Dave Broder on the report of a Soviet breakthrough in high energy weapons: "... Is there any such development and does it threaten the U.S. strategic deterrence?” Carter replied: “We have no evidence, Dave, that the Soviets have achieved any major breakthrough in the kind of weapon described ... the assessment of the report in (he aviation magazine has been exaggerated.” (AxWk, May 9/77, 13)
At least 7 defense contractors had performed studies on space defense systems, Aerospace Daily reported, predicting that spending on this activity would double in the upcoming federal budget (from $61 million to $126 million in FY 1978, and double again to $265 million in FY 1979). In its concern for detection of hostile satellites, especially in the infrared frequencies, the Dept, of Defense had officially confirmed four USSR intercept launches last yr. DOD considered comsats and early-warning satellites in synchronous orbits most vulnerable; the USAF was also concerned about its reconnaissance satellites, especially the Big Bird, only one of which is normally in orbit at a time. Contractors working on the problem were Science Applications, Inc., doing a $60 000 study of charge-coupled device (CCD) sensors for a terminal optical-warning system; Rockwell Inti., with a $50 000 study of potential maneuvers for the NavStar global-positioning satellite to be used for guidance aid in tactical-weapons delivery; TRW, Inc., a $50 000 study to identify maneuvering possibilities for the AfSatCom (USAF sat-com) system; and three other firms studying standby survival launch capabilities applicable to all USAF missions (Hughes, $250 000; Boeing, $250 000; and Lockheed, $100 000). The Air Force also reported that Westinghouse had made a $50 000 study of an impact sensor to detect attacks with non-nuclear pellet warheads against a spacecraft in orbit. (ASD, Feb 1/77, 158)
The USAF launched the Navy’s navigation technology satellite Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster into a 12hr circular orbit of 63° inclination at about 11 600mi altitude. First of a system to be called NavStar, the Nts 2 carried two cesium-beam time standards (atomic clocks) to produce precise time signals and 14 solar-cell experiments for its builder, the Naval Research Laboratory. The joint-service NavStar system upon completion would consist of 24 satellites (8 in each of 3 circular-orbit planes) to provide users with longitude, latitude, and altitude information around the clock in any weather. It would give a customer his location within 33ft, his speed within about 4in/sec, and the correct time. Uses of NavStar would include tactical-missile navigation and precision delivery of weapons; aid to space, air, land, and sea travel; grid mapping and geodetic surveys; aerial rendezvous and refueling; and search-and-rescue operations. The USAF had announced plans to launch five of its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978 for NavStar testing. (D/SBD, June 20/77, 279; June 27/77, 320; AvWk, Oct 11/76, 47; NRL Release 20-7-77C; AFSC Newsreview, Aug 77, 3)
NASA reported that Kenneth Souza of ARC and Dr. Eugene Benton of the Univ. of San Francisco had returned to the U.S. from Moscow Sept. 2 with the biological samples carried on the USSR biosat Cosmos 936 [see Aug. 30]. This mission was the first to subject laboratory rats to artificial gravity in the'weightlessness of space. NASA would send the samples (tissue from the rats and live fruit flies, processed ! and packed in dry ice at the mobile landing site in Siberia) with radiation records to U.S. laboratories at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Univ. of Wash., Seattle; Univ. of San Francisco; Univ. of Southern Calif.; and ARC, for analysis. (NASA Release 77-182)
MSFC reported that Mack Vinson of its personnel office had been one of only 25 people, and the only one from Alabama, selected for a 2-wk study tour in March 1978 of the Peoples Republic of China. The group, a delegation from the American Society for Public Administration, would view firsthand the ways in which PRC officials solved public policy and administrative issues. Other objectives would be to set up a 2-way interchange of administrative ideas and techniques, obtain information for use in university courses, and broaden understanding of China and its people. Vinson said the tour was a matter of personal interest and would be made at his own expense. He had been a member of ASPA since 1965 and was president of its northern Alabama section in 1975-76. {Marshall Star, Dec 21/77, 2)
NASA announced it had awarded RCA Astro-Electronics Division of Princeton, N.J., a $10.5 million fixed-price contract for a closed-circuit television system to support the Space Shuttle program. The contract, running from Jan. 1978 through June 1982, would cover design, development, production, qualification, and delivery of CCTV systems for training, certification, and flight. It would include hardware for the first orbital test vehicle design, with options for TV equipment on additional orbiters and for Canada-built remote manipulator systems. Cameras and monitors would fly in the crew compartment and the payload bay, and on the arm of the remote manipulator. JSC would provide technical direction. (NASA Release 77-259)
Rockwell Intl.’s B-l Division announced award of contracts for more than $3 million to two Phoenix, Ariz., firms—Sperry Rand Flight Systems Division and AiResearch Manufacturing Co. —for work on the new USAF B-l strategic bomber. The B-l Division was system contractor to the Air Force for the program, which received DOD production approval on Dec. 2, 1976. Sperry would receive a $1 840 500 contract to build a gyrostabilization subsystem and a vertical situation display for a B-l prototype that would enter flight testing in 1979; AiResearch would receive a $1 218 102 contract to produce a secondary power subsystem for the same prototype. The gyrostabilization subsystem would provide the B-l crew with the aircraft’s course heading and flight angle with relation to the horizon; the secondary power subsystem would provide extra power for engine start and operation of support systems on the B-l. (Rockwell Release LA-1)
U.S. interplanetary spacecraft had confirmed that the planet Jupiter was emitting high-energy electrons over a vast region of space, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times. The spring meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C. heard Dr. John A. Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago and others describe the Jupiter emissions as similar to pulsars—electromagnetic radiation appearing as pulses sweeping through space like airport beacons—but carrying the “signature” of the planet’s spin rate, picked up every lOhr as a rotation was completed. Dr. Simpson said Jupiter was not a direct analogy of pulsars but would offer common features that might provide clues to an understanding of both. Observations of the Jupiter emissions had come from Pioneer 10, which had passed Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now beyond the orbit of Saturn, and from Pioneer 11, which had first passed Jupiter in Dec. 1974 and was scheduled to approach Saturn in Sept. 1979. The volume of Jupiter’s magnetosphere had been estimated as 5 times that of the sun’s; lo, innermost moon of Jupiter, had an orbit within the magnetosphere and its radiation belt (a greatly intensified version of earth’s Van Allen belt), and the unusual brightness of lo on emerging from Jupiter’s shadow had been attributed to particle activity. The 2 Voyager spacecraft to be launched this yr toward Jupiter and Saturn would be programmed to investigate further when they arrived nearby in March and July of 1979. (NYT, June 2/77, B4)
Johnson Space Center announced it had awarded a $399 600 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to ESL, Inc., of Sunnyvale, Calif., for using Landsat data in a vegetation inventory for eastern Alaska under a NASA project conducted jointly with the Bureau of Land Management. The BLM had begun an automatic inventory system for 474 million acres under its jurisdiction; the Alaska area would represent a tundra ecology. If the joint task were successful, NASA had options for work on grassland and sagebrush ecologies. (JSC Release 77-31)
KSC announced that the Thunderstorm Research International Program (TRIP) combining efforts of atmospheric physicists and lightning researchers from the U.S., Europe, and Africa would continue in 1978 as they had for the past 2 summers. At the recent meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, KSC had invited the researchers to continue their studies of electrical properties, origins, and effects of thunderstorms. The KSC Spaceport would benefit from the studies by applying the findings in Shuttle launch and landing operations; to have many investigators in the same area studying the same storms and exchanging data would offer more chances of gaining new knowledge than might come from isolated studies. The researchers had funded their own programs, KSC providing meteorological instrumentation, use of the local National Weather Service office, and normal support services such as power, communications, and file processing. KSC, hosting the program for a third consecutive yr, had unique meteorological facilities accumulated during the Apollo and Skylab programs, plus a large number of summer thunderstorms occurring normally in the area. Although KSC would not host the group after next yr, the 1979 study site for continuations of TRIP would be the Langmuir Laboratories at Socorro, N.M., for studies of mountain storms of the southwest. (KSC Release 217-77)
Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. Ilyushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World War II to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or cause of death. Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931 devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design was the II-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level. The II-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to New York in July 1968. Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die: A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 supersonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K. Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the 11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A. Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY Times, Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
NASA announced that JSC’s space and life sciences directorate payload to be managed by the Hq Office of Applications on the second flight of Shuttle orbiter 102 (sister ship to the Enterprise used in recent approach-and-landing tests at Dryden Flight Research Center) in 1979 would investigate earth resources, environmental quality, and severe storms. The instrumentation and other hardware carried on the second flight would be reusable, to permit adjusting or modifying it for later flights at relatively low cost. The first orbital flight would mainly record performance and monitor space immediately around the orbiter for contamination; the monitor would fly on all 6 orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980. NASA had estimated the cost of payload hardware, science and technical integration, and mission support at about $10 million. The 6 orbital test launches from Kennedy Space Center would aim at preparing the Shuttle for regular operations by May 1980. (NASA Release 77-181; JSC Release 77-48)
First appraisals .of a Soviet MiG-25 aircraft flown by a Soviet pilot to Japan on Sept. 6, 1976, had been revised, according to U.S. Air Force specialists quoted by the NY Times. Further analysis had revealed that the aircfaft did not lag behind the advanced technology of U.S aircraft, as previously stated, but contained some surprises. After 7wk of study, officials reported the MiG-25’s radar to be more powerful and less vulnerable to enemy jamming than U.S. radars, although operated on vacuum-tube technology. The Soviet aircraft’s radar also lacked the “look-down” capability of U.S. aircraft, so that Soviet MiG-25’s could not detect low-flying enemy aircraft that blended in with the earth’s surface. Similarly, Air Force specialists described the MiG-25’s Tumansky jet engines as 15yrs outmoded: the flight computer—called impressive even though it too was based on vacuum-tube technology—required extra space, maintenance, and cooling mechanisms. The USSR apparently was reluctant to entrust its pilots with total control of their aircraft, which explained the “very sophisticated data base” which could not only handle fire control and sensor systems but could also return the craft to any of four predesignated landing fields. “The biggest advantage,” said one U.S. Air Force officer, “is that we allow, we train, our men to think, to adapt. This does not occur in many cases with the Soviet air force.” Designed in 1960 to combat the U.S. B-70 bomber, which never went into production, the MiG-25 had been altered later for use against the highflying Lockheed SR-71 reconnaissance plane. (NYT, Jan 26/77, A-ll)
Television programs beamed by satellite to the whole world were unwelcome to some delegates at the Vienna meeting of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, the W. Post reported. Its reprint of a London Observer article said that the major technical problem remaining for global TV transmission was overcrowded frequencies, but political problems remained. A majority of UN members including the Soviet bloc had pressed for regulation of TV transmission, claiming the right to intervene between their citizens and the broadcasts they could receive. The Soviet group objected to “propaganda” especially on its Eastern European borders where “Western TV programs, soap operas and all, are often more welcome than the home product.” Developing countries unable to afford their own TV broadcasts claimed that unrestricted foreign TV from satellites would result in “cultural imperialism.” The delegates seemed to want data from satellites scanning the earth to be generally available, but differed over what should go to whom. A U.S. satellite detecting a new Soviet oil field might have to ask permission before reporting the find; discovery by any satellite-operating nation of resources (uranium, for instance) in a developing country might start a “gold rush” by major powers wanting to “help” that country exploit those resources. The committee agreed to formulate guidelines for UN General Assembly approval, but western European and North American nations wanted to prevent anything resembling censorship. Because of a Belgrade conference in session “only a few hundred miles further east,” the Soviet bloc also was sensitive to any measures that could be interpreted as infringing human rights or the free exchange of information. (W Post, July 10/77, A-14)
NASA announced that a test model of Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to reached Jupiter, would be on display at the Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., beginning Jan. 11. The actual spacecraft, launched March 3, 1972, had reached Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now about 1.6 billion km (about a billion miles) from earth headed for the orbit of Uranus, which it should reach in Sept. 1979, by the time its sister spacecraft Pioneer 11 would reach Saturn. Headed generally toward Aldebaran in the constellation Taurus, Pioneer 10 would reach the orbit of Pluto (about 4 billion miles out) in 1987, but radio-signal reception would be doubtful beyond the orbit of Uranus. The model of the first spacecraft scheduled to leave the earth’s solar system would appear in the Milestones of Flight hall with the Wright Flyer, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Apollo 11. (NASA Release 77-1; ARC Release 77-1)
Kennedy Space Center announced it would host for the second consecutive yr a gathering of more than 85 meteorologists and atmospheric physicists for TRIP 77 (Thunderstorm Research Inti. Program 1977), including 21 principal investigators and their associates, continuing their studies of lightning and thunderstorms and the hazards resulting from them. The 1976 program had yielded much data on electrical charges within and between clouds and from clouds to earth’s surface. (KSC Release 127-77)
NASA announced that Ronald E. Evans, former command-module pilot of Apollo 17, would leave Mar. 15 to become executive vice president of Western American Energy Corp. (WAEC) and director of marketing for WES-PAC Energy, coal-producing subsidiary of WAEC. Evans, selected as an astronaut in 1966, flew on Apollo 17 in 1971 and made a lhr 6min spacewalk. He had been in charge of plans for the ascent phase of Space Shuttle orbital-test flights scheduled for 1979. (NASA Release 77-44)
NASA announced it had joined with Rockwell Inti. Corp. in granting funds for a new solid-state electronics facility at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C., dedicated Sept. 20 at ceremonies with NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch as speaker, attended by more than 200 persons from NASA, Rockwell, Cornell Univ., ERDA, Bell Laboratories, and other public and private groups. Cornell Univ., a leading school in electronics research, had helped set up the Howard project at the request of Rockwell. (NASA Release 77-201)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
