MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
Av Wk reported that engineers suspected a hot-gas system leak in the sustainer engine of the USAF/General Dynamics Atlas F launch vehicle as the cause of overtemperatures registered during recent DOD NavStar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Overtemperatures in the boat-tail area of the Atlas F (recorded in telemetry from the launches of NavStar 1 in Feb. and NavStar 2 in May) had forced postponement for at least 14days of SeaSat-A’s launch from Vandenberg. Rockwell Intl.’s Rocketdyne Div. had test-fired the engine to determine whether a leak in the sustainer engine’s hot gas system was responsible, and to pinpoint the location of the leak. They also had hot-fired sustainer-engine gas generators as part of the investigation. General Dynamics had monitored aerodynamic flow around the Atlas F during flight for hot gas from the exhaust plume impinging on the boattail. Temperatures in the boattail had climbed earlier than expected during the NavStar launches; in one launch, that area had become hot enough to melt insulation on copper wires, causing failure of some onboard instruments and intermittent operation of others. NASA had increased insulation on some wire bundles in SeaSat-A’s Atlas F; more insulation around other rocket’s components might also be added. Additional instruments installed in the launch vehicle should obtain more details on temperature and pressure conditions in the boattail area during launch, program officials noted. They had not decided whether to postpone launch of the third NavStar satellite, planned for Aug. (AvWk, June 12/78, 18)
The W Star reported that spokesmen for four government agencies using portable nuclear-power generators could not respond immediately to charges that the federal government lacked adequate control over the use or whereabouts of such devices. Charges came from members of the House Commerce Committee who said the public had not been informed of potential hazards to health, safety, and the environment posed by the devices or how they were used. Committee members had sent President Carter a letter asking for a public accounting of portable nuclear devices used by the U.S. around the world. Of major concern was a device called SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) generating from any of three radioactive and highly toxic fuels—cesium, strontium, or plutonium—heat that the device could transform into electricity for satellites or other remote power needs. Designed in the early 1960s primarily as a power source for space satellites, SNAPs had later been applied to terrestrial uses including a CIA project in which a SNAP, left on a Himalayan mountain to monitor China’s missile testing, was apparently buried by an avalanche. After a 1964 mishap when an Air Force spy satellite powered by a SNAP reentered and burned over the Indian Ocean, spreading radioactive fallout over a wide area, DOD had ordered manufacture of SNAPs in case-hardened containers that would remain intact if a satellite carrying one should fall from orbit. In 1968, a rocket launching another spy satellite from Vandenberg AFB had misfired and dropped two SNAP generators into the Pacific just off the southern Calif, coast; a 6mo search had recovered the SNAPs. (W Star, May 17/78, A-18)
Although the U.S. and USSR had signed separate treaties in 1963 and 1967 prohibiting test and deployment of nuclear weapons in space, western observers had interpreted the USSR’s Cosmos series as an antisatellite development program, Farooq Hussain reported in a Nature article. Killer satellites had exploited the poor resistance of satellite components (particularly solar cells) to intense heating and radiation damage; they could aim at satellites’ high energy-lasers or ion beams to cause arcing and discharge through instrumentation. Precision-guided missiles could destroy satellites either by colliding with them or by detonating conventional explosives close to a target. One explanation of recent Soviet tests had been China’s development of reconnaissance satellites. The only U.S. test of an antisatellite had occurred in 1963 when a modified McDonnell Douglas Thor missile had been fired against a missile booster in low earth orbit. Recent advances had indicated that killer satellites might carry high-energy continuous-wave or pulsed lasers to destroy target satellites; both sides had used ground-based lasers for several years to interrogate reconnaissance satellites. In Sept. 1977 the Air Force had awarded to Vought Corp., Dallas, Tex., a $58.7 million contract for development of a killer satellite. To avoid the cost of this arms race, the article said, both the U.S. and USSR had been willing to agree on limiting development of killer satellites. (Nature, Jan 26/78, 293)
NASA announced it had launched the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) from KSC at 12:36pm EST on Jan. 26, 1978, aboard a Delta rocket. KSC had delayed the launch for 4hr to secure an access door on the Delta heatshield. The Delta had injected IUE into a transfer orbit with 46 342km (28 784mi) apogee, 167km (104mi) perigee, and 28.7° inclination. IUE was part of a joint program by NASA, ESA, and the United Kingdom’s Science Research Council (SRC); more astronomers (200 from 17 countries) would use IUE than had used any previous satellite. The satellite’s telescope, aimed by ground controllers, would examine the ultraviolet spectrum between 1 150 and 3 200A, a region inaccessible to study from the ground. Studies would range from planets in earth’s solar system to some of the most distant objects in the universe, including quasars, pulsars, and black holes in space. Astronomers would study a wide range of stars to learn how they were born, live, and die; the material between these stars from which they are formed and are still forming; strange objects emitting radio waves or x-rays, or both; the sedate nearby galaxies and the violent distant quasars; and earth’s planetary neighbors and their satellites. IUE would complement and extend current NASA observations from the two orbiting astronomical observatories, OAO 2 and Copernicus, and ESA’s TD 1 satellite. IUE’s follow-on would be the 10-ton Space Telescope (ST) to be launched by the Shuttle in 1983. The IUE spacecraft was an octagonal cylinder approximately 1.5m tall and 1.3m between opposing faces. Overall length of 4.2m included a telescope tube at the forward end and an apogee motor extending from the rear. Solar arrays on opposite sides of the spacecraft when unfolded in space would measure 4.3m (14ft) wide. Spacecraft weight was 14791b, of which 2721b was scientific instrumentation. After stabilization, the spacecraft would continuously point one of its two solar arrays at the sun. Goddard Space Flight Center would have a constant view of IUE; ESA’s Villafranca station near Madrid, Spain, a view at least lOhr per day. GSFC had designed, integrated, and tested IUE and provided U.S. ground-support facilities; ESA had built the solar array and the Madrid ground facilities. SRC, in collaboration with Univ. College, London, had provided four television camera detectors to transform spectral displays into video signals for transmission to the ground. The joint agreement had allocated 16hr of viewing time a day to NASA, 8hr to be shared jointly by ESA and the United Kingdom. The U.S. had spent $57 million on the spacecraft, Delta rocket, and other items; ESA had spent $21 million; SRC and Univ. College had spent $9 million. (NASA Release 78-8; MOR S-868-78-01 [prelaunch] Jan 19/78, [postlaunch] Feb 2/78; NYT, Jan 27/78, A-8; ESA Release Jan 20/78; Goddard News, Jan-Feb 78, 1)
NASA reported completion of a 3yr Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment (LACIE) using space-age technology to monitor global wheat production. A symposium at Johnson Space Center attended by more than 700 conferees from 22 nations representing federal agencies, private companies, universities, and foreign governments, presented results of the experiment. The experiment had begun in 1974 to determine if data from a Landsat orbiting some 805km (500mi) above earth could be used with surface observations and weather information derived from U.S. operational environmental satellites to predict the size of the world’s wheat crop. Major foreign study areas were Canada and the Soviet Union, with preliminary examination of wheat-growing areas of Australia, People’s Republic of China, Brazil, India, and Argentina. The U.S. Great Plains area served for extensive test and evaluation of techniques, since it was the best source of statistical data with known reliability. LACIE had been designed to improve global wheat-production forecasts by making foreign-production predictions as early as possible in the crop season. The goal of the project was to develop estimates accurate within 10% of the true production at harvest time in 9yr out of 10; tests over the winter-wheat area of the Great Plains showed the goal could be met. Using LACIE techniques to monitor Soviet wheat crops harvested in 1977, the system estimated a production of 91.4 million metric tons, less than 1% below the Soviets’ official announcement of 92 million tons. However, the system’s ability to achieve such accuracy from yr to yr had yet to be determined. Findings were presented at the four-day symposium by the LACIE participants: NASA, USDA, NOAA, and cooperating universities and industry. A peer-evaluation team composed of prominent scientists, chaired by Dr. Don Paarlberg, former director of economics for USDA, reviewed the LACIE techniques and reported on them to the symposium. Dr. Paarlberg stated that “LACIE results to date clearly demonstrate that present remote-sensing capabilities can be combined with or substituted for conventional methods of information collection in order to improve foreign crop production estimates.” He concluded that "... for global wheat regions such as the USSR the LACIE technology can be made operational ... for regions where technology requires improvement, funding for further research and development should be continued.” (NASA Release 78-179)
NASA announced it had appointed two U.S. scientists to an international group of five seeking to become payload specialists on the first Spacelab mission scheduled for late 1980. One American and one European would be selected to fly on the laboratory to operate the science instruments. The investigators, working group (IWG), composed of scientists representing all investigators, had selected Dr. Michael Lampton of Berkeley, Calif., space physicist at the Univ. of Calif., and Byron Lichtenberg of Natrick, Mass., vestibular researcher at the Mass. Inst, of Technology. The three payload specialists not chosen to fly would be backup specialists and would particpate in ground-based mission activities at Johnson Space Center. In a similar screening program, ESA had selected its payload specialists from among thousands of applicants from its member states. The Spacelab 1 mission would investigate stratosphere and upper atmosphere physics, materials processing, space plasma physics, life sciences, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and space technology. Marshall Space Flight Center had been responsible for payload-specialists training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission; ESA’s Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in Europe (SPICE) had managed training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-76; JSC Roundup, June 1/78, 4; DRFC X-Press, June 1/78, 3)
NASA reported that President Jimmy Carter had named six astronauts to receive the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, first such medal ever awarded by the UlS. The six were Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; Charles Conrad, Jr.; John Glenn; Virgil Grissom (posthumous); and Alan Shepard, Jr. The President would present the medals Oct. 1 during a visit to KSC on the 20th anniversary of NASA’s establishment. Congress had authorized in 1969 the award “to any astronaut who in the performance of his duties has distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind.” Citations were as follows: —	Neil Armstrong, for actions during Gemini 8 in Mar. 1966 to overcome problems and land his spacecraft safely, and for “steady cool professionalism, repeatedly overcoming hazards” on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969, when he became the first person to walk on the moon. —Frank Borman, who had commanded Gemini 7 in Dec. 1965 and Apollo 8 in Dec. 1968, both of which “significantly hastened and facilitated achievement of the manned lunar landing objective.” On Apollo 8 he had commanded the first manned spacecraft to escape the earth’s gravity. —	Charles Conrad, Jr., who from Aug. 1965 to June 1973 had participated in four spaceflights of increasing duration, complexity, and achievement. His contribution had culminated in the first manned Skylab mission in May and June 1973, when he commanded the crew that performed “lengthy, dangerous, and strenuous activities that were necessary to repair damage inflicted on the orbital workshop during launch and thereby save the two-billion-dollar program.” —	John Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth in the third manned mission of Project Mercury in Feb. 1962, when his professional handling of extreme difficulties with the spacecraft “demonstrated the value of the human pilot in space. ... He returned to a nation and a world that seized on him as a major hero. This difficult role he handled with the same polite dignity that he brought to all his assignments.” —Virgil Grissom (posthumous), second American in space who from July 1961 to Jan. 1967 had participated in Mercury and Gemini spaceflights and had lost his life during preparation for the first Apollo flight. Experience gained from the first manned Gemini flight in March 1965, which he commanded, led to “procedures necessary for the support of subsequent long-duration and rendezvous missions.”
Emme had been founding chairman of the history committee of the Natl. Rocket Club (later the Natl. Space Club) and had served on the history committees of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the American Astronautical Society. He had been a corresponding member of the Inti. Academy of Astronautics, a fellow of the American Association for Advancement of Science, the British Interplanetary Society, and the AAS; and he was an associate fellow of AIAA. (NASA Release 78-63)
KSC announced award of a $3.5 million contract to Federal Systems Division, Honeywell Information Systems, for delivery of a central data subsystem for Shuttle launch processing, consisting of two large scale computers sharing a common memory that would store test procedures, a master-program library, pre- and post-test data analyses, and other types of data to support Shuttle checkout, countdown, and launch. KSC had procured the subsystem for Vandenberg AFB for a second Shuttle launch and processing facility. (KSC Release 3-78)
JSC officials were puzzled after a weekend surprise, the Houston Post reported: 240 000 or so people came out to see the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise. With interest in the space program supposedly flagging, the question was why so many—some of whom walked for miles to get to the Space Shuttle orbiter—showed up to see an airplane-like craft just sitting atop a large airplane. The newspaper quoted a highway patrol trooper with 9yr of traffic-patrol duty: “Never in my life have I seen people come like that.” Largest previous crowd had been the 135 000 who turned up at Ellington Air Force Base for a 2-day Blue Angels show. Charles Biggs, JSC exhibits manager, said JSC had made no effort other than the usual press releases to attract a crowd, “no bands, no celebrities, no giveaways, just the orbiter sitting there.” A tour guide commented: “What I thipk is that this is different than Apollo and going to the moon. I think the Shuttle is coming closer to the people. It is something they can relate to. They wanted to know when they can go on it.” (Houston Post, Mar 14/78,3A)
NASA had cancelled the Lockheed/JPL SeaSat ocean-research spacecraft launch planned for May 17, AvWk reported, because of a failure in its synthetic-aperture radar downlink transmitter. Lockheed had detected the failure during thermal-vacuum testing of the spacecraft. Launch would be postponed until early June; the postponement would delay launch of the RCA/Goddard Tiros-N weather satellite to early Aug., because both missions would go on General Dynamics’s Altas boosters that must use the same pad at Vandenberg AFB. Analysis of the SeaSat failure had revealed damage to a ceramic circuit board during manufacture; all other SeaSat systems functioned normally in the test. (AvWk, Apr 17/78, 27)
The Marshall Star reported delivery to Cape Canaveral of a light ion-mass spectrometer (LIMS) developed by MSFC scientists, for integration with other instruments on the USAF’s SCATHA (satellite charging at high altitudes) scheduled for launch on a Delta Jan. 25, 1979. SCATHA instruments would collect data on electrically charged particles in the upper ionosphere and magnetosphere to help solve the problem of static-electricity buildup on satellite surfaces at geosynchronous altitude. The LIMS would measure density, temperature, and speed of low-energy ions from all directions, as sensors separated hydrogen, helium, and oxygen ions and recorded their speed and numbers. Martin Marietta Co., integration contractor, had delivered the instrument to MSFC 3wk previously, and MSFC personnel had installed flight sensors and completed final calibration before delivering it to the Air Force at the Cape. Designed for a nominal lyr lifetime, SCATHA might return data for possibly 3yr or more. (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 2)
NASA announced 3 key personnel changes during April: Dr. William Schneider would become associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking networks, facilities, and systems for communications and data acquisition and processing for all NASA spaceflight programs. Dr. Schneider had joined NASA and the Gemini program in June 1963, after 2yr as director of space systems at ITT’s Federal Laboratories. He had been mission director for 7 of the 10 manned Gemini missions, and had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his service as deputy director of the Gemini program. He had also been mission director and program deputy director for the Apollo mission, and had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his contribution to the success of the Apollo 8 mission. At the end of Apr., Clarence Syvertson had become director of ARC, where he had served as acting director and deputy director. Syvertson had begun with the NACA at ARC in 1948 as a research scientist and assistant branch chief, then chief of the Hypersonic Wind Tunnel Branch, and later was director of the Mission Analysis Division. In 1966 he had become ARC’S director of astronautics, a position he held until appointed deputy director. Syvertson had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for leadership of the joint DOT-NASA Civil Aviation R & D Policy Study, and in 1976 had been named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. R. D. “Duff’ Ginter, assistant associate administrator for energy programs in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, had announced he would retire in June after 28 years of government service with NASA and the U.S. Navy. Ginter’s contributions to space solar power, photovoltaic developments, wind energy systems, and automotive propulsion had placed him in the forefront of advanced technology applications. Ginter had begun his career with NASA in 1960 as chief of the Scout vehicle program. He later held several positions including director of the Centaur program, for which he received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal; director of the Technology Applications Division; director of the Energy Systems Division; and assistant administrator for energy programs. (NASA anno April 3, 10, 26/78; NASA Release 78-57, 78-65, 78-52; ARC Release 78-16)
KSC’s Spaceport News noted the 20th anniversary of the launch of Vanguard 1, a satellite which, together with Explorer 1, launched 6wk earlier, “invoked a national sigh of relief.” Project Vanguard had begun in July 1955 with a White House announcement that the U.S. would launch a satellite as the U.S. contribution to the International Geophysical Year. The first attempt to launch a Vanguard, TV-3, ended when the spacecraft was destroyed Dec. 6, 1957, in an explosion on the pad. As one observer stated, “Following the explosion of TV-3, the Vanguard became a whipping boy for the hurt pride of the American people.” Then came the success of Explorer 1. But the failures of the next Vanguard and next Explorer meant tremendous pressures on the Vanguard launch team. Vanguard 1 had been launched from Cape Canaveral at 7:15am, March 17, 1958. The Vanguard team had in record time (2yr, 6mo, and 8da) developed from scratch a complete high-performance 3-stage launch vehicle, a highly accurate worldwide satellite-tracking system, and an adequate launch facility and range instrumentation. And, they had suceeded in getting the Vanguard into orbit during the International Geophysical Year. (Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 4)
Scientists in NASA’s Viking project this spring would award grants totaling $5000 to support undergraduate research projects in planetology or astronomy, NASA announced. The money had been part of the annual Newcomb Cleveland Award presented Feb. 15 by the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) to 150 Viking scientists, authors of scientific papers that had appeared in 3 special Viking issues of Science magazine. This had been the first Cleveland Award to a group. The grants, ranging from $500 to $2000, would fund a student’s (or group of students’) ideas or would supplement student work in progress, selected on the basis of originality and feasibility. (LaRC Release 78-7; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 3)
NASA announced it had appointed Frank Simokaitis (Maj. Gen., USAF, Ret.) director of its DOD affairs division, Hq Office of External Relations. During World War II, Gen. Simokaitis had been an instructor pilot and bomber pilot in the European theater. Later he had held a series of special investigative, legal, planning, administrative, and staff posts, including executive assistant to the Secretary of the Air Force from 1969 to 1973. Until his retirement, Gen. Simokaitis had been commandant of the USAF Inst, of Technology at Wright Patterson AFB and commandant of the Defense Institute of Security Assistance Management. He had received LL.B. and J.D. degrees from St. Louis Univ. and was a member of the bar of the State of Missouri, admitted to practice before the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Court of Claims. (NASA Release 78-139)
The Marshall Star reported that 6 American and 2 British scientists would compete for the 2 experimenter seats on the second flight of the Shuttle-borne Spacelab experiments in 1981. The experimenters, called payload specialists, would be employed by the payload sponsor and would differ from NASA’s pilots and mission specialists in being selected and trained for a specific mission. Four selected from the group of 8 would train to operate the mission’s 13 scientific investigations; NASA would choose 2 of the 4 to fly on the 7- to 12-day mission. The investigators working group (IWG), scientists representing 13 experiment teams for the U.S. and the United Kingdom charged by NASA with directing Spacelab scientific investigations, had selected the candidates for payload specialist. MSFC would manage the training programs for all 4 payload specialists. The Spacelab 2 finalists would be the second group of candidates for flight assignments; 10 Spacelab 1 payload-specialist finalists had been selected in Dec. 1977 to compete for 2 flight positions. Finalists for the Spacelab 2 payload-specialist positions were Loren Acton, Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; John-David Bartoe, Naval Research Laboratory; John Harvey, Kitt Peak National Observatory; Bruce Patchett, Astrophysics Research Division of Appleton Laboratory; N. Paul Patterson, Ball Brothers Research Corporation; Dianne Prinz, NRL; George Simon, Sacramento Peak Observatory; and Keith Strong, Mullard Space Science Laboratory. (Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 4)
NASA announced that its scientists had been studying radar images of the North American coast from SeaSat 1, first ocean-monitoring satellite, launched in June 1978 and now in a 805km (500mi) high polar orbit. One of the satellite’s five microwave sensors, a powerful radar system called a synthetic aperture radar (SAR), could take pictures of earth’s surface day or night under any weather conditions, A typical SAR operation had produced a continuous swath of radar images 97km (60mi) wide by 4023km (2500mi) long, extending from the Mexican west coast to Alaska. JPL, manager of the SeaSat project, had processed the images. Scientists from NASA, NOAA, the Natl. Environmental Satellite Service, the U.S. Navy, and USGS had received images of the Arctic pack, the Gulf Stream off the east coast of Fla., the Caribbean off the northern coast of South America, and a hurricane zone near the Baja Calif, peninsula. (NASA Release 78-116)
Most important uses of Landsat data would correspond to three of the world’s major problems: energy supplies, food production, and global large-scale environment monitoring. Innovations in the multispectral scanner system (MSS) would permit detection of day and night temperature differences in vegetation, bodies of water, and urban areas. The return beam vidicon (RBV) sensor improvements would increase recorded image resolution by 50%. Areas as small as half an acre would be identified and studied. Landsat-C also carried a data-collection system (DCS) that would collect data radioed directly from as many as 1000 remote ground platforms and relay them to a Landsat data-acquisition station. The DCS would collect data on volcano activity, stream flow, water and snow depth, water temperature, and sediment density. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for project management of the Landsat spacecraft, Delta launch vehicle, NASA image-processing facility, and worldwide tracking network. KSC would supervise launch. General Electric Co.’s Space Division was Landsat spacecraft prime contractor. (NASA Release 78-22)
The Congressional Record reported that President Carter had nominated former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford to be Air Force deputy chief of staff for research and development. Stafford, who had spent more than 500hr in space, was serving as commander of Edwards AFB Flight Test Center. The nomination, which carried a promotion to the rank of Lt. Gen., was subject to Senate confirmation. {CR, Feb 28/78, S 2580; NYT, Feb 26/78, (27), 14) During February: Gossamer Condor, the manpowered aircraft that won the $85 000 Kramer prize in 1977, was on display at the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., the National Aeronautic Association reported. The 96-ft wingspan had been cut into 4 pieces for shipping across country with the fuselage and stabilizer. Gossamer Condor had the largest wingspan and was the lightest of any plane in the museum, the wing-covering accounting for only 4.51b of the craft’s total 701b. An intricate web of piano wire held the structure together. Flight speed, reaching lOmph, had required the manpower equivalent of one-1 third of a horsepower. Designer Paul MacCready had substantiated his belief in the potential of ultralight craft. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 4)
INTELSAT reported that telecasts of the 1978 World Cup soccer championship won by Argentina had been the world’s biggest satellite television event. Although final figures had not been tallied, officials estimated the World Cup had surpassed the popularity of the 1976 Montreal Olympics, measured by riumbers and hours of international satellite telecasts. INTELSAT said the number of transmissions and receptions of the games had totaled 1364; with an average 2-hr transmission, total time given to transmissions and receptions worldwide was 2728hr. INTELSAT’S operations center in Washington, D.C. had estimated an additional 400 transmissions of World Cup material, other than the actual games, accounting for another 700hr. The World Cup thus ran to more than 3400hr compared to the 1976 Olympics, which had held the previous record for satellite television time, more than 2600 transmis-sion/reception hr. (INTELSAT Release 78-18-1)
Av Wk reported that U.S. Air Force ground controllers had begun to bring the second NavStar global-positioning system satellite up to full operational status, after its successful launch on an Atlas F May 13 from Vandenberg AFB. The 9551b spacecraft had gone into an 85 x 10 900nm elliptical orbit, and its solid-fuel rocket motor had fired 2days later, putting it in a circular orbit; thrusters would shift it to its final station. Modifications of the rubidium-vapor atomic clocks had delayed launch of NavStar 2 for a day; when ground tests indicated a malfunction of the NavStar frequency-divider circuit, the USAF had ordered modifications of all three clocks on NavStar 2 to prevent a similar occurrence in orbit. The USAF planned to launch a third NavStar from Vandenberg in Aug. (A v Wk, May 22/78, 24)
Wallops Flight Center announced that NASA, the Army’s Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory (ASL), the Air Force Geophysical Laboratory (AFGL), and the National Research Council (NRC) of Canada would undertake a joint scientific and technical support program to study the total solar eclipse of Feb. 26, 1979, last observable from North America in this century, and its effect on earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. Aimed at improving predictions of atmospheric responses to a variety of disturbances, the program would include sounding rockets to be launched from a NRC/ASL small rocket site at Cochinour and from the NASA/ASL large rocket site on the Chucuni River, both in Canada, that would obtain measurements necessary for a quantitative description of the middle-atmosphere response. NASA would be lead agency for the U.S.; NRC would provide construction, ground- and flight-safety systems, launch coordination, and other launch-site support. WFC had planned 7 launches during the eclipse: 3 payloads with joint experiments for the Univ. of Illinois and the Univ. of Bern, Switzerland; 1 payload with experiments for Cornell Univ. and NRL; 1 payload for the Univ. of Pittsburgh; and 2 payloads for Penn. State Univ. Site preparation had begun in June; launchers would be installed in Sept. WFC would provide mobile instrumentation systems to support launching, tracking, and data acquisition. (WFC Newsletter, Oct 1/78, 5)
The U.S. Army had devised a charged-particle beam weapon using negative hydrogen neutralized through an exchange cell as an antisatellite-kill mechanism, AvWk reported. The program had been code-named Sipapu, an American Indian word meaning sacred fire. Its application to ballistic-missile defense would be as an accelerator with small angular divergence; an antisatellite version with a range of several thousand km could destroy enemy vehicles without maneuvering to intercept. AvWk said that a smaller adaptation of the device, requiring lower power levels, could be orbited in 2 or 3yr, probably by NASA’s Space Shuttle. The Accelerator Div. at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory had worked on Sipapu for the Army, with USAF participation; the Army’s Ballistic Missile Defense Command would spend $4.3 million this year and $5 million in FY79 for charged-particle beam weapons, and $3 million in the coming yr for high-energy laser weapons. {AvWk, Mar 20/78, 13)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Boeing Services International, Inc., a 1-yr $24 071 643 extension of a ground-systems operational contract, which brought the contract total to $67 143 012. Services by Boeing would include facility and utility operations and maintenance for propellants; cranes, doors, and platforms; elevators; services and shops; nondestructive evaluation; and life support and industrial operations. (KSC Release 63-78)
U.S. and Chinese technical officials had begun discussion Nov. 28 of a plan for the People’s Republic of China to buy an American communications satellite, the Washington Post reported. The deal would constitute the most sophisticated transfer of technology yet between the two countries. A 15-member Chinese delegation led by Jen Hsinmin, director of the PRC’s Space Technology Research Institute, had met with officials from the State and Commerce Depts. and NASA at the start of a 23-day visit to the U.S. The Baltimore Sun quoted a State Dept, official as saying the U.S. would require, as a condition of purchase, that the PRC not use the satellite for military purposes, meaning that the satellite’s signals could be transmitted only within China’s borders. A White House official said it was understood the Chinese planned to use the satellite to transmit educational television. The communications system could cost as much as $50 million, including the price of sending the satellite into orbit. (WPost, Nov 29/78, A-19; B Sun, Nov 27/78, 13)
The Carter administration, calling for national commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first powered flight, had designated DOT lead agency to coordinate programs and materials, the National Aeronautic Association reported. The task force for the 75th anniversary, which had held its first meeting at DOT in Jan., would be a clearinghouse to avoid duplication, facilitate innovation, and develop ideas suitable for agencies a^d private organizations. Peter Clapper, FAA assistant administrator for public affairs, noted that the American people had taken for granted the tremendous advances in aviation over the last 75yr and that the anniversary offered an opportunity to bring these advances to public attention. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 1)
Walter Morgan, ComSatCorp seniqr staff scientist, said at a conference sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics that a network of high-capacity comsats could be in orbit by the early 1990s, increasing transmission capacity and reducing the need for large ground antennas, A v Wk reported. Called orbital antenna “farms,” the 14 0001b clusters of communications satellite antennas and sensors could replace many smaller individual satellites in geostationary orbit. Five antenna farms linked together in circular fashion would form a major cluster, which in turn could make up 1 part of a network of 5 separate clusters serving the Americas, Europe, the Pacific, Africa and the Middle East, and Asia. Such antenna farms would reduce the number of individual satellites and emit higher powered radio frequencies, permitting numerous earth stations to have smaller antennas with attendant lower costs and greater mobility. Basis of an antenna farm cluster would be a structure about 40ft long and 14ft in diameter, housing electronic modules to control mission-payload equipment. Although current technology was capable of handling orbital antenna farms, two possible technological problems would be in-orbit construction of the platforms and in-orbit servicing of the equipment. Disadvantages would include compromises on optimum orbital locations for various missions, radio-frequency interference between payloads grouped on a common platform, and the effect of a single system’s failure on other antenna farm systems. Although ComSatCorp had not taken an official position on the concept, Morgan predicted that an antenna farm could be operational in the early 1990s, and that a smaller experimental farm might be operating earlier. (AvWk, May 8/78, 56)
NOAA announced that the American Water Resources Assn, would sponsor the fifth annual William T. Pecora memorial symposium June 11-15, 1979, in Sioux Falls, S. Dak. The Dept, of Interior’s U.S. Geological Survey EROS data center would host the program, to focus attention on satellite remote sensing for observing the hydrosphere as a means of averting water shortages and of water management. Participants — scientists from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service, the U.S.G.S., NASA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, universities, and private industry—would present papers on applications of space technology to all phases of hydrology and water resources. New satellites such as Landsat 3, Nimbus 7, the heat capacity mapping mission satellite, and SeaSat 1; new or improved sensors, including the scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer and synthetic-aperture radar; improved resolution on Landsat and HCMM thermal scanners; and new thermal bands on the advanced very high-resolution radiometer had affected hydrological technology and would be the subject of papers describing these improvements and capabilities. (NOAA Release 78-119)
ComSatCorp had agreed to a 48% reduction in its rates for international satellite communications, following FAA approval of a proposed settlement of its 13-yr-old rate case, Av Wk reported. ComSatCorp management and FCC staff had agreed on settlement last Feb. As U.S. representative to the 102-nation International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), ComSatCorp had leased capacity on INTELSAT circuits to other U.S. carriers such as American Telephone & Telegraph, ITT World Communications, RCA Global Communications, and Western Union International. The FCC now had to decide how these carriers would pass rate reductions along to their customers. As part of the settlement, ComSatCorp would relinquish all claim to an escrow account totaling more than $100 million that it had set up in mid-1976 pending judicial review of an FCC Dec. 1975 decision in the' rate case. The amount in escrow had been set aside for possible refund of overcharges since mid-1976, and the FCC also had to decide how refunds would be made. Under the settlement, ComSatCorp’s overall allowed rate of return would be 11.48%, compared to 10.8% under the FCC’s 1975 decision. {AvWk, May 15/78, 22)
Rockwell Inti. Corp. announced that the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded its Los Angeles Division a $6.04 million contract to build test-aircraft structures using a revolutionary manufacturing process developed by the company and used on the Rockwell-built Space Shuttle. The AF Built-up Low-cost Advanced Titanium Structure (BLATS) program would use 2 Rockwell-developed processes (diffusion bonding and superplastic forming) in designing, fabricating, and testing a 10001b section of fuselage for use on a future advanced fighter. The 46mo contract called for construction of a complex about 8ft x 10ft x 3ft, representing the center fuselage section where the wings attach, and a portion of the aft fuselage where the engines would be mounted, and including the necessary fuel tanks. Rockwell engineers believed superplastic forming with concurrent diffusion bonding of titanium aircraft structure was the biggest breakthrough of the decade in advanced metals fabrication, because it might result (depending on the type of structure) in cost savings of from 50 to 70% and weight savings of from 30 to 50%, compared to conventional methods of building titanium parts. Besides the next generation of fighter aircraft, other applications of the process could be jet engines, spacecraft, and supersonic transports. (Rockwell Release LAD-8)
Alan Shepard, Jr., first American in space aboard a Mercury spacecraft in May 1961, which “demonstrated that his country lacked neither the courage nor the technology to compete in the new arena of space.” He also was cited for showing in Feb. 1971 “the highest qualities of leadership” as commander of Apollo 14, the third lunar landing mission. (NASA Release 78-146)
NASA announced that Dr. Lo I. Yin, a scientist at GSFC, had demonstrated his invention of a hand-held x-ray device at the annual convention of the National Medical Association in Washington, D.C. The Lixiscope (low-intensity x-ray imaging scope), a gun-shaped instrument weighing about 0.67kg (1.251b), was powered by a single penlight 2.7v battery and a small radioactive source. Although Dr. Yin had not claimed his invention could replace x-ray equipment, he saw its value in mobility—in military situations or sports, for example. Dr. Yin had done this work under NASA’s technology utilization program, aimed at identifying and transferring aerospace technology benefits to the general public. NASA had patented the Lixiscope, and the license would be available at no cost. (NASA Release 78-127) GSFC reported that 100 representatives from U.S. industry and research institutions had met there to discuss possible applications of the Lixiscope, which had originated out of a need for single-photon imaging in x-ray astronomy. The sensitivity of the Lixiscope was so great that it could significantly reduce the dose of radiation received by a patient. Pulling a trigger on the device would unshield the radioactive source and send into the object being examined a low dosage of x-rays to be absorbed by a phosphor screen that would convert them to visible light. Six companies had applied for a license to manufacture or distribute the Lix-iscope, not yet commercially available. NASA had estimated the cost of a mass-produced instrument composed entirely of existing technical components at about $5000. NASA was considering use of the device on the Space Shuttle. (Goddard News, Aug 16/78, 1)
ESA announced that its Geos2 scientific satellite, launched from Cape Canaveral July 14 on a Delta and placed in geosynchronous orbit, had reached its scheduled position of 6°E on July 26. It would move during ’ its 2-yr mission from its first operational station in geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above the equator through a zone extending from 0° to 37°E longitude. On July 26 the European Space Operations Centre at Darmstadt, West Germany, had switched on the S-band telemetry system and the magnetometer experiment, and would switch on six other experiments progressively until the satellite had become fully operational in early Aug. All data confirmed that Geos 2 was functioning correctly. The satellite, positioned on magnetic field lines linked to the earth’s auroral zones, could correlate those data with similar data acquired from associated auroral stations by ground-based balloon-borne or rocket-borne instruments. NASA had expected that the Geos 2 data, correlated with data acquired by the already launched Isee A and B and by the ISEE-C scheduled for launch in Aug. 1978, would constitute a substantial body of information on the magnetosphere to aid in understanding the effect of interplanetary-space processes on the near-earth environment. (ESA Release July 31/78) During July: The USAF announced it had launched a second prototype satellite in DOD’s NavStar global-positioning system from SAMTEC facilities aboard an Atlas F booster. The 955-lb navigational satellite working with a previously orbited NavStar satellite would be part of the program’s concept-validation phase using six satellites to test navigation capability at the Army’s Yuma, Ariz., proving grounds. When fully operational in the 1980s, the 24-satellite NavStar system would provide precise worldwide navigation coverage 24hr a day. The Air Force’s global-satellite control network, managed by SAMSO’s Air Force Satellite Control Facility at Sunnyvale, AFS, Calif., would track and operate the satellite. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 12) The USAF announced it had launched a third defense meteorological satellite from SAMTEC facilities at Vandenberg AFB on a Thor LV-2F into a near-polar sun-synchronous orbit 450mi above the earth. The 1131-lb satellite carrying visual and infrared instruments had joined two previously orbited spacecraft in providing high-priority weather forecasts to U.S. military commanders worldwide. The sensors could detect and observe developing weather patterns and could track existing weather systems over remote areas, including oceans. After 30 days of on-orbit tests, the satellite was orbiting the earth every lOlmin, scanning a 1841-mi area on each pass and photographing the entire earth over a 12-hr period. It would transmit weather imagery in real time to ground and shipborne terminals around the world for military purposes and, through NOAA, to the civilian community. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 1)	'
LaRC announced that Dr. Peter Calder, project director for the Olympus 593 engine at Rolls Royce Ltd., Bristol, England, would be guest speaker at a center colloquium July 31 on “Engine Options for Supersonic Cruise Aircraft.” Calder would discuss the Olympus 593 twin-spool turbojet engine produced by Rolls Royce in Britain and SNECMA in France, which had powered the Concorde supersonic jet transport. He would describe development of the engine and its inlet, and discuss possible modifications to improve propulsion system operating efficiency and environmental acceptability. Concorde supersonic passenger service from Paris and London to South America and the Middle East had been under way for 2.5yr and to North America for 2yr, initially to Washington, D.C., and then to New York. (LaRC Release 78-38; Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2)
NASA announced that, after nearly a mo of attempts to reestablish contact with SeaSat, its experimental oceanographic satellite, project officials had formally terminated the mission. JPL would process the data collected during the spacecraft’s 106-da lifetime; project officials expected the task to occupy more than 1.5yr. SeaSat’s synthetic-aperture radar had completed some 300 data-gathering passes, during which it collected about 60hr of data including images of sea ice, waves, coastal conditions, and various land forms. The spacecraft’s scat-terometer (measuring sea-surface wind speeds) and scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer (measuring sea-surface temperature and wind speed) had collected data for 99da. SeaSat’s altimeter and visual and infrared radiometer returned data for 70 and 52da, respectively. The instruments also completed a series of sea-surface fact-finding experiments. The SeaSat program had three objectives: to demonstrate techniques to monitor earth’s oceanographic phenomena and features from space on a global scale; to provide timely oceanographic data to scientists studying marine phenomena, and to users of the oceans as a resource (ocean shippers, fishermen, marine geologists, etc.); and to determine the key features of an operational full-time ocean-monitoring system. Analysis of SeaSat-collected data by teams of scientists, engineers, and user representatives indicated the first of the objectives would be largely met, as well as a high probability of accomplishing most of the other objectives. A failure review board [see Oct. 30] was working to determine the causes of the premature end of SeaSat operation. SeaSat had been launched June 26 from Vandenberg AFB; contact was lost Oct. 9 on its 1502nd earth orbit when a so-far-unexplained short circuit drained all power from the batteries. (NASA Release 78-178)
NASA announced award of a contract worth approximately $10.5 million to RCA for-a high-quality television camera system to transmit live color and black and white TV during manned orbital Space Shuttle flights. The closed-circuit TV camera system installed on the Space Shuttle would photograph earth-orbital missions starting in 1979 through the 1980s. Under contract to Johnson Space Flight Center, RCA would provide up to 50 cameras for approximately 500 Shuttle flights over the next decade. Each Shuttle orbiter might carry up to 6 cameras; the system would consist of several TV cameras, a video control unit, pan and tilt mechanisms, and various monitors. Cameras installed in the crew compartment, cargo bay, and on a remote manipulator arm would use a 525-line standard compatible with broadcast television. A portable TV camera used during astronaut extravehicular activity (EVA), for example, could look at areas of the orbiter not visible to the permanently mounted cameras. The portable camera equipped with its own viewfinder would allow astronauts to focus accurately on an object such as the moon or a free-flying satellite in space. The TV system should help the crew in retrieving satellites from space, removing spacecraft from the cargo bay of the Shuttle, and repairing or replacing parts of a satellite on the servicing platform mounted in the orbiter’s payload bay. (JSC Roundup, Mar 3/78, 1)	'
Kennedy Space Center announced it had awarded Planning Research Corporation (PRC), McLean, Va., a $23 626 661 contract extension for engineering support services. Under the 12-mo cost-plus-fixed-fee extension, PRC would continue through May 19, 1979, its design engineering of Space Shuttle equipment and other tasks for KSC’s design-engineering directorate, including design of new and modified ground-support equipment and minor facilities-design support for all KSC programs. The Spaceport and Cape Canaveral in Fla., Vandenberg AFB, and Dryden Flight Research Center had received support under the contract. The extension brought the total contract amount since the original award in May 1974 to $97 306 220. (KSC Release 53-78)
Disagreement about the age of the newly discovered rings around Uranus was expressed at the Nov. 9 meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Pasadena, Calif., the Pasadena Star-News reported. Discovered by astronomer Jim Elliot of Cornell Univ. in March 1977, the rings had sparked many scientific theories. Elliot originally had observed five rings; subsequent observations had disclosed four additional rings. Uranus’s rings did not spread into broad bands circling the planet like those of Saturn, but were narrow and confined to tight belts. Attracting most attention was the fifth ring, Epsilon, which was thicker and wider than the other rings, although its width varied from 20 to 100km. The inner edge of the Epsilon ring did not move around the planet at a rate different from that of the outer edge, contrary to what might have been expected. Dr. Richard Goldreich of CalTech theorized that the Epsilon ring was bound together by its own gravity, which, in turn, meant it had substantial mass (possibly as much as 25grams per cm3, extremely dense by ring standards), causing him to conclude the rings around Uranus were very old. However, Judd Boynton, director of Geophysics Labs and Research in Berkeley, who had predicted that rings would be found around Uranus, had concluded the rings were of relatively recent origin, perhaps as young as 10 million yr. (JPL newsclips, Nov 10/78)
Modification and flight of U.S. Air Force jet cargo/tanker aircraft delivered to DFRC would allow NASA to research the possibility of significant fuel savings, NASA announced. Winglets (2.7m [9ft]-long airfoil sections attached to the wingtips of a KC-135 aircraft) could improve performance in cruise flight by approximately 8%, for an annual fuel saving of 11.9 million liters (45 million gal) based on 1975 use rates for KC-135 aircraft. Other NASA studies had indicated that use of the winglet could benefit existing medium-weight civil-transport aircraft. LaRC had developed the winglet concept in its wind tunnels. Winglets, made of aluminum 0.6m (2ft) wide at the tip and 1.8m (6ft) wide at the base, could weigh almost 68kg (1501b). The Boeing Co. would install them on outer wing panels under an Air Force contract estimated at $3 million. Varying the incidence and cant angle of the winglets between flights would demonstrate their effectiveness at various positions. After installation of recorders, the KC-135 would make the first flights in a joint NASA-USAF program scheduled after winglet installation in early 1979. Comparison of data would demonstrate winglet effectiveness. (NASA Release 78-25)
The Air Force had launched at 7:45pm the previous Thursday a secret payload aboard an Atlas-Agena rocket from Cape Canaveral, Today reported. The launch, not previously announced, resembled previous unannounced launches that had carried various spy satellites. The launch followed 3 consecutive unsuccessful military missions. In Feb., an experimental Trident fleet ballistic missile had failed after launch from a land pad at the Air Force station; in Mar., DOD officials had destroyed both a Titan III-C rocket carrying 2 Triple 7 defense communications satellites and a Poseidon fleet ballistic missile. {Today, April 7/78, 1A)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO-IIIC, third and final comsat in a new series to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), on Nov. 15 from Kennedy Space Center. A U.S.—NATO agreement had specified launch on a Delta rocket, and NATO would reimburse NASA $8.9 million for the launch vehicle and services. A Delta had previously successfully launched Nato IIA and IIB in March 1970 and February 1971, respectively; Nato IIIA in April 1976; and Nato IIIB in January 1977. NATO-IIIC would provide in-orbit backup to Nato IIIA and IIIB in the NATO Integrated Communications System (NICS). At a geosynchronous orbital altitude of 35 900km (22 300mi), NATO-IIIC would orbit earth once every 24hr synchronized with earth’s 24-hr rotation period, keeping the satellite on station over the same spot above the equator. Once in its transfer orbit, the satellite would be controlled by U.S. Air Force Satellite Control Facility network on behalf of NATO., The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) served as satellite contracting agency for NICS. Ford Aeronautic and Communications Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., built NATO III. (NASA Release 78-171; MOR M-492-207-78-03 [prelaunch], Nov 15/78; Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 1)	,
NASA’s struggle to save 3 astronauts trapped in a foundering spaceship during the flight of Apollo 13 had begun the most harrowing 6 days in NASA’s history, NASA Activities reported in observing the 8th anniversary of the flight. The astronauts had heard a loud bang; when Fred Haise, Jr., scanned the instrument panel, he saw that one of the main electrical systems was deteriorating. The words Jack Swigert spoke to mission control long haunted NASA: “Houston, we’ve got a problem.” At the time of the explosion, Apollo 13 traveling at 2100mph was 205 OOOmi from earth and more than 50 OOOmi from the moon, with a dead mothership (Odyssey) that included the main propulsion engine. After moving the astronauts into the lunar module, NASA focused on getting the Apollo on course for home while conserving limited supplies of power, oxygen, and water. Not only had NASA employees worked round the clock, but also specialists and computers from North American Rockwell, the contractor; Grumman Aerospace Corp., manufacturer of the LM; TRW Systems, builder of the descent propulsion engine; and many others. NASA had decided to drop the service module and put the command module Aquarius into the correct attitude for earth-atmosphere reentry; when the latter entered earth’s gravity 216 277mi from home, it needed another course correction. The tnird descent-engine burn was successful, putting Aquarius into the proper reentry corridor. As the spacecraft drew closer to splashdown, one of the astronauts described to ground control what he was seeing: “There’s one whole side of that spacecraft missing . . . right by the high-gain antenna, the whole panel is blown out, almost from the base to the engine . . . it’s really a mess . . . man, that’s just unbelievable—looks like a lot of debris is just hanging out of the side near the S-band antenna.” The astronauts had returned safely to earth 142hr, 54min, 41sec after launch. As Jim Lovell said, “We do not realize what we have on earth until we leave it.” (NASA Actv, Apr 78, 14)
FBIS carried from Tass a Pravda report that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were concluding the program of scientific explorations in their 4.5mo orbital flight and preparing for return to earth, by reactivating the transport ship Soyuz31 and closing down Salyut 6. The mission had produced new information for biologists, medical personnel; glaciologists, volcanologists, oceanologists, and firemen. One example was the previously unknown regularity of glacial movement in Latin American mountains; the cosmonauts also had observed seven forest fires in Australia. Visiting crews had already returned major portions of experimental results to earth. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 29/78)
Payload specialist candidates had begun training at MSFC for the late-1980 first Spacelab mission, the Marshall Star reported. The first 5-day session had covered training approach and plans. Trainees were Michael Lampton of the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Byron Lichtenberg of the Mass. Inst, of Technology; Ulf Merbold of W. Germany’s Max-Planck Inst.; Claude Nicollier, a Swiss, from the European Space Technology Center; and Wubbo Ockels of Groenigen Univ. in the Netherlands. One American and one European would fly on the mission; the others would assist on the ground. Later in the training cycle, NASA would select those to fly. (Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 2)
Spaceport News reported a spacecraft problem had delayed launch of FltSatCom-A, first of a new highly versatile 3-satellite military communications system in which each satellite in geosynchronous orbit would provide 23 operating channels. A FltSatCom (fleet satellite communications) system would provide reliable secure communications between naval units anywhere except in extreme polar regions, and would become part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AFSat-Com) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) and other USAF units. DOD had reserved one wideband 500KHz channel on FltSatCom-A. (Spaceport News, Jan 20/78,1)
George Mueller, NASA’s associate administrator for manned spaceflight 1963-1969, now chairman and president of Systems Development Corp., was named president-elect of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, AvWk reported. He would serve on the AIAA board of directors during 1978 and be inaugurated as president in 1979. {AvWk, Mar 27/78, 11)
Johnson Space Center announced it would sponsor a 2-day conference with the Univ. of Texas health science center on ways to use spaceflight’ in biomedical research. The first session, entitled Space: A Challenge for the Life Sciences, would have as speakers the JSC director, Christopher Kraft, Jr.; NASA’s director for life sciences, David Winter, M.D.; JSC director of space and life sciences Richard Johnston; and Univ. of Tex. health science center resident Truman Blocker. The conference would conclude with a panel discussion on spaceflight applications. (JSC Release 78-19)
Onboard equipment problems had delayed launch of Nimbus-G and TIROS-N from Vandenberg AFB, Av Wk reported. Tape recorder problems had caused cancellation of the Nimbus-G launch scheduled for Sept. 18; the new launch would not be before Oct. 2. Replacement of a malfunctioning processing unit had delayed the TIROS-N launch for 2wk. The problem appeared to be isolated and should not affect the unit’s design or the AF meteorological satellites then in orbit. Aerospace Daily reported that NASA had returned the three tape recorders in Nimbus-G to the builder, RCA Corp., for cleaning and removal of loose solder that could cause short circuits; five essentially identical tape recorders on TIROS-N also needed cleaning. Nimbus-G and TIROS-N represented first uses of the NASA tape recorder, developed over several years by RCA as standard equipment for a variety of spacecraft. The problem had apparently arisen in soldering connectors to the mother board (a printed circuit board into which other PCBs were plugged); upon inspecting a tape recorder that had failed during tests, NASA found that loose solder had shorted pins. While drawing up a cleaning requirement for units not yet delivered, NASA had dismantled three tape recorders and had found loose solder capable of causing shorts in all three. (AvWfc, Sept 18/78, 33; A/D, Sept 18/78, 73)
The USAF had sent a destruct signal Mar. 19 to a Titan rocket carrying a pair of military comsats, the W Post reported, aborting an $80-million mission 8min after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Air Force officials said a range-safety officer had sent the destruct signal when the rocket suddenly began slowing down and falling back to earth. Debris from the 31 0001b space mission, rocket, and satellites had fallen into the ocean, although the exact location was unknown. (WPost, Mar 20/78, B-9)
NASA announced appointment of Kenneth Chapman as associate administrator for external relations, effective Jan. 8. Chapman had been acting in the position since its creation Nov. 8, 1977, and had been assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs since joining NASA April 1, 1977. Chapman would be senior policy official responsible for integrating NASA activities in public, legislative, university, community, interagency, and international affairs. Chapman had come to NASA from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He retired from the Air Force in 1975 after a 29-yr career. (NASA Release 78-4)
KSC had begun preparation for launching Shuttle Orbiter 102 in Oct., Spaceport News reported. Construction of new facilities and modifications to existing ones were proceeding on schedule. The orbiter-landing facility and orbiter-processing facility had been the only new facilities built at KSC to support Shuttle operations. Other preparations included modifications of existing facilities originally designed and built to support Apollo/Satum operations. KSC would transform hanger AF at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station into a solid-fuel rocket-booster recovery and disassembly facility. {Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1)
NASA reported a board of inquiry’s findings on the Sept. 9, 1977, failure of an Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle destroyed 55sec into the flight. Launched from Kennedy Space Center, the vehicle had carried an Intelsat IV-A. The board attributed failure to a rupture in the high-pressure “omega joint” in the Atlas-stage gas-generator discharge line, caused by contamination during production. Technicians had tested joints on all completed vehicles, and all those at KSC had passed; a few in the factory that were corroded or questionable had been replaced. Changing the fabrication process should prevent further contamination, the report stated. (NASA Release 78-3)
NASA announced appointment of Samuel Keller as deputy associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications (OSTA), succeeding Leonard Jaffe, who had been appointed special assistant to NASA’s chief engineer. In his new position, Keller would be responsible for general management and direction of OSTA programs. He had held numerous management positions at Goddard Space Flight Center before coming to NASA Hq as assistant administrator for personnel programs; had worked in industry and government; and had been a pilot in the U.S. Air Force from 1956 to 1959. (NASA anno May 5/78)
NASA announced that JPL, acting for the Dept, of Energy, had awarded study contracts to Acurex, Inc., Mountain View, Calif.; Boeing Engineering & Construction Co., Seattle, Wash.; and General Electric Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., to develop a solar-energy concentrator for generating electric power. The contracts, each valued at about $240 000, would cover the first part of a two-phase program to develop a low-cost point-focusing solar concentrator. The concentrator would direct mirror-reflected sunlight to a heat absorber and heat-driven engine turning a generator to produce electricity to supplement electrical power for small communities and rural areas. The solar concentrator to be developed under the contracts would include the optics (mirrors) and the mechanism that allowed the concentrator to track the sun. Heat absorbers and engine generators would be developed under separate contracts. Prime objective of the contracts would be to obtain the best thermal performance at the least cost per concentrator. As many as six would be tested and evaluated at JPL’s Solar Thermal Test Site at Edwards, Calif. JPL would manage the study for DOE’s Small Power Systems Program under an interagency agreement with NASA. (NASA Release 78-161)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA’s Skylab workshop launched in May 1973 might descend to 150 nautical miles (173 statute miles, 278km) altitude and begin reentry into earth’s atmosphere as early as late summer of 1979, JSC Roundup reported, citing orbit data from the North American Air Defense Command’s satellite trackers, the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, and the Swiss federal observatory. NASA would try two ways of postponing Skylab reentry: first, to reactivate the workshop’s thruster attitude-control system in the spring of 1978 and put it into a very slow tumble, decreasing atmospheric drag and perhaps adding several months to its orbital lifetime; second, to use a teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) launched on an early Space Shuttle mission (about Oct. 1979) and flown by remote control to dock with Skylab. Once docked, the TRS propulsion system could either raise Skylab’s orbit or control its reentry. Although Skylab would break up and burn during descent, some debris would probably survive reentry, and probably would land in an ocean, because 80% of the Skylab orbit had been over water (between 50°N and 50°S). Skylab, largest payload in earth orbit at 85 tons, and about 96ft in length, had been manned during 3 missions by 3 different astronaut crews. When the last crew had left Skylab, NASA estimated the workshop would remain in orbit until 1983; however, its altitude had dropped more rapidly than expected because of increased atmospheric drag caused by sunspot activity. (JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, Feb 10/78, 2; Marshall Star, Feb 8/78, 4; W Post, Feb 2/78, A-2; C Trib, Feb 6/78, Sec. 1; Nature, Feb 9/78, 499)
The 16th Aerospace Sciences Meeting at MSFC of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics with nearly 700 registrants concluded with posthumous presentation of the space systems award to Dr. Werner von Braun, first MSFC director. Former astronaut Maj. Gen. Thomas Stafford had accepted the Haley spaceflight award on behalf of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew. (Marshall Star, Jan 18/78, 1)
NASA announced that the Delta vehicle scheduled to launch the Japanese broadcasting satellite for experimental purposes (BSE) from KSC Apr. 7 had been qualified for flight, following an investigation and tests resulting from detection of a leak in the first stage of the Delta used in the successful launch of NASA’s Landsat 3 from Vandenberg AFB Mar. 5. The pogo accumulator that suppressed pogo-stick-like vibration in the fuel system during flight had been the most probable cause of the leak. NASA had installed a new pogo accumulator, previously subjected to screening and test, in the Delta for BSE launch. (NASA Release 78-55)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that, pending arrival of the age of the Space Shuttle, the USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAM-SO) was modifying a Titan III 34D booster to ensure prime and backup launch capabilities during Space Shuttle transition. The 34D was a modified Titan HID that the USAF had put into operation in 1971; SAMSO had recommended it in 1975 to the Defense Science Board studying how DOD could manage an orderly transition from expendable to reusable launch vehicles. Instead of a variety of boosters, the 34D would use a common Titan III core for east- and west-coast launches, with the option of dedicating a 34D launch vehicle to either coast as late’ as 6mo before launch. The 34D also was compatible with the new inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle, another SAMSO project in full-scale development by Boeing Aerospace Co. During the Space Shuttle backup era beginning in 1980, the 34D/IUS combination would be contingency booster for top-priority defense payloads. Plans called for development of seven 34D boosters to be used first for launching two defense satellite communications system (DSCS) spacecraft in July 1980 from Cape Canaveral. Four of the seven vehicles would serve east coast launches using the IUS, and three would serve polar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Differences between the 34D and Titan HID included solid-fuel rocket motors lengthened 5 ft each to align with new common-core attach points and payload fairing modified to extend from 40 to 55ft. The new fairing would make the 34D payload environment nearly identical to that of the Shuttle orbiter cargo bay, a step toward upper-stage commonality. The 34D program was in final design stage under contracts with Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and United Technologies Corp. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78, 9)
The National Aeronautic Association announced the 1977 Collier trophy winners: U.S. Air Force Gen. Robert J. Dixon, and the Tactical Air Command headed by him since 1973. The NAA had awarded the Collier trophy annually for U.S. achievement in aeronautics and astronautics during the preceding yr; the selection committee had made the award for development and implementation in 1977 of the Red Flag combat-simulation flight-training program. Red Flag, designed to enhance combat readiness of U.S. air crews, had been regarded as a significant contribution to national defense. Encounters in Red Flag, consisting of missions against simulated surface-to-air missiles, had been the most realistic undertaken in peacetime aerial-combat training. Gen. Dixon had established the program in 1977, conducting ten 4-wk exercises at Nellis Air Force Base, Nev.; more than 8200 air crews had trained during 1977, with 10 000 ground troops participating. (NAA newsletter Apr 7/78)
NASA Administrator Robert Frosch in a briefing announced that NASA’s FY79 budget would propose an 8% increase, providing “buying power” at about the 1978 level. The space science request had gone up about 27%, largely because of the Space Telescope and the Galileo (Jupiter-orbiter) project. Applications and aeronautics were each up about 16%. The proposed FY79 budget was $4,371 billion; the FY78 budget was $4,064 billion. The FY79 budget requested money for only four Space Shuttle orbiters; Frosch explained that the four orbiters would use two launch sites (KSC and Vandenberg AFB) and that NASA and the Air Force would phase out the existing stable of expendable boosters. Omitted was OV-101, the Enterprise, which would be used for approach and landing tests or for spare parts, or could be reconfigured in an emergency to spaceflight status. The major new start NASA had included in the budget was the “Out of Ecliptic” (OOE) or Solar-Polar, a cooperative venture with ESA to fly two satellites to look at the structure of the sun’s surface and at sunspots and poles. Other new starts NASA had requested were the HALO (halogen-occultation) experiments to study upper-atmosphere pollution, and the earth radiation-budget satellite system to study incoming and outgoing radiation. Key application continuations would be Landsat C and D, the Nimbus-G environmental satellite, Tiros-N next-generation weather satellite, and Seasat-A. Space Transportation Systems would receive $1 827 700 000; Space Science $513 200 000; Space and Terrestrial Applications $283 400 000; Aeronautics and Space Technology $375 400 000; Tracking and Data Acquisition $305 400 000. Manpower would remain at the FY78 level, with 45 positions shifted from MSFC to JSC, KSC, and the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories. (NASA budget briefing, Jan 21/78; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1; W Star, Jan 23/78, A-8; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 13; Jan 30/78, 28)
The Washington Post reported the Carter Administration had decided to allow the Peoples Republic of China to buy an American communications satellite launched by the U.S. The administration was waiting for the Chinese to reconfirm interest in the deal, the most sophisticated technology transfer so far between two countries. Several yr ago the Chinese had reserved a slot for a communications satellite with the U.N. agency monitoring the field. Discussions were still tentative, as the Chinese would have to negotiate with the few U.S. comsat manufacturers and would have to buy an undetermined number of ground stations. A satellite would cost $15 to $17 million; placing it in orbit would cost $13 to $23 million, depending on the rocket used. Regardless of any military implications, the satellite sale would probably annoy the USSR, which had repeatedly warned of danger in Washington’s “playing the China card” (cultivating closer Chinese ties while Peking-Moscow relations were strained). (WPost, Oct 13/78, C-14)
Kennedy Space Center reported it had begun a 3-mo exercise called Spacelab Critical Design Review, whose results would go to a final board meeting on design changes needed for Spacelab to fly. ESA’s prime contractor, ERNO, had assembled Spacelab data consisting of 34 volumes and approximately 3000 drawings and had packaged 5 sets, weighing a total of 5001b, for shipment to the U.S. KSC review groups would look for discrepancies to ensure that the data reflected the hardware design and that the design was compatible with KSC operations. The reviewers would submit any discrepancies to a screening group, which would select those to be forwarded (along with those identified by other NASA centers) to MSFC for consolidation and decision on which would be sent to Europe. Those finally selected would be consolidated with ESA-identified discrepancies and forwarded to ERNO. (Spaceport News, Feb 3/78, 1)
NASA announced it had awarded Vought Corporation, Dallas, Tex., a modification of its contract to provide Scout launch vehicles. Under the modification, Vought would provide NASA with 12 additional guidance systems for use on Phase 8 Scouts (107 vehicles had constituted Phases 1 through 7), the same system used on the launch vehicle since the Scout program began. Vought had been the Scout project’s prime contractor since 1959; the first Scout launched in 1960 was designed to put a 130-lb payload into a 300-nautical-mi circular earth orbit. The latest Scouts were designed to place a 404-lb payload in that orbit. Scout vehicles had been launched from Wallops Island, Va., Vandenberg AFB, Calif., and San Marco, Kenya. Vought valued the modification at approximately $6.5 million. Langley Research Center would manage the 2.5-yr contract. (LaRC Release 78-67)
NASA announced that the USAF Space and Missile Test Command at Vandenberg AFB would launch SeaSat-A on a modified Atlas-F booster no earlier than June 26. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, noted that NASA had established a launch date of May 17, 1978, early in the program, and had maintained it even when a resolicitation of bids became necessary because of adding a sensor to the original complement. The launch date had slipped from May 17 to June 10 because of a late start of thermal-vacuum testing, and subsequent replacement of a cracked alumina substrate in the power amplifier of the data link. The launch date had then slipped to June 24, then to June 26, because of Atlas-F booster problems [see June 12]. The USAF had grounded the entire Atlas-F fleet for analysis and testing, but this had not delayed NASA’s schedule, as rework had continued while the vehicle remained on the stand. (MOR E-655-78-01 [prelauch] June 23/78; Spaceport News, June 23/78,1; Lewis News, June 23/78,1; Marshall Star, June 21/78, 1; Langley Researcher, June 30/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 16/78, 3; JPL Universe, June 23/78, 1; Nature, June '22/78, 586)
... We are here today to recognize and honor six American pioneers of the farthest and highest of all frontiers, the frontier of space. We honor them for individual human qualities, dedication, skill, extraordinary courage. But we do more than that. What those men have done is the most visible part of a vast and continuing collective accomplishment of many people. Tens of thousands of Americans, many of you, including scientists, engineers, administrators, skilled workers, others, have contributed directly to the success of the American space enterprise. They in turn have had the support of an entire nation and the good wishes of an entire planet. The glory that belongs to the six recipients this afternoon of the Space Medal of Honor belongs equally to those who helped them, and in a real sense, to all humanity who prayed for them and who supported them. “It is fitting that these ceremonies take place today on the 20th anniversary of the founding of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. And it is, of course, fitting that they take place here where the ships that took men to the moon were launched and where we will take our next great step into space with the first flight of the Space Shuttle, which I sincerely hope will be before my next birthday. . . .
Ames Research Center announced the scheduled arrival this month of the XV-15, a tilt-rotor research aircraft, which would have wingtip-mounted turbine engines that turned 7.6m (25ft) prop rotors. The engine-prop rotor assembly could be tilted up for helicopter-type vertical takeoff and landing, or oriented forward in the normal position for conventional flight as an airplane. Bell Helicopter Textron, Fort Worth, Tex., had built the aircraft under a joint program of ARC and the U.S. Army’s Research and Technology Laboratories at Moffett Field, Calif. The first XV-15 to arrive at ARC, modifed for remote control, would undergo 6wk of testing in ARC’s 12.2 X 24.4m (40 X 80ft) wind tunnel. Flight test of the second aircraft would begin at the Bell facilities in Fort Worth after wind-tunnel tests. ARC would eventually house both aircraft for Army/NASA evaluation of the tilt-rotor concept, and for ARC research on terminal-area (airport) navigation and on vertical- and short-takeoff-and-landing. (NASA Release 78-45)
NASA announced that Chimex Systems, Inc., of Houston, Tex., had received a subcontract from Computer Sciences Corp. of Falls Church, Va, for institutional computer systems engineering, development, and production operations under CSC’s 5-yr contract with Johnson Space Center. A major factor of CSC’s winning bid had been its plan to use minority subcontractors. This was the fourth NASA contract won by Chimex, which had provided keypunch services at Kennedy Space Center and engineering support and keypunch services at JSC. Under the new subcontract, Chimex would employ 40 people primarily in keypunch and data-distribution at an estimated $800 000 per yr for 5yr. NASA’s minority business awards for the first half of FY1978 had amounted to more than $37 million. (NASA Release 78-117)
NASA announced it had selected four American scientists as payload specialists for the second Spacelab mission scheduled for 1981. Those named were Dr. Loren Acton of Palo Alto, Calif., research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; Dr. John-David Bartoe of Reston, Va., and Dr. Dianne Prinz of Alexandria, Va., both research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory; and Dr. George Simon of Alamagordo, N.M., chief of the solar-research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory. Two of these scientists would be selected to fly on the orbiting space laboratory to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and assist the two in orbit. The Spacelab investigators’ working group (IWG), composed of Spacelab 2 principal investigators having experiments on the mission, had selected the payload specialists, each of whom was a coinvestigator on one Of the Spacelab 2 experiments. Scientific investigations on Spacelab 2 would be mainly in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar-physics research, with others in plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. Scientific instruments on the mission would be “pallet only,” exposed to space in the orbiter’s cargo bay. Payload specialists would operate their experiment equipment from the orbiter’s crew cabin, working in shifts to run the experiments 24hr a day. The mission, scheduled for launch from KSC in 1981, would orbit at an altitude of about 450km (250mi) for 9da. MSFC had been responsible for payload specialist training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission. (NASA Release 78-120; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1) August 4\ MSFC announced it had awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Sunnyvale, Calif., a $2.7 million contract to develop and deliver a flight experiment solar-array wing by May 1980 for a Shuttle orbital-flight test in November 1980. A significant step toward producing large amounts of power in space, the experiment would verify structural and dynamic characteristics of the solar-array wing, its electrical performance, and the readiness of solar-array technology for planetary- and earth-orbit Space Shuttle payload applications. The solar-array wing, 32m (105ft) long and 4m (13.5ft) wide, folded and stored in the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay during launch, would be extended to its full length and retracted several times during the test. When its solar-cell surface was fully extended, the array’s 82 panels would convert solar energy to produce 12.5kw of power. Only three of the panels would be active in the experiment flight. The experimental solar-array wing would demonstrate that use of this technology to augment power for Shuttle and Spacelab could extend mission duration and lead to a solar-electric propulsion stage. Solar-array technology could have Shuttle-payload applications such as space-base construction, satellite power systems, and power modules. NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had directed the solar-array program as part of a larger effort on solar-electric propulsion for long-term missions in the mid-1980s. (NASA Release 78-123; Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 1; DSFC X-Press, Aug 11/78, 4; A/D, Aug 4/78, 151; AvWk, Aug 14/78, 15)
NASA announced award of a $5 million contract to Vought Corporation, Dallas, Tex., for 5 Scout launch vehicles and associated hardware, such as separation systems and heat shields. Vought had been the Scout project’s prime contractor since 1959. The first Scout, designed to place a 130-lb payload into a 300-nautical-mi circular earth orbit, had been launched in 1960. The new Scout could launch a 4041b payload from Wallops Island, Va.; Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.; or San Marco offshore at Kenya, Africa, into that orbit. The latest configuration of Scout vehicles was known as Phase 8; phases 1 through 7 had produced 107 vehicles, 96 of which had been launched. (NASA Release 78-20)
Air Force Magazine, in an article on Goddard Space Flight Center, called it the jack-of-all-trades among NASA’s space centers. It was NASA’s communications hub, with a system of landlines, undersea cables, and satellites reaching around the world and connecting the 21 sites of the Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) that had served all NASA’s spaceflight activities. GSFC also had one of the world’s largest assemblies of scientists, who theorized either scientific or applications satellite missions and made investigations into disciplines such as astronomy, planetary atmosphere, solar activity, and near-earth physics. About a third of scientific experiments on U.S. spacecraft were conceived, designed, and/or built by Goddard scientists. The Goddard-developed earth-resources survey programs used orbiting Landsats capable of scanning the planet (except for the polar regions) every 9da. The photographs they provided had allowed detailed study of the earth faster, cheaper, and more accurately than aerial photography. Its impact on agriculture worldwide could be enormous; Landsat would make possible, for example, an inventory in Calif.’s Imperial Valley of more than 25 separate crops in nearly 9000 fields scattered over 458 000 acres. Landsat data would identify specific crops and indicate their condition, permitting very accurate agricultural production forecasts. NASA planned to launch in the early 1980s a pair of Goddard-developed satellites containing space-tracking equipment to replace all but sue of the present ground-based tracking stations, supplying data 85% of the time with greater efficiency and manpower savings. GSFC scientists were also making experimental and practical applications of laser technology. One program would eventually establish laser-satellite systems on each continent, to measure the most minute movements of the plates forming earth’s crust. (AF Mag, Aug/78, 68)
NASA and the state of Texas had signed a 3-yr agreement that the Texas natural-resources information system (TNRIS) would use Landsat computer-processed data in managing the state’s natural resources, Johnson Space Center reported. Project costs were estimated at $600 000 for NASA and $750 000 for Texas. Day-to-day operations would use a mix of manual and computer-assisted remote-sensing methods to monitor Texas natural resources; photographic and electronic data from aircraft, ground-truth measurements, and weather-station environmental data would supplement satellite data during early phases of the project. JSC and a TNRIS task force would design and implement the data system; NASA would provide technical expertise. (JSC Roundup, Oct 13/78, 1)
The Langley Researcher reported that, under a program sponsored jointly by NASA and the American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE), a team of 19 university professors and two legal interns had spent the summer at LaRC on a study, An Integrated Air-Cargo Transport System. The team had reviewed forecasts of the air-cargo industry and had recommended changes in aircraft, air-freight terminals, air-transportation networks, and government regulation, to best serve national needs between 1990-2000. Recommendations had included designing a new medium-range aircraft for cargo service and a long-range aircraft that constituted an improved or derivative version of today’s craft; arrangements for all aircraft and major freight terminals to handle 20ft intermodal containers; continuation of air-cargo industry deregulation for at least the immediate future; and permission for airlines to own interstate trucking companies. Dr. Griffith McRee of Old Dominion Univ. had directed the study. (Langley Researcher, Aug 25/78, 4)
INTELSAT announced reduced charges for many of its satellite services for the ninth consecutive yr. Meeting in Washington, D.C., INTELSAT’S board of governors had reduced the monthly charge for full-time two-way telephone circuits on an INTELSAT satellite (about 80% of the INTELSAT system) from $1140 to $960 beginning in Jan. 1979. Charges for on-demand telephone circuits (known as SPADE circuits) would drop from 16 to 14 cents/min. Original rate for satellite telephone circuits established by INTELSAT in 1965 was $5334/mo; since then, advancing technology had increased demand and improved efficiency so that INTELSAT could progressively reduce its rates. Marcel Perras of Canada, chairman of the board of governors, said INTELSAT was considering a 5-yr plan to lower the rate for satellite telephone circuits to less than $700/mo by 1983. (INTELSAT 78-35-1)
President Carter at a press conference with editors and news directors was asked: “There was a big spread in the local (Cape Canaveral) newspapers yesterday that you were ordering cutbacks in the space program. And there are also rumors going around the Kennedy Space Center that as soon as the shuttle becomes operational, you will order even more cutbacks in an austerity program. So my question is this: What kind of space policy can we expect from your administration?” The President said: “I think a very aggressive space policy. Anyone who reads the documents that have been prepared very carefully, very thoroughly by the Defense Department, the CIA, NSC, all those who will use them, including Agriculture, Commerce, and finally approved by me, would say that it’s a very sound program based on scientific need and actually capitalizing now upon the great exploratory efforts that have been made in space. We look upon the Space Shuttle as a way to change dramatic, very costly initiatives into a sound, progressive, and innovative program to utilize the technology that we have available to us. “We’ll continue interplanetary space exploration. We’ll have a greatly expanded effort concerning astronomy assessments of the earth, weather, communications. We’ll expand our effort to bring into the space program now, both foreign countries and also private firms in our nation. And I think it is accurate to say that the Space Shuttle, which is approaching completion—we hope the first orbital flights will be less than a year from now—will open up a broad vista of new uses for our technology. “So, we’re not going to minimize or decrease our commitment to space at all. I think the spectacular efforts to send men to the moon and to make the first orbital flights, and so forth, have been just a precursor to now the more practical and consistent and effective use of our space technology. “So, it’s not a matter of playing down the importance of space; it’s a matter of using what we’ve already learned in the most effective way.” (Press Doc, Oct 20/78, 1976)
Administrator Robert Frosch said NASA would analyze any chemical samples of UFOs received from credible sources but would not initiate any research programs, Goddard News reported. Frosch outlined NASA’s position in a letter to the White House, in response to an inquiry from the director of science and technology policy. NASA was most often asked about the purported UFO sightings by astronauts and President Carter; NASA had satisfied itself that the astronauts had seen nothing abnormal in the space environment, and the bright object President Carter reported seeing in the sky when he was governor of Ga. had been classified as “unidentifiable” by the Natl. Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena. Some students of astronomy had suggested that what Carter saw was the planet Venus, at times much brighter than a first-magnitude star. Although the USAF had routinely investigated reports of all UFO sightings until 1969, when it terminated its “Project Blue Book,” it no^ limited its interest to sightings important to defense surveillance. The Air Force had concluded that never in almost 2 decades of investigating UFOs had it found “evidence of technological developments . . . beyond the range of present-day scientific knowledge.” (Goddard News, Mar 78, 3)
satellite being built would serve as a spare. KSC and its Expendable Vehicles Directorate would be responsible for preparing and launching the Atlas Centaur vehicles; a joint government-industry team would supervise all launch-vehicle and pad operations during countdown. The ETR, launch-vehicle contractor General Dynamics, and NASA would supply all personnel and equipment required to handle assembly, prelaunch checkout, and launch. The Comstar spacecrafts used by American Telephone and Telegraph Co. as part of its nationwide communications network had a capacity of more than 14 000 high-quality 2-way voice circuits. In geostationary orbit at 22 300mi altitude, they could provide reliable communications to the 48 contiguous states, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Each Comstar carried centimeter-wave beacons to test higher frequency propagation at 19 and 28GHz, measuring the adverse effects of rainfall on signals at these frequencies, and leading to possible use of higher frequencies to future commercial comsat systems. Under an agreement with Comsat General, AT&T would lease the entire capacity of the three in-orbit Comstars; AT&T, which was building its own earth-station network, would integrate satellite communications with its terrestrial facilities to enhance its domestic U.S. services. (MOR M-491-201-78-01 [prelaunch summary] June 14/78; Spaceport News, June 23/78, 1)
ESA announced that the full-scale propellant mockup of the European launcher Ariane (47m high, maximum diameter 3.8m) had left the integration site near Paris for its launch base at Kourou in French Guiana on the South American coast. Two Seine barges had transported three pressurized containers (one for each stage) to Le Havre, where they were loaded on a freighter bound for Cayenne. Tests of the mockup would begin in Aug. when the launcher would be erected on the pad for the first time. ESA had planned 3mo of tests to check general conditions for launcher assembly and vehicle compatibility with ground facilities, as well as fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) would handle, transport, assembly, and test operations. Aerospatiale, the system integrator, would evaluate dynamic and thermal behavior of the launcher under ambient climatic conditions in tests simulating vibrations like those at liftoff. ESA had planned four qualification launches between June 1979 and Oct. 1980 (ESA Release June 16/78)
NASA announced it would physically integrate ail Space Shuttle/ Spacelab experiments at Kennedy Space Center. Extensive analysis and cost studies had confirmed an earlier tentative decision to do the work at KSC rather than at centers managing the Spacelab mission. “Physical integration” consisted of installing experiments on Spacelab’s racks and pallets. After Spacelab operations became routine in the mid-1980s, physical integration should require about 100 civil service and contractor man-yrs per yr at KSC. The analyses required to integrate experiments for each mission would continue at assigned Spacelab management centers. (NASA Release 78-186)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced its engineers had delivered the first hardware—a thermal-model tape recorder —for the earth-orbiting infrared astronomical satellite IRAS to their counterparts in the Netherlands for testing, before delivering the actual flight recorder in 1979	for installation in the IRAS satellite. A joint program by the U.S., the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands, IRAS had been scheduled for launch from Vandenberg AFB in Feb. 1981, carrying a single experiment: a liquid-helium-cooled telescope to map the sky in infrared frequencies from 1 to lOOmicrons. Infrared astronomers would use the data to construct an infrared sky map and a source catalog with roughly 1 million sources. IRAS would make about 14 orbits of earth daily, but only two daily data-transmitting passes over the U.K. ground station. The tape recorder would therefore store all data for transmission every 12hr. Odetics Corp. of Anaheim, Calif., had built the flight version of the tape recorder for shipment to the Netherlands, where the spacecraft was being built. After completing construction and installation of the telescope, IRAS would return to the U.S. for tests at JPL. (JPL Universe, June 23/78, 1)
A House subcommittee on space science and applications would hold panel discussions later in June on opportunities for international cooperation in space, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology announced. Moderated by Dr. Jerry Grey of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the discussions would follow subcommittee hearings scheduled May 16, 17, and 18 on international space programs. Panelists reviewing the hearings would make recommendations on international cooperation for publication with the hearings. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla), subcommittee chairman, said he favored use of the space environment “not only for our own nation but for the benefit of all mankind. All reasonable efforts should be made in the international community to assure that worldwide understanding and mutual commitments are developed to provide sound basis for these future efforts.” (U.S. House Committee on Sci and Tech Release, June 7/78)
NASA announced it had awarded Computer Sciences Corp., Falls Church, Va., a $40 million contract for 3yr of institutional computer systems engineering, development, and production operations work at Johnson Space Center. Under JSC management, the corporation would perform systems engineering and definition, applied software development, and computer systems and related facility planning and development for the central computing facility, as well as computer operations, equipment operations, job scheduling and processing, dispatch services, job quality control, maintenance of tape libraries, production coordination, and other related tasks for the facility and mission control center. (NASA Release 78-95; JSC Release 78-29)
NASA and ESA announced selection of experiments for the proposed 2-spacecraft solar-polar mission planned for launch in 1983 and designed for first-time observation of the sun from the unique perspective of its polar regions. The solar-polar mission would explore one of the remaining frontiers of the solar system: the third dimension of space, out of the plane of the orbits of the planets. All previous interplanetary space probes had flown in the orbits of the planets, essentially intersecting the sun’s equatorial regions. Congress had not yet approved the project, but early selection of scientific participants and investigations would allow a prompt start on approval. NASA and ESA would each provide one spacecraft, and the combined scientific payload would be divided between U.S. and European investigators. The Space Shuttle would launch both spacecraft simultaneously using an inertial upper-stage booster, directing them on a trajectory in the ecliptic plane (the plane containing all the planets) toward Jupiter. Swinging around Jupiter, the craft would use the gravity of that planet to move out of the ecliptic plane and back toward the sun in trajectories, one northbound and one southbound, essentially mirror images of each other. After passing over the north and south solar poles, the spacecrafts would swing through perihelion (the distance closest to the sun) in the ecliptic plane, pass respectively over the other solar poles, then fly back to the vicinity of Jupiter’s orbit. The period from launch until shortly after the second pair of polar passages would be approximately 5yr. The mission should provide important new knowledge about the solar wind, cosmic rays, and the 3-dimensional structure and evolution of the sun’s corona (the outermost solar atmosphere), and increase understanding of solar phenomena that shape and control earth’s space environment. In anticipation of a FY79 Congressional authorization of the mission, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of the mission for NASA, had undertaken studies of the U.S. spacecraft, payload, and mission design concepts. More than ISO American and European scientists would participate in solar-polar investigations. (NASA Release 78-39; ESA Release Mar 13/78; JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 1)
Noise levels of Concorde departures at New York’s John F. Kennedy Inti. Airport continued to be lower than those measured at Dulles Inti. Airport near Washington, D.C., according to the FAA’s February monitoring report. On approach, average Feb. measurement was 98.7db at Cedarhurst on Long Island, compared with a cumulative average through Jan. of 100.4db. Vibration tests conducted by NASA during Feb. had shown the relationship between structural vibration and aircraft noise to be the same for Concorde as for other jet aircraft; the relatively higher levels of structural vibration measured during Concorde operations resulted from overall higher sound levels rather than from any unique characteristics of the Concorde. The FAA’s monitoring equipment had recorded no sonic booms for the 103 Concorde operations during Feb. (FAA Release 23-78)
Johnson Space Center reported that 11 of 35 current astronaut candidates had undergone parasail training Aug. 28 at Vance AFB, Enid, Okla., learning how to land by parachute in the event of an emergency ejection from the T-38 aircraft over land. Other astronaut candidates had taken the course before entering the NASA program. The six female astronaut candidates along with five male counterparts had taken the 1-day training exercise. {JSC Roundup, Sept 1/78, 1)
The Inti. Council of Scientific Unions and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) announced that more than 140 nations would participate in the largest international scientific experiment ever held, beginning in January 1979. The Global Weather Experiment (GWE) would establish the practical limits of weather forecasting and design a global observation system to achieve them. During the 12mo experiment, a massive array of scientific personnel and observing equipment would monitor earth’s oceans and atmosphere to compile the most complete record of global weather data ever assembled. The experiment, part of the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), would be a joint effort of the 2 organizations and all 147 member nations of WMO; 5 other international organizations were also contributing. U.S. participants would include the Depts. of Commerce, Defense, Energy, Interior, Transportation, and State; NASA; the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research; the Natl. Science Foundation; the Defense Nuclear Agency; the Air Force, Army, Navy, and Coast Guard; and many academic institutions. NOAA would coordinate U.S. participation. The experiment would supplement the existing World Weather Watch (now generating more than 40 000 observations daily) with 10 satellites, about 50 research vessels, 110 aircraft (including 10 research planes), 300 high-altitude constant-level balloons, and 300 instrumented drifting buoys. One focus of attention would be the broad belt around the equator, an enormous heat sink absorbing much of the sun’s energy and generating much of the world’s weather, but so far comparatively unobserved. To obtain more data on this crucial region, GWE would operate observing systems during two special periods (Jan. 5 to March 5, and May 1 to June 30) to gather vital tropical-wind information. The combined systems would generate weather data for 85% of the earth’s area not covered by the World Weather Watch. At the end of the Global Weather Experiment Nov. 30, 1979, centers in a number of nations would process the data and forward the results to World Data Centers in Moscow and Washington, D.C., and to meteorological research laboratories in Bracknell, England, and Princeton, N.J. Scientists would use computers to refine the data and construct for the first time a complete 12-mo world-weather history. They would run computer experiments using this unique record to test their results, and to determine not only the practical limits of weather prediction but also the data needed to reach these limits and the kind of system needed to gather the data. The socioeconomic impact of improved weather forecasts could be dramatic; industries, for example, could benefit from knowing what the weather would be as far as 8 to 10 (or even 14) days in advance. (GWE Release 78-1)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
LaRC reported the White House had issued a statement July 20, 1978, commemorating the ninth anniversary of man’s first walk on the moon. The statement read in part: “Nine years ago today, the world paused to watch two brave men tread the surface of the moon. It was a moment without precedent in human experience, a moment when terrestrial life reached out to touch another world. It is a source of pride for us that those men were Americans. Today, the lunar surface is criss-crossed in a half dozen places with the footprints of American astronauts and implanted with a variety of American scientific instruments. “The Space Shuttle, our next major manned space project, will begin regular, routine economical operation in the early 1980s. ... In the deeper reaches of space, we will continue to seek to expand our knowledge of the solar system and the universe of which we are a part. “As time and technology take us ever more deeply into the space age, it will continue to be our policy to conduct operations in space as required for our national well being and to support the right of all nations to do likewise. In so doing, we remain committed to the underlying principle of the exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes and for the benefit of all mankind.” (Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2; Spaceport News, July 21/78, 1; JSC Roundup, July 21/78, 4; DFRC X-Press, July 28/78, 4)
The Air Force Systems Command noted that Atlas launches planned at Vandenberg AFB as well as at Cape Canaveral in 1978 would use one of the oldest booster systems still working: first use of Atlas as a launch vehicle was in 1958. Atlas launches planned from Space Launch Complex 3 would support the USAF NavStar global-positioning system and space-test program; 2 NASA-sponsored satellites, Sea Satellite-A (SeaSat) and Tiros-N, would also use Atlas vehicles. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 78, 3)
In 1977 JPL scientists Donn Lynn and Jean Lorre had agreed to apply image-processing techniques to photographs of the Shroud of Turin, but had not expected their results to be published in newspapers and magazines around the world, JPL Universe reported. Their “mild curiosity” about the relic had introduced them to other American scientists who proposed using a variety of sophisticated tests to determine how the shroud had been imprinted. The result was a trip planned for Oct. that would take Lynn and Lorre to Turin, where church authorities would allow the American science team an unprecedented 24hr examination of the shroud itself.	■ Coinciding with a public exhibition and international conference about the shroud, the tests would entail infrared and ultraviolet photography as well as conventional black-and-white pictures. Other team members would make radiographic and x-ray fluorescence examinations, all to investigate the mechanical formation of the “negative” image on the cloth. The shroud had been stitched to a protective cloth backing, but the team would use a flexible optical instrument to examine the reverse side of the fragile fabric. Major business corporations, including photographic and electronic-equipment companies such as Polaroid, Kodak, and the Brooks Institute of Photography had agreed to lend or donate facilities and equipment for the tests. Lynn and Lorre expected to provide a quick-look report of their findings soon after the Turin exhibition. (JPL Universe, July 21/78, 1)
Hughes Communications Services, Inc., Culver City, Calif., had received a $335 million Navy Systems Command contract to provide 5yr of Leasat (leased satellite) communications services at each of four locations in space starting in 1982, Aerospace Daily reported. Hughes, which had proposed to use its Syncom-4 Shuttle-optimized spacecraft, had won out over Comsat General Corp. and TRW Inc. Leasat would replace the Gapfiller service currently leased from Comsat General’s Marisat system, and would complement the TRW-built Navy-owned FltSatCom system by serving both Navy ships and Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force ground-mobile forces. Choice of the Hughes system, dedicated to Pentagon use, should enhance prospects of a ESA and INTELSAT joint offer of a civilian system to be used by the pre-Inmarsat joint venture. (A/D, Sept 11/78, 38)
The Air Force Systems Command reported it had successfully concluded a 2-yr space-communications test program 4mo ahead of schedule, saving the Air Force more than $500 000. Directed by the Satellite Communications Terminal Program Office, SAMTEC’s 6555th Aerospace Test Group had launched the Lincoln experimental satellites LES 8 and 9 from Cape Canaveral 22 OOOmi into space to demonstrate advanced technology that would provide dependable jam-proof communications between satellites spaced thousands of miles apart and terminals scattered over more than 75% of the earth’s surface. The satellites and terminals had worked essentially flawlessly. In the test, a receiver and transmitter on each satellite had relayed messages for the first time directly between two spacecraft without ground or airborne relay. Acting as earth-orbiting relay stations during the test program, the satellites exchanged voice and data information between airborne, ground, and shipboard terminals. Instead of batteries charged by solar panels (susceptible to radiation damage), each satellite had used two nuclear-powered thermal generators for long-term dependable power services. Some tests had run continuously for 2 or 3 days, requiring 24-hr manning. Nerve center for the program had been the test-management facility at the Mitre Corp., Bedford, Mass. (ASFC Newsreview, Jan 78, 6)
NASA announced plans to launch TIROS-N from WTR Sept. 15 as part of a third generation of new meteorological satellites. First of a series of eight polar-orbiting environmental spacecraft, TIROS-N would carry new environmental monitors representing significant technological advances over those on the current NOAA-series spacecraft. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Services (NESS) would operate TIROS-N, intended to improve weather analysis for more accurate weather forecasts; to locate ocean currents and areas of upwell-ing, important to fishing and shipping interests; and to acquire more precise data on snow cover, snowmelt, and rainfall, essential to water-resource management and flood forecasting. Also possible would be more accurate alerts of high-energy solar-radiation levels above the atmosphere, important to space missions, high-altitude commercial airEAGE At l INTENTION ALLY BLANK craft flights, long-range communications, and electrical power-distribution networks. Its advanced data-collection and platform-location system meant that TIROS-N would have for the first time an operational capability to collect and transmit environmental data from platforms on land, at sea, and in the air; and to determine the geographic locations of those platforms in motion on the surface of the sea, land, or aloft. TIROS-N’s scanning radiometer, most versatile to be carried aboard an environmental satellite, could gather and store for later playback visible and infrared measurements and images in 4 channels for more precise evaluation of land, ice, surface-water, and cloud conditions, and sea-surface temperatures, transmitting them in real time to both automatic picture-transmission (APT) and high-resolution picture-transmission (HRPT) users in more than 100 countries around the world. The vertical-sounder subsystem, containing three instruments, could register temperatures to within 1°C and moisture data from earth’s surface up through the stratosphere. Even under obscuring cloud cover, TIROS-N could obtain some data because one of the three instruments would be able to record microwave radiation regardless of clouds. TIROS-N would be a primary data source for the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s first global experiment, an international cooperative project of 140 countries scheduled to begin Dec. 1, 1978. Its instruments would meet FGE requirements for collecting quantitative data on earth’s atmosphere and sea surface to construct numerical atmospheric models for improved long-range weather forecasts. Sensors were multinational: the stratospheric-sounding units were from Great Britain, the data-collection platform-location system from France, and other sensors from the U.S. Ground-support systems were also multinational: the U.S. would acquire and process most data through NOAA’s command and data-acquisition (CDA) stations near Fairbanks, Alaska; Wallops Island, Va.; and a central processing system at Suitland, Md. France’s Centre National d’fitudes Spatiales (CNES) would process and distribute data associated with collection and the platform-location system. TIROS-N instruments had drawn heavily on technology from NASA’s Nimbus-spacecraft program: TIROS-N’s bus was a modified USAF Block 5D spacecraft bus with a 25% growth allowance in payload-carrying capability. NASA had designed and funded TIROS-N; Goddard Space Flight Center would manage it during checkout (about 2mo) before turning it over to NOAA. Launch vehicle would be a standard reconditioned Atlas E/F. (NASA Release 78-132; NASA press conf. Sept 8/78; Spaceport News, Sept 15/78, 2)
NASA announced preparations to launch its second high energy astronomy observatory HEAO-B, continuing a three-mission program to study some of the most intriguing mysteries of the universe: pulsars, quasars, exploding galaxies, and black holes. Launch would be from KSC on an Atlas Centaur about Nov. 13. Carrying a focusing x-ray telescope and a variety of sensitive instruments, HEAO-B would maneuver and point for long periods of time at selected x-ray sources previously identified by Heao 1. Pictures returned by HEAO-B would be the first spacecraft-generated x-ray images of objects other than the sun. HEAO-B’s images, acquired by x-ray telescope, would be converted to telemetry received and taped by ground stations and eventually reconstructed as photographs showing size, structure, and detail of objects viewed by the spacecraft. HEAO-B, with a design lyr mission lifetime, would be placed in low circular orbit far enough above the atmosphere to detect radiation normally unable to reach earth’s surface. MSFC had managed HEAO for NASA’s Office of Space Science. KSC would manage launch operations including prelaunch checkout, launch, and flight through observatory separation in orbit. Lewis Research Center managed launch-vehicle procurement and related activities for the HEAO program. MSFC would control the in-orbit HEAO observatories, in conjunction with TRW flight-control engineers operating from Goddard Space Flight Center. Cost of the three-mission HEAO program was about $248 million, HEAO-B’s approximately $87 million. (NASA Release 78-165; MOR S-382-78-02 [prelaunch] Oct 30/78)
NASA reported that Cornell Univ. scientists had for the first time turned xenon, rarest of stable rare gases, into a metal by applying tremendous pressure on solid xenon. David Nelson, Jr., and Professor Arthur Ruloff of Cornell’s department of materials science and engineering, in work sponsored by LeRC, reported pressures of 320 000 atmospheres applied to a tiny amount of solid xenon at - 241 °C (- 402°F) ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978	.	NOVEMBER ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY NASA's second high-energy astronomy observatory, heaviest manned earthorbiting spacecraft, undergoing checkout before launch on a mission of general sky survey, mapping x-ray sources and measuring low-energy gamma-ray flux, (NASA photo 78-H-623) had produced the metal. Xenon frozen solid would not conduct electricity; however, at the pressures applied in the Cornell experiment, the electrical conductivity of the frozen xenon increased more than a hundred billion times—that is, it behaved like a metal. Because the xenon returned to the insulating (nonconductive) state when the pressure was removed, no engineering applications were apparent. However, Ruloff noted, “The production of metallic xenon is of considerable scientific interest. Furthermore, the development of these techniques is a step forward in high-pressure research.” Ruloff believed that his group could make oxygen and krypton metallic, and possibly nitrogen, argon, and even hydrogen. If frozen hydrogen could be made metallic and remain in that state when the pressure was removed, it might have practical use as an extremely powerful rocket propellant, a superconductor, or an improved source for fusion energy. NASA would explore the possibility of making metallic hydrogen. (NASA Release 78-174)
NASA announced it had appointed Robert Allnutt associate deputy administrator. AUnutt, currently acting assistant general counsel for legislation at DOE, had been deputy assistant administrator for the Energy Research and Development Administration, responsible for program areas including procurement, personnel, labor relations, and construction. Following a career both inside and outside the executive branch, Allnutt in 1970 had been appointed associate general counsel to the congressionally-established Commission on Government Procurement to improve governmentwide policies, procedures, and legislation. In 1973 Allnutt had been appointed staff director and counsel of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, with jurisdiction over federal aerospace research and development activities including all NASA programs. NASA had named Isaac Gillam, IV, director of DFRC, where he had been acting director since the departure of David Scott in Nov. 1977; he had been deputy director there since Aug. 1977. Gillam, an associate fellow of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and a senior member of the American Astronautical Society, had joined NASA Hq in 1963 as a resource-management specialist and had gone to DFRC in 1976 as director of Space Shuttle operations. Before joining NASA, Gillam had served in the USAF. Lt. Gen. Duward Crow (USAF-ret.), assistant to the deputy administrator of NASA, had announced plans to leave NASA Sept. 1, 1978. Gen. Crow had begun NASA service in 1974 as assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs. In Oct. 1975 he had become associate deputy administrator of NASA, assuming his present duties following a reorganization in Nov. 1977. Crow had graduated in 1941 from the U.S. Military Academy and had served in the China-Burma-India theatre of operations. He had become comptroller of the USAF in 1969 and was assistant vice chief of staff from Oct. 1973 to July 1974 when he retired. He had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his work on the NASA launch vehicles program. (NASA anno June 13/78)
NASA announced it had appointed Terence Finn director of legislative affairs. Finn had served since Dec. 1974 as senior analyst for energy, science, and space on the staff of the Senate budget committee, where he had been responsible for the budgets of NASA, National Space Foundation, and DOE. He was teaching a graduate course, Congress and Budget, at Catholic Univ., and also had taught at American Univ. and the Dept, of Agriculture Graduate School. Finn was a member of the American Political Science Association and a life member of the American Aviation Historical Society. (NASA Release 78-131)
The USAF had budgeted $664 million for space procurement in FY80, up from $379.6 million in FY79, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Major increases were in the defense support program (early-warning satellite by TRW and Aeroject), up $48 million; the satellite data system (Hughes), up $80 million; the defense satellite-communications systems (DSCS), up $65 million; and the Space Shuttle (Rockwell Inti.), up $73 million. The USAF had planned to buy five satellite systems in FY80: an RCA defense meteorological satellite program (DMSP) spacecraft; a defense support program spacecraft; a satellite data system spacecraft; and two DSCS spacecraft. One spacecraft to be purchased in FY79 would be a DMSP. The Air Force had last purchased boosters (three Martin Marietta Titan Ills) in FY78 and planned none for FY79 or 80, “assuming Shuttle stays on schedule,” a USAF official said. (D/SBD, Aug 10/78, 188)
The U.S. Navy had orbited two clusters of ocean-surveillance satellites to monitor radio communications and radar emissions from Soviet submarines and ships, and would add more spacecraft to expand coverage, Av Wk reported. The Navy had launched the first of the two clusters (each consisting of three small satellites in close proximity) in 1976, the second cluster in 1977, all from Vandenberg AFB into nearcircular 63“-inclination orbits at 700mi altitudes. At that altitude, the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2000mi away. The Naval Research Laboratory, which in Dec. 1971 had built and launched three spacecraft as a first demonstration of using multiple satellites to direction-find and eavesdrop on Soviet surface vessels and submarines, had designed and built the ocean-surveillance satellites (NOSS). Martin Marietta had begun production of additional satellites with E-Systems, Inc., as major subcontractor to provide the electronic intelligence (elint) receivers and antennas. For the future, the Navy had planned a more advanced spaceborne ocean-surveillance system using active radar to pinpoint the position of surface vessels, to be developed for launch by 1983 under a program called Clipper Bow. (AvWk, July 10/78, 22)
American Indians of the Far West had used the Communications Technology Satellite, world’s most powerful, in an unusual undertaking: tribes in Mont, and N.M. had linked up via the satellite with each other and federal officials in Washington, D.C., to exchange information and views on health, agriculture, education, and other tribal concerns. ARC said the Cts experimental satellite, operating on a new frequency and at power levels 10 to 20 times higher than current commercial comsats, had provided 2-way interactive video and audio communications between ground sites, allowing participants to view and confer with each other as though in the same room. Lewis Research Center had developed the transmitter (its key component) and would manage U.S. portions of the joint U.S.-Canadian satellite program, the Lewis News reported. Indian nations taking part in the broadcasts over 3days were the Crows and other tribes from the northwestern U.S., and the All-Indian Pueblo Council, Inc., and nearby tribes from the southwest. Government representatives included the assistant secretary of the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, senators, and representatives, the governor of Montana, and the assistant secretary for Indian affairs in the U.S. Dept, of Interior. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 7/78, 2; Lewis News, Apr 14/78, 1)
NASA announced plans to launch on Feb. 9, 1978, the first spacecraft in a new worldwide military communications system. DOD’s Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) satellites would provide vital communications for the Navy, Air Force, DOD, and the Presidential Command Network [see Jan. 20]. The spacecraft would go into synchronous-transfer orbit on an Atlas Centaur from ETR’s launch complex 36. FltSatCom, a highly versatile military-communications system built by TRW Defense and Space Systems, would offer 23 operating channels: the Navy would use 1 fleet-broadcast and 9 fleet-relay channels for communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, and ground stations, ship-to-ship and ship-to-shore. The system could offer reliable secure communications between naval units, even relatively small vessels equipped with inexpensive antennas and simple equipment, anywhere in the world except in extreme polar regions. The Air Force would use 12 narrowband channels as a part of the Air Force Satellite Communications System (AfSatCom) linking the national command authority with Strategic Air Command (SAC) units and other arms of the Air Force; DOD had reserved 1 channel. The Naval Electronic Systems Command would manage the FltSatCom program. The spacecraft would consist of two major hexagonal elements (a payload module and a spacecraft module), with the majority of electronic equipment mounted on 12 panels enclosing the payload and spacecraft modules. The payload module would contain UHF and X-band communications equipment, and antennas—the UHF-transmit antenna, built of ribs and mesh to open like an umbrella; and the receive antenna, a separate deployable helix. The spacecraft module would contain earth sensors, an apogee kick motor, attitude and velocity control, telemetry tracking and command, electrical-power distribution, and a solar array folded around the spacecraft module until reaching final position in orbit, to be deployed by spring-loaded hinges. The 1875kg (41321b) spacecraft weighed about 390kg (8601b), more than any satellite previously launched into synchronous orbit on an Atlas Centaur, NASA’s standard launch vehicle for intermediate-weight payloads. (NASA Release 78-17; MOR M-491-202-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb 3/78)
NASA announced that 8 women volunteers aged 45 to 55 had emerged in November hale and hearty after nearly a month of tests at ARC’S Human Research Center during which they were isolated from friends and family. Like 40 other men and women aged 25 to 55 who had volunteered for space program tests since 1973, the ARC group had participated in a study of the effects of weightlessness on the human body. Researchers from ARC’S biomedical research division were interested in the tolerances and responses of a body reentering earth’s gravity after experiencing zero gravity in space. The long-term NASA experiment, the Bed Rest Program, would extend over the next 12mo with 2 more groups—8 men, then 8 women, all aged 55 to 65—undergoing the same tests. Prolonged horizontal bed rest (a physiological approximation on earth of zero-gravity) would cause bodily changes within 24 to 48hr and would maintain them throughout the program. Having approximated the effects of zero gravity, researchers could study human responses to the introduction of both normal and abnormal Shuttle-reentry gravity forces. Other tests in cooperation with Johnson Space Center had evaluated the protection offered by antigravity suits against reentry stresses. Those volunteering for the program in response to newspaper advertisements had undergone a series of exacting physical and psychological tests. The 3-phase study began with the 8 subjects moving into the 12-bed ARC research facility. After a 9-day control period came lOda of total bed rest, followed by a 5-day recovery period. During the bed rest experiment, participants had to remain flat except to raise their heads slightly to eat. The subjects even showered in a horizontal position, being moved on a wheeled gurney to a specially designed shower. They had no visitors, but could have incoming and outgoing telephone calls. The routine did not deviate from three meals a day, lights off at 11pm, on at 7pm. At times the lower body underwent negative-pressure tests in a box. Researchers took daily blood samples and deep body temperatures. Electrocardiograms constantly recorded heart rates, and a “biobelt” around the waist constantly sent data to recorders. Before and during bed rest, the subjects took centrifuge rides designed to measure reflexes and coordination as the body made adjustments. The researchers tried to keep the subjects cheerful and to relieve natural boredom with books and games; each bed had stereo and color television. Medical attendants (doctors, nurses, and technicians) were on hand at all times. (NASA Release 78-185)
The Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards AFB, Calif., was target site for a Navy Tomahawk cruise missile successfully launched from a submarine, the USS Barb, a major milestone in the cruise-missile development program, AFSC Newreview reported. The test off the coast of southern Calif, was the Tomahawk’s 24th, and its first launch from a submarine. The missile flew a fully guided land-attack test flight terminating at AFFTC. Objectives accomplished in the test included underwater ignition of Tomahawk’s solid-propellant boost motor, and a midair engine start of the missile’s turbofan engine for cruise flight. An onboard inertial-navigation set guided the missile to the Pacific coastline; once over land, the missile’s terrain-contour matching system guided it to a recovery area. The flight ended with deployment of the test missile’s parachute over a remote section of the test center; the missile, recovered by Navy personnel with AFFTC assistance, would be reused in future tests. (AFSC Newsreview, April 78, 11)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the Air Force Avionics Laboratory (AFAL) was preparing critical electronic equipment for the NavStar global-positioning system (GPS) to undergo initial flight tests with GPS satellites. A generalized development model (GDM) designed by AFAL and built by Rockwell Inti. Corp.’s Collins Avionics and Missile Systems Division, Cedar Rapids, la., would demonstrate operation of GPS navigation equipment in a hostile electromagnetic-jamming environment. One GDM delivered to ASD’s 4950th Test Wing had been installed on a C-141 aircraft for testing. Evaluation of a GDM installed in two satellites had begun in August at the Naval Air Station, El Centro, Calif., and flight testing with three satellites against a ground jammer would begin in late Nov. GDM tests with four satellites in March 1979 would determine the equipment’s full antijam performance, using ground-based jammers and possibly an airborne jammer. A second GDM, to be delivered to AFAL in Feb. 1979, would be integrated with the laboratory’s GPS evaluator, after which AFAL engineers would conduct jamming tests in various simulated environments. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 12)
NASA announced successful launch Apr. 26 from Vandenberg AFB on a Scout of the first spacecraft built to measure variations in the earth’s temperature, the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM). The experimental satellite had assumed a circular sun-synchronous 620km (385mi) orbit to measure areas of the earth’s surface for maximum temperatures, then to measure minimum temperatures of those same areas about llhr later. A 2-channel scanning radiometer would acquire images in the visible and near-infrared spectrum during the day, and in the thermal-infrared spectrum both day and night. Data resolution of the 2 channels would be about 0.5 X 0.5km (1800ft) as the spacecraft covered a 700km (435mi)-wide swath. Project officials said the position of the 3001b satellite in orbit was “almost perfect. If all goes well, we could take a picture of the earth in the visible spectrum as early as tomorrow.” HCMM was first in a series of low-cost modular spacecraft built for the Applications Explorer Missions (AEM) — small, experimental spacecraft in special orbits to satisfy mission-unique experimental data-acquisition requirements. Scientists designed the mission to determine the feasibility of using day-night thermal-infrared remote sensor-derived data to detect various rock types and mineral resources; monitor surface soil-moisture changes; measure plant-canopy temperatures at frequent intervals to detect transpiration of water and plant stress; measure urban heat islands; map surface-temperature changes on land and water bodies; and analyze snow fields to predict water runoff. HCMM data, correlated with data from other satellites (especially Landsat) and from ground observations, could aid in detecting time variations of temperatures on the earth’s surface. Goddard Space Flight Center had been responsible for design, integration, and testing of the satellite and for data processing. Boeing Aerospace Co. had built the base module, International Telephone and Telegraph the instrument. (NASA Release 78-60; MOR E-651-78-01 [prelaunch] Apr 19/78; NYT, Apr 27/78)
NASA announced that Kenneth Chapman, associate administrator for external relations since Jan. 1978, had resigned from NASA to join Vought Aircraft Co., Dallas, Tex., as vice president for market research and analysis. Chapman had assumed his NASA position in Jan. 1978. Before joining NASA, Chapman had been director of nuclear material safety and safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He was a retired Air Force major general. (NASA Release 78-78; NASA anno May 18/78)
NASA announced it would hold a symposium Jan. 16 and 17 in Washington, D.C., on the proper role NASA should be prepared to fulfill during the early to mid-1980s. The symposium would host 20 nationally-known authorities in fields including federal research policy, economics, education, science, aircraft development, and space applications. The symposium was a part of its current assessment of its institutional base. (NASA Release 78-5)
NASA reported procurements during FY78 totalled $3660 million, 3.6% more than during FY77. Approximately 81% of the net dollar value was placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 5% with or through other government agencies; 90% of the dollar value of the latter resulted in contracts with industry. About 53% of funds placed by NASA under JPL contracts resulted in subcontracts or purchases with business firms. In short, about 90% of NASA procurement was contracted to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 72% were competitive procurements (either through formal advertising or negotiation) and 28% were noncompetitive. Small business firms had received $282 million (10%) of NASA’s direct awards, indicating that most agency awards to business firms were large continuing R&D contracts for major systems or items of hardware generally beyond the capability of small business firms on a prime-contract basis. However, of the $633 million in new contracts worth $10 000 or more awarded to business firms during 1978, small business received $137 million (22%); in addition to direct awards, small business received substantial subcontract awards from 75 of the NASA prime contractors participating in its small business subcontracting program. Total direct awards plus known subcontract awards to small business aggregated $513 million, 17% of NASA’s total (direct plus indirect) awards to business firms. Included in awards to small business firms were $75,852 million awarded to minority business enterprises: $14,064 million in direct awards, $32,151 million under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, and known subcontract awards of $29,637 million. In 1978, 49 states and Washington, D.C., participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over. These larger awards went to 2068 business firms in 46 states and D.C., and to 341 universities and nonprofit organizations in 47 states and D.C. Labor-surplus areas in 40 states had received 53% of the awards. (NASA ann proc rpt FY78)
NASA announced plans for 25 launches in 1978 and support of 3 Atlas-F space launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The 1978 missions would be almost equally divided between those directly benefiting people (for communications and geodetic, environmental, navigation, meteorological, and earth-resources studies) and those primarily for scientific and exploratory research. Fifteen launches would be for paying customers, including the European Space Agency (ESA), ComSatCorp, the U.S. Navy, Japan, NOAA, the United Kingdom, and Canada. Cape Canaveral had been scheduled for 10 Delta launches and all the Atlas-Centaur launches; one Delta would be launched from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg AFB. (Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1; Goddard News, Jan/Feb 78, 1; AvWk, Jan 9/78, 48)
The NYT reported a leading Soviet astrophysicist’s forecast that the next 250yr would see construction of a vast “artificial biosphere” in outer space capable of supporting 10 billion people, more than twice the world’s present population. Iosif Shklovsky had visualized a system of space colonies with total surface area hundreds of thousands of times greater than earth’s, that could capture and use huge amounts of solar energy. Looking further into the future, Shklovsky had also predicted that 2540yr from now mankind would have fully colonized the solar system. His article in the journal Social Sciences emphasized U.S. plans to use large satellites to beam solar energy to earth as microwaves. Prof. Gerald O’Neill of Princeton Univ., head of a group of physicists and engineers designing solar satellites, had estimated that a space colony accommodating 100 000 or more people could be built by the year 2025. Skhlovsky had agreed that expansion into space would be inevitable because of mounting pressures of population and environment on earth’s resources. Only the colonizing of space could offer a long-term solution, Shklovsky contended, claiming mathematical proof that adopting a global-balance strategy of limited growth could delay, but not avert, a world crisis. Shklovsky added that construction of large-scale colonies would require raw materials from the moon, asteroids, and other planets. Although other Soviet scientists had stressed the importance of the search for extraterrestrial life, Shklovsky said that chances of finding other intelligent life were extremely remote. The distance to the nearest extraterrestrial civilization (one whose signals could be reaching the earth now) had been calculated at 3300 to 9800 light yr, or 19 800 trillion to 58 800 trillion mi; however, the absence of life, at least intelligent life, in earth’s region of the universe should , not discourage, but rather encourage, the conquest of space, he said. (NYTMay 18/78, B-10)
NASA’s Office of Space Science (OSS) had become less optimistic about how much money it could expect from Congress for Spacelab in the 1980s, and was trying to reduce the estimated cost of such missions, Aerospace Daily reported. The cost of Spacelab operations, together with inherent limitations on the work it could support, was working against previous forecasts of heavy use. Two yrs previously, OSS had viewed Spacelab as an opportunity for growth of NASA’s science program and had projected annual Spacelab budgets of $250 million or so, excluding launch costs, by the mid-1980s. Dr. Noel Hinners, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, said, “Now we don’t have the same optimism,” given the expected budget environment, Spacelab orbit staytime and schedule limits, and competition within OSS for continued development of free-flyers. A more realistic budget prospect now would be $100 to $125 million per yr, essentially permitting three missions per yr (one for physics and astronomy, one for solar terrestrial programs, and one for life sciences), and development of one facility-class instrument per yr once steady-state operations were reached about 1984. That level of funding would be about the same as that for one major flight of planetary spacecraft per yr. (A/D, Nov 30/78, 127) During November: Two Space and Missile Test Center (SAMTEC) test ranges had provided NASA with radar tracking and data-relay support during the reentry of Pegasus 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. The micrometeoroid-detector satellite was NASA’s largest unmanned spacecraft when it was launched in February 1965. The Eastern Test Range at Patrick AFB, Fla., had served as lead range in satellite tracking, furnishing data from eastern sensors to GSFC; the Western Test Range at Vandenberg AFB had tracked the satellite after receiving acquisition data from NORAD. Employees of Federal Electric Corp., SAMTEC’s range technical-services contractor, had worked from early Sept. 12 until late Sept. 16 when reentry occurred off the coast of Angola. The company had used the TPQ-18 radar on south Vandenberg AFB, the FPQ-14 radar at Kaena Point, Hawaii, and the FPQ-6 radar at Pillar Point, Calif. In addition, SAMTEC Operations Control personnel at Vandenberg had supported the tracking and data relay provided to ETR from SAMTEC’s Kwajalein missile range in the Marshall Islands. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 78, 1)
NASA announced that it had appointed Dr. John McCarthy director of LeRC, effective Oct. 1, 1978. Currently director of Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Center for Space Research and a professor of aeronautics and astronautics, Dr. McCarthy had been widely recognized as an expert in systems engineering and vehicle design. He had served as a member of the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board and chairman of the Aeronautical Systems Division Advisory Group, Air Force Systems Command, and had been a member of the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff Scientific Advisory Group for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (NASA Release 78-16)
Fourteen satellites, four of them NASA’s and two starting the Intelsat V series of international communications satellites, were on the preliminary schedule of NASA launches for 1979, Aerospace Daily reported. These missions would use expendable launch vehicles, and NASA hoped that its most significant mission of 1979 would be number 15: first flight of the Spaed Shuttle. The tentative 1979 schedule would begin the transition of payloads from expendable launchers to the Space Shuttle. The Delta launch vehicle, workhorse of the 1970s, would carry only 4 of 1979’s 14 missions. Only three of the payloads were commercial, and half the 1979 launches would be from Vandenberg AFB and Wallops Island rather than KSC. The three launches scheduled in the first quarter of 1979 would use all three launch sites and three different launchers. Second-quarter payloads, all sponsored by organizations outside NASA, would also use all three launch sites. NASA planned five launches in the third quarter, which it hoped to close with the Space Shuttle’s first flight. (A/D Nov 21/78, 95)	,
MSFC announced it had successfully completed at the National Parachute Range May 23 an airdrop test of the parachute system designed to recover Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters after launch. This was the fourth drop test in which a dummy booster had been carried aloft beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft; the recovery system’s three main parachutes had all deployed, and all had functioned as expected. The dummy booster had landed virtually undamaged. NASA engineers planned two more airdrops before certifying the system for flight. (.Marshall Star, May 31/78, 2) During May: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that a 15-member U.S. aerobatic team would travel in Aug. to Ceske Budejovice, Czechoslovakia, to compete in the ninth World Aerobatic Championships sanctioned by the Inti. Aeronautic Federation (FAI). The 1978 U.S. team would be all male, as no woman had qualified in competitions to determine team members. Three-time U.S. national champion Leo Loudenslager, an American Airlines pilot, said, “We have high expectations. We have even better trained pilots and more sophisticated aircraft than we did in 1976, and we are more knowledgeable about what to expect.” The 1976 U.S. team had lost to the USSR the titles it had captured in France in 1972: top team, best male, and best female. Loudenslager would fly his experimental modified version of the 200hp Stephens Akro, the Laser 200. Henry Haigh might fly the modified Pitts Special biplane in which he had competed in 1976, basically the same design flown by the remainder of the team. The five aircraft for the competition, disassembled Aug. 8 at Kennedy Inti. Airport for transport to Frankfort, would be reassembled and flown to Peine near Braunschweig in West Germany for 2wk of intensive practice, then to Budejovice for the competition. The championship event would mark nearly two decades of U.S. participation in FAI-sanctioned precision aerobatic competitions, first held in 1960 in Czechoslovakia. The event also would commemorate two-thirds of a century since the first recorded aerobatic flight: Lt. Peter Nesterov of the Imperial Russian Air Service was credited with performing in 1913 the first inside loop in a Nieuport monoplane. NAA, the aero club representing the U.S., had sanctioned as the official team representing the U.S. at the world championships the group selected by the Aerobatic Club of America, which would also be the only team competing in Czechoslovakia without government financing. (NAA newsletter, May 78, 1)
NASA’s annual procurement report for FY77 said that agency procurements had totaled $3532 million, a 10.2% increase over FY76. Approximately 80% of the net dollar value had been placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 6% with or through other government agencies. Of procurements placed by NASA with other government agencies, 90% had resulted in contracts with industry; about 48% of funds under JPL contracts had been for subcontracts with or purchases from business firms. Thus, about 90% of NASA’s procurement dollars had gone directly or indirectly to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 73% were competitive procurements. Small business firms had received $255 million (only 9%) of these direct awards, since most of them were for large continuing R&D contracts for major systems and items of hardware, generally beyond the prime contractor capability of a small business. However, small business had received $119 million (22%) of the $522 million in new contracts worth $10 000 and more with business firms. Small business had also received $496 million (18%) of subcontract awards from 87 of NASA’s prime contractors, including $59,382 million awarded to minority small business enterprises. During 1977, 48 states and- Washington, D.C., had participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over, 83% of which were placed in labor-surplus areas located in 41 states. Of NASA’s prime contractors, 86% reported their larger subcontract awards had gone to 1684 different subcontractors in 45 states and Washington, D.C. (NASA pro-cur rpt FY77)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers reported completion of tests simulating checkout of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) using flight-type hardware interfaced with the launch-processing system (LPS) and tests run by computer. The tests would verify compatibility of SRB hardware and demonstrate use of the LPS to checkout the SRB system. Flight equipment removed from simulated SRB hardware had been relocated in equipment racks to simulate a left-hand SRB configuration; next use of the LPS would be to checkout the left-hand SRB. United Space Boosters, Inc., would perform the checkouts, then move the equipment to Kennedy Space Center for use in future SRB checkouts. (Marshall Star, Mar 1/78, 2)
Aerospace Daily reported that John Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had addressed the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Nov. 28 on the importance of Congress’s role in an aggressive space program, contrasting the cautious approach of the Carter Administration. He cited the 1978 introduction of national space-policy bills by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.) and Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.). On the House side, Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced, and the House overwhelmingly passed, a bill authorizing an unrequested $25 million to broaden and accelerate R&D for a solar power satellite system, including a hardware flight-demonstration phase that the administration had opposed as “premature.”	. The staff of the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications, chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), had been working on ways for Congress to facilitate “the space industrial revolution,” Yardley noted. He added that “if Congress does all these things, it will be in their tradition,” including taking the lead in developing the nation’s railroad system and passing the Homestead Act in the 19th century. “The same kind of action will be needed soon for the space industrial revolution,” he said; the industrial activity required will “be brought to bear if the climate is correct. It’s up to the government to provide the environment to stimulate growth.” Whether this occurred, he concluded, “may be the difference in the next 50 years as to whether the United States continues to be world leader not only in space but economically—or becomes a second-class power.” (A/D, Dec 1/78, 137)
NASA announced it had selected Pan American World Airways, Inc., Aerospace Services Division, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for support services to facility operations at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss. Estimated cost over the first 3yr of the cost-plus-award-fee contract would be $32 million, with two 1-yr unpriced options. The contractor would operate and maintain NSTL real and installed property; manage supplies and equipment; and provide institutional, construction, and installation services. (NASA Release 78-94)
NASA announced plans to launch from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Mar. 23 an experimental Japanese direct-broadcast communications satellite capable of sending television programs directly into an individual’s home. The satellite, technically named Medium-Scale Broadcasting Satellite for Experiment Purposes (BSE), had been a project of Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA). As agreed by the U.S. and Japan, NASA would launch BSE on a Delta rocket; NASDA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs. NASA’s worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) would track BSE until it achieved final orbit, when NASDA would take over tracking. Present Japanese TV, though covering 97% of the main islands, had not been economical for remote islands and mountain regions; also, tall buildings had degraded TV reception in large cities. NASDA had designed BSE to transmit high-quality color television to the Japanese islands and Okinawa at lower cost; user antennas could be as small as 1 to 1.6 meters (3.3 to 5.2ft), with production costs estimated at $200 per unit. The high power of BSE could transmit directly to individual TV sets even in bad weather, making TV available to Japanese living on the offshore islands and in inaccessible mountain areas. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage the Delta vehicle for NASA’s Office of Space Transportation Systems, and KSC would manage launch operations. General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., had built the BSE under contract to Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. The Japanese Broadcasting Corp., the Japanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, and the Radio Research Laboratories of Japan would sponsor or participate in the program. (NASA Release 78-33; MOR M-492-212-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb. 28/78; Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 1)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert Frosch, had accepted for NASA a document commemorating the anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s solo trans-Atlantic flight from New York to Paris in the “Spirit of St. Louis” on May 20, 1927. Copies of the framed Flight Philatelic Document, containing a series of American and French Lindbergh stamps and cancellations tracing the history of the aviator’s achievement, had been presented to 25 persons and organizations in the U.S. and France. Friends of the Nassau County Museum, Long Island, N.Y., had produced the tribute and selected the recipients, including President Jimmy Carter, French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, and museums and agencies linked to aviation. Each of the documents bore seven American and French Lindbergh stamps with key cancellations, and each document was autographed by President Carter, President d’Estaing, Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac, U.S. Postmaster General Benjamin Bailer, French Postal Secretary Norbert Segard, and Mrs. Lindbergh. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
A simulated Space Shuttle orbiter had represented the Enterprise during practice hoists into the tall tower where the latter would soon be tested, the Marshall Star reported. The real orbiter had recently completed a series of landing tests in Calif, and would next undergo a series of tests at MSFC to see how the orbiter and other Shuttle components would maintain guidance and control under vibration during launch and powered flight. MSFC engineers would use the simulated orbiter to rehearse tests; for example, they had towed the simulator along center roadways to check clearances. The team had then practiced hoisting the simulator into the 131m (430ft) test stand. After completing tests at MSFC, the simulator would go by barge to KSC to check out procedures for launch. Vandenberg AFB had asked to borrow the simulator for its Shuttle launch facilities. (Marshall Star, Jan 11/78, 1)
NASA announced it had named Dr. Adrienne Timothy assistant associate administrator for space science, effective June 18. Dr. Timothy would be chief scientist in the Office of Space Science, representing that office to the scientific community as the focal point for obtaining, evaluating, and using its expertise in planning NASA space science programs. She would succeed Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool, who had been named chief scientist for NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications. Timothy had begun her NASA career in 1974 as staff scientist for solar physics, Physics and Astronomy Programs, in the Office of Space Science. In 1975 she had become chief of the Solar Physics Branch, where she planned and directed U.S. space science research in the solar physics discipline; in 1977 she had become program manager for advanced programs and technology in NASA’s Solar Terrestrial Division of the Office of Space Science. Before joining NASA, Timothy had been leader for the Apollo telescope-mount reduction and analysis system at the American Science and Engineering Corp. (NASA Release 78-91)
The NYT reported that the Soviet Union had built and bombers drop-tested a new manned space vehicle similar to the U.S. Space Shuttle. The delta-winged reusable vehicle had been dropped from a Soviet Tupolev TU-95 Bear bomber in atmospheric tests of the spacecraft’s aerodynamic and handling qualities, like recent tests of the Space Shuttle. No known space testing of the delta-winged vehicle had occurred, although the Soviets might have begun orbital tests with a second new manned-flight craft with space-tug capabilities. Design characteristics of the test vehicle were apparently similar to those of both the U.S. Shuttle orbiter and the lifting-body research vehicles flight-tested earlier by the U.S. Air Force and NASA. The vehicle strongly resembled the USAF/Boeing X-20 DynaSoar concept, which had been viewed as a space station resupply vehicle before the program was canceled. The Soviet spacecraft was described as smaller than the 150 0001b NASA Shuttle orbiter, but larger than the Soyuz expendable manned transport. The NYT said the new vehicle indicated the USSR believed it had the technology to proceed with building reusable manned spacecraft. (NYT, Mar 21/78, 12)
The Congressional Record reported that former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) had introduced S. 3541, the NASA Solar-Power Satellite Program Act of 1978, authorizing research, development, and demonstration of obtaining electrical power from space through solar-power satellite systems or other energy sources. Successful demonstration of the technical and economic feasibility of this concept would supply an inexhaustible future energy both for domestic purposes and for export. “Either way,” said Sen. Schmitt, “such a demonstration could have a significant impact on our nation’s balance of trade.” The bill would instruct NASA to begin a program aimed at resolving economic and technical problems surrounding the concept, including systems definitions; health, safety, environmental and socioeconomic studies; and technology assessments of various space energy sources compared with terrestrial energy sources. Favorable evaluations “would accelerate the design of a program to make this promising concept operational at the earliest possible date,” Harrison concluded. (CR, Sept 30/78, S 16715) During September: NASA announced that scientists had confirmed detection by Pioneer Venus 1, on the first leg of its 7mo voyage to Venus, of a powerful gamma-ray burst from somewhere in the universe. So-called gamma-ray bursts, unknown until 1973, had enormous energies and occurred about once a month from random points in earth’s galaxy or even beyond. Discovery of their origin—black holes, brilliant supernova, neutron stars, or some totally unexpected source—would be a difficult task for astronomers. Pioneer Venus measurements of these bursts during its 482million-km mission should enable scientists for the first time to track the origins accurately. Two other American spacecraft (Vela, a DOE satellite orbiting the earth, and Helios B, a NASA-European scientific satellite orbiting the sun) had detected the gamma-ray burst; scientists would correlate observations of all the satellites to get a rough fix on the burst. Locating the origin of the burst would give scientists an idea of the extraordinary physical events that could produce such high-energy explosions; no current hypotheses could account for them. (NASA Actv, Sept/78, 19)
On March 30, 1977, Carter announced that the U.S. and the USSR would establish a study group to “develop an agreement whereby we might forgo the development of a capability of destroying satellite observations vehicles, so that we can have an assured way to watch the Soviets [and] they can have an assured way of watching us from satellites” (the principal means of detecting noncompliance with strategic arms-control limitations). Yet, according to Brown’s statement, Oct. 1977 was already too late for both sides to give up killer-satellite development. The Navy had been interested in killer-satellite capability because the USSR had begun to use ocean-surveillance satellites to locate American ships. The USSR had also tried to use satellites to detect submerged submarines, making missile-carrying submarines vulnerable and offering a threat to the undersea leg of the U.S. triad of nuclear deterrence. (W Star, June 6/78, A-4)
