NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that a NASA-USAF pilotless research vehicle called HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) made its first flight at the Edwards Air Force Base test center. Purpose of the HiMAT program was to improve maneuverability of U.S. fighter craft at transonic speeds (700-780 mph) and in air-to-air combat. No other remotely piloted vehicle or aircraft had the design features used on HiMAT, which would be incorporated into future USAF vehicles if successful: winglets (airfoils at the end of each wing) and unique close-coupled canards (small winglike surfaces located close to the main wings) to reduce air drag, and aeroelastic tailoring that originated in the early 1970s using the directional properties of graphite composites in the wings and canards (representing about 25% of HiMAT’s total weight) to control deformations under aerodynamic loads. The first flight was to test vehicle aerodynamics during separation from the carrier and during approach and landing. Taken to an altitude of 45,000 feet under the right wing of a B-52, HiMAT flew for 22 minutes under control of a NASA research pilot on the ground before landing on skids at a dry lakebed. HiMAT was built by Rockwell International’s North American Aircraft Division under contract to DFRC, using concepts from the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79,
Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., U.S. Air Force chief of staff, told the annual meeting of the Military Operations Research Society that the priority of the Space Shuttle program had “shifted to matters of national defense,” the Santa Barbara News Press reported [see October 30]. Whatever else the Shuttle does and whatever other purposes it will have, “the priority, the emphasis, and the driving momentum now has to be those satellite systems which are important to national security,” said Allen, a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Emphasizing the “change from what had been true a year or so ago,” Allen said the change was “apparent and accepted now, and it’s a change which will, if there are additional technical difficulties..., become more and more significant.” The Shuttle, he said, was “quite critical for concerns of national defense and for.. .verification of treaties.. .Confidence in the Shuttle and its reliability must be sufficiently high for us to place what is a substantial amount of the security of the nation on the performance of that system.” (Santa Barbara News Press, Dec 6/79, 14)
The Washington Star reported on a NASA Pioneer Venus briefing at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., which revealed that Venus (far from being the dull and featureless object it appeared, covered by heavy cloud layers) had spectacular terrain and a unique atmospheric circulation system. Pioneer Venus 1 had been sending back radar and other information since it arrived at Venus in December 1978; Pioneer Venus 2 had arrived shortly thereafter, separating into five probes to study the atmosphere, four of which reached the “smoldering 900° F surface.” Dr. Harold Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey reported that radar scans of Venus had shown a mountain estimated at 27,000 feet, far higher than Earth’s 29,028-foot Mt. Everest. Dr. Alvin Seiff of ARC said that Venus’s atmospheric circulation was different from any known elsewhere: Earth’s surface absorbed sunlight, and the resulting heat in combination with Earth’s rotation made the atmosphere flow west to east. However, the atmosphere of Venus absorbed the sunlight 30 to 35 miles above the surface, and heat variations in the atmospheric layers apparently drove one another with their motion. (W Star May 29/79, A-2)
DOD launched a Block 5D defense meteorological satellite (DMSP) from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., at 11:22 a.m. local time on a Thor booster into an orbit with 837-kilometer apogee, 818-kilometer perigee, 101.5-minute period, and 98.8° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the 1,131-pound spacecraft would be tested for about 15 days before being put into operation in its nearpolar Sun-synchronous orbit. (NASA wkly SSR, May 31-Junc 6; AvWk, June 18/79, 56) June 7; The Soviet Union launched Bhaskara, an Earth-observation satellite, for the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) from the Kapustin Yar cosmodrome at 2 p.m. local time on an SS-5 Skean vehicle into an orbit with 541-kilometer apogee, 518-kilometer perigee, 50.7° inclination, and 95.2-minute period. Named for an ancient Indian astronomer, the 1,000-pound India-built spacecraft was the second launched for India by the Soviet Union; it carried television cameras and equipment for studying hydrology, meteorology, and forestry. India’s first satellite, launched about four years ago, was still in orbit and functioning well. (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13/79; Spacewarn SPX-308; WPost, June 8/79, A-15; AvWk, July 23/79, 59; D/SD, June 11/79, 200; July 3/79, 10)
NASA announced that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, and Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, on March 29 signed a memorandum of understanding in Washington, D.C., on a joint international solar-polar mission to be launched in 1983. NASA and ESA would each provide a spacecraft, and ESA would supply software and personnel to support ESA’s flight operations in the United States. NASA would be responsible for mission control, launch operations, and tracking and data acquisition, and for several experiments. JPL would manage the NASA scientific effort and development of a NASA spacecraft; JSC would manage the Shuttle launch portion of the mission; ESTEC would manage the European effort. The objectives of the mission would be to study the structure and emissions of the Sun as a function of latitude from the solar equator to the solar poles and to study the interplanetary medium Earth-to-Jupiter and the Jovian magnetosphere. Launched from a Shuttle, the two craft, each propelled by an upper-stage booster, would take a path in the ecliptic plane (that containing all the planets in Earth’s system) toward Jupiter, using its gravity to propel them out of the ecliptic toward the Sun on trajectories to pass one over the north and one over the south solar poles, retrace the ecliptic track, pass over the opposite poles, and fly back toward Jupiter. Mission lifetime would be about five years. (NASA Release 79-37; ESA anno Mar 30/79) During March: FBIS carried regular reports on the progress of the Soyuz 32 cosmonauts aboard the Salyut 6 orbiting space station. Upon arrival February 26, the crew had begun reactivating the thermal regulators, water regeneration system, and ventilation. On March 1, they had begun checkout of individual consoles and scientific instruments, tested the manual attitude control system, and corrected the flight path of Salyut 6 using Soyuz 32 propulsion. The following day the crew did baseline medical checkups using Polynom apparatus; the flight engineer was tested in the morning, and the commander was tested in the afternoon. In an interview March 4, the crew’s doctor reported that Lyakhov had needed 1.5 days to adapt to weightlessness but was now feeling well. The crew had asked to begin their exercise program on trainer machines and cycles several days ahead of schedule. Lyakhov’s regime emphasized his “vestibular system”; Ryumin’s, the cardiovascular. On March 5, Tass, the Soviet news agency, said that the doctors were keeping close watch on Commander Lyakhov, “a thick-set man...on his first flight in outer space.” The commentator said “unhasty adaptation” was important during the first few days on the space station, which imposed three peak loads at one time: adaptation to weightlessness, complicated docking and transfer procedures, and emotional strain. More time had been allowed on this flight than usual for the crew to check all the station systems, both those governing flight and those controlling living conditions (the “boost week,” a term used by cosmonaut Vladimir Kovalenok, one of the communications team keeping in touch with the Soyuz 32 crew). A March 6 broadcast interview with a “scientific employee at the Flight Center” on repair and servicing of the Salyut said that the intensive activity “did not mean that anything is broken or needs mending.” On Salyut 6, unlike its predecessors, individual items of equipment for the first time could be exchanged when their resources were exhausted. The station had been in orbit for 18 months and carried almost 1,000 different instruments, the reporter said. Important systems, such as life support, had been designed to be practically failure proof by using interchangeable units within easy reach, facilitating periodic exchange of equipment. Introduction of the Progress automated cargo ships meant that new instruments, equipment, and tools were available upon crew request. Progress 2 had brought the Soyuz 29 crew a globe indicator for the control panel to show the station’s location in relation to Earth; it had also brought new computer units for the Delta automated navigation system. The first job in reactivating the Salyut 6 station had been to check out the docking unit on the transfer module, with its opening into outer space; the Soyuz 26 crew had done this last year. Lyakhov and Ryumin would have to test each on-board system and plug in reserve circuits or replace units. The reporter pointed out that, notwithstanding the long use of the station, “not one reserve circuit in any system has so far been switched on.” The current crew would replace ventilators in the thermal system, light bulbs, cables in the television and communications systems, components of the exercise equipment, and filters and regenerators in the life-support systems. On March 12, Progress 5 was launched with a load of fuel for the Salyut 6 propulsion unit and materials for its on-board systems. A commentator said that portable cables and other mobile elements of radiocommunication “wear out heavily” on long flights; the crew had replaced headsets, cables, and switches. They had also set up and operated an on-board videotape recorder and a video monitoring device. An interview March 13 with cosmonaut Vladimir Aksenov said that the Salyut represented a new stage of technology, not only because it could be supplied but also because it could be overhauled in space with components and assemblies flown there by freight and crew transport vessels. Aksenov noted that the crew had used an ordinary soldering iron, said to be an enormous departure for repairs in a closed weightless space. Also, he said, basic scientific apparatus had heretofore been assembled in a ground workshop and checked out in a ground station; for the first time, the installation and test of new apparatus would take place on an operating space station in orbit. This was made possible by a wide selection of tools designed especially for use in space: pliers, screwdrivers, clamps, and special instruments to handle special nuts and bolts. Upon the arrival March 14 of the Progress 5, bringing fuel, equipment, experiment materials, and mail, the crew’s doctor said in an interview that previous flights had indicated that weightlessness had some tricky aspects and that the consequences of exposure to it could be very serious. The current crew were apparently beginning to feel at home in the new surroundings, however. After unloading the ferry, the crew had the job of dismantling the Kristall electric furnace used for more than 40 experiments in space processing of materials and installing new apparatus better designed to operate in weightlessness; they had also plugged in a new chemical battery to reinvigorate the power system. By March 21, the unloading of the supply ship was completed, and the crew was ahead of schedule using the new equipment, especially a color television camera to show the interior of the station with equipment replacements including new sensors installed in the work area to detect minimal air pollution in the station’s atmosphere. On March 24, the crew communicated by television with the flight control center “in the direction from earth to the spaceship.. .for the first time in the history of space flight.” The control center could now transmit drawings, plans, and working documents from the ground to the Salyut; “in principle,” said the report, “any central TV transmission can be sent to the spaceship.” By month’s end, Tass said that the crew had adapted to weightlessness and were proceeding with scheduled tasks. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 1-28/79)
NASA reported that four organizations in the United States and Canada had formed a joint sounding-rocket program to study this month’s total solar eclipse and its effect on Earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. The February 26 event, visible in totality only in the northwestern United States and central Canada, would be the last one in this century observable from the North American continent. Working from two launch sites in western Ontario north of Minneapolis, Minn., NASA, the Army’s Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory, the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, and Canada’s National Research Council (NRC) would gather data or predicting atmospheric responses to such disturbances. NASA, through WFC, would be the U.S. lead agency for seven rocket launches during the operation. The NRC in Canada would provide construction, ground and flight safety, launch coordination, and other support. The Army lab would sponsor an experiment measuring electron densities, and the U.S. Air Force lab would operate a mobile observatory to measure infrared radiation from the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 79-18)
The Washington Star said that three jet planes in four days had lost large parts while in flight: on September 15, a Boeing 707 passenger jet operated by American Airlines on a flight from Detroit to San Francisco had dropped a wing flap into San Francisco Bay; on September 17, a DC-9 passenger jet of Air Canada, 60 miles north of Boston’s Logan International Airport en route to Nova Scotia, had dropped is tailcone into the Atlantic Ocean from 25,000 feet up. An American Airlines Boeing cargo jet had scattered 200-pound chunks of its left wing over Chicago September 18 before landing safely at O’Hare airport. No one had reported injuries from falling debris. (W Star Sept 19/79, A-9)
NASA launched for the U.S. Air Force a satellite called SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 4:42 p.m. EST on Delta into a transfer orbit pending its boost into operational orbit February 2. Later orbit elements were 43,297-kilometer apogee, 27,512-kilometer perigee, 1,416.6-minute period, 6.5° inclination. SCATHA carried twelve experiments, three provided by NASA, to collect data on high-energy solar-wind particles causing false signals from satellites by building up electrical charges on their surfaces. Military and commercial satellites in geostationary orbit over the Earth at 35,900 kilometers (22,300 miles) had been the major sufferers; the charges could effectively disable vital communications by causing equipment failure, false recording of unachieved events, or initiation of unplanned events. SCATHA would meet the greatest challenge of its planned 1-year lifetime during a solar eclipse period beginning in March, when electrical charging would reach its height; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had included an electric-field detector, a pair of 50-meter antennas to be extended in opposite directions in March to form a single instrument longer than a football field. Extension of the antennas might effect the spacecraft’s dynamics. The USAF’s Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) would reimburse NASA about $9 million for the launch. (NASA Release 79-3; NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [prelaunch] Jan 17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 25/789; O Sen Star Jan 31/79, 1; Today, Jan 20/79, 8A; Jan 22/79, 6A; Jan 30/79, 10A; W Star Jan 23/79, A-6) During January: The ESA announced that it planned to launch one of its Intelsat V communications satellites on Europe’s Ariane booster. The first four of this series of seven would be launched from mid-1979 to late 1980 on U.S. Atlas Centaurs; ESA’s board opted for a 1981 Ariane launch of its sixth Intelsat V and for Shuttle launches for the other two. (ESA Release Jan 1979, 1)
The Washington Star reported that DOD would begin next week a long-awaited fly-off to see who would get a $2 billion contract to produce air-launched cruise missiles. The U.S. Air Force said that the missile was “desperately needed” to fill a gap in the U.S. weapons system created by President Carter’s decision to scrap the B-l bomber. Launched from a B-52 flying off the coast of California, the missiles would fly to a target southwest of Salt Lake City, Utah. W Star, July 13/79, A-4)
NASA declared the August 9 launch of WESTAR-C (known as Westar 3 in orbit) to be satisfactory. The satellite, third of Western Union Telegraph Company’s communications satellites to be launched by NASA, was performing satisfactorily on its station at 91 °W over the equator. (NASA MOR M-492-203-79-03 [postlaunch] Oct 25/79) NASA declared satisfactory the January 30 launch for U.S. Air Force SAM-SO of the SCATHA mission into a transfer orbit from which it went into operational mode, a controlled westward drifting of 5° per day as planned. (NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [postlaunch] Oct 25/79)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with Rockwell International Corporation’s space systems group to build two Space Shuttle orbiters (OV-103 and OV-104), convert a ground-test orbiter (OV-99), and modify the first orbiter (OV-102); this would give NASA four orbiters for Shuttle operations. JSC would administer the $1.9-billion contract at Rockwell’s California facilities and at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. (NASA Release 79-15; JSC Release 79-07)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
MSFC announced that payload specialists selected for Spacelab 2 would begin training in April with an orientation tou r to visit most of the principal investigators whose experiments would ride on the 1982 mission. Each of the selectees had been a co-investigator on one of the Spacelab 2 experiments. The three men and one woman selected would visit six sites in the United States and three in the United Kingdom for a first look at many of the experiments and to allow them to decide with MSFC management how much training they would need before the flight. To be visited were Chicago, Iowa City, Palo Alto, Pasadena, Washington, D.C., and Cambridge, Mass., in the United States; and Abingdon, Dorking, and Birmingham in England. Those selected were Dr. Loren W. Acton, research scientist at Lockheed’s Palo Alto laboratory; Dr. John-David F. Bartoe and Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, research physicists at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C.; and Dr. George W. Simon, chief of the solar research branch at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, assigned to the Sacramento Peak observatory in New Mexico. Two of the specialists would actually fly on Spacelab 2 to operate the scientific experiments; the others would operate ground-based equipment and assist the two in orbit. Spacelab 2’s payload would consist mainly of experiments in astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics, plus plasma physics, botany, medicine, and space technology. (MSFC Release
NASA announced that it would launch the third applications explorer mission, AEM-C, from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Scout on or about October 29. Called Magsat (magnetic-field satellite), the craft would map Earth’s magnetic field and record distribution of crustal anomalies with a resolution of 350 kilometers, first global vector measurements of the nearEarth field. Magsat was a cooperative effort of NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey, which would use the data to update its magnetic charts. (NASA MOR E-662-79-01 [prelaunch] Sept 28/79) During September: The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy announced that the United States and Japan had formally agreed to extend their research and development cooperation into nonenergy fields. A meeting in Tokyo September 20-21 had issued a U.S.-Japan joint communique recalling summit talks in May between President Carter and Prime Minister Ohira on cooperative efforts in basic and applied research; working groups at the September meeting had looked at possible joint projects in areas such as environment, health, and outer space development. Further meetings would be held, the next in Washington. (Executive Office of the President release, no date)
NASA announced it would test a modified U.S. Air Force jet July 20 at DFRC to see if winglets (9-foot airfoil sections) attached to wingtips of a KC-135 could improve performance and save fuel. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, LaRC’s inventor-engineer, had had the idea of using normal drag from a wingtip vortex as lift to improve performance. NASA would vary the winglets’ cant angle and incidence between test flights to measure effects of different positions; DFRC had already flown the plane without winglets to obtain baseline measurements for comparison. (NASA Release 79-94; DFRC Release 27-79)
The North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) issued a fact sheet on satellite decay predictions by its Space Defense Center, watching over more than 4,500 man-made satellites in orbit around the Earth. The Tracking and Impact Predictions (TIPs) gave time and position for large items such as payloads and rocket motors that might survive reentry and impact on Earth; for smaller objects likely to burn up without reaching the ground, the center would compute only a probable date of decay. Predictions would depend on many variables but were necessary under a 1971 pact between the United States and the Soviet Union that both nations would help identify objects that might reenter over the other’s territory; TIPs would prevent mistaking a reentering object for an incoming warhead and triggering warning networks. (PAO, Peterson AFB, Apr 15/79)
The Washington Post reported that five states were vying for the Large Space Telescope “even though it will be 300 miles above everybody’s head.” The actual bone of contention was the science institute that would direct use of the unique orbiting observatory. One astronomer said the location of the institute would be “the astronomical capital of the world” for the next 30 years; it was “the biggest astronomical prize to come along since the 200-inch was built at Palomar for the Hale Observatory.” The five competing states were Maryland, New Jersey, Illinois, Colorado, and California (the University of Arizona and University of New Mexico, where numerous ground-based telescopes were already located, were considered “occasional” contenders). Competition for the institute was so serious that three of the competing groups represented 74 universities: the University Research Association (URA), with 53; Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI), with 7; and the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), with 14. URA backed the Fermilab outside Chicago; AUI wanted it at Princeton; AURA wanted it at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. Princeton boasted of Einstein’s work there for over 20 years. Hopkins said that it had been doing spaceborne astronomy for 20 years and was closer to Washington and to GSFC, which would track and control the Space Telescope. NASA said it would not decide for a year; the Washington Post said that nobody at the agency would talk about it. (W Post, Nov 18/79, A-4)
Today reported launch of an unannounced classified payload from Cape Canaveral Air Force Base on a Titan 3C at 7:22 a.m. Monday, September 30. The craft was a reconnaissance satellite, military sources said later, and would be used to photograph Soviet troop movements. (Today, Oct 2/79, 8A)
INTELSAT reported from its meeting just ended in Washington, D.C., that international telecommunications by satellite would increase nearly 100% by 1983.	More than 200 delegates representing more than 100 nations at the week-long meeting had pooled forecasts of services needed from INTELSAT’s satellite system. The biggest growth would be in the Atlantic region, where traffic might increase 114% by year-end 1983. The new Intelsat V satellites soon to be launched could carry 12,000 simultaneous phone calls plus two television channels—double the capacity of present satellites. Planning was under way for satellites with 40,000-circuit capacity. (INTELSAT Release
The Washington Post reported that the Air Force had taken an “unusual step” December 4 in formally defending the Pratt & Whitney F100 engine powering the F-15 and F-16 fighter planes. Robert J. Hermann, assistant PRECEDING page blank not filmed INTFNTIONM-tY 91 secretary for research, said the U.S. Air Force had no plans to use another engine because of F100 problems. Conceding that F100 engine durability was “less than anticipated,” Hermann said F-15 engine-related safety was better than that of any Air Force fighter after comparable service. On November 21, the head of the USAF Systems Command told the Senate Armed Services Committee that “as many as 43” F-15s and F-16s would be without engines by next summer because of F100 production delays and other problems; at Congress’s insistence, the Pentagon had financed limited work on General Electric’s F101X engine as a possible alternative. Pratt & Whitney and General Electric were competing “hotly” for flight-engine contracts, the Washington Post said, and Pratt & Whitney had announced plans to spend $10 million on expansion of its jet production capabilities. (WPost, Dec 5/79, D9)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
NASA reported that researchers from JPL and the U.S. Geological Survey had carried out measurements using radio noise from distant quasars that indicated rapid increase in southern California’s width. Dr. Arthur E. Niell of JPL’s astronomical radio-interferometric Earth-survey team reported an increase of 20.3 centimeters (8 inches) over 7 months between JPL and NASA’s Goldstone deep-space station about 193 kilometers (120 miles) away. At the American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco, Nieil and J.C. Savage of the U.S. Geologic;il Survey described making simultaneous recordings at the two radiotelescopes of radio noise from quasars and comparing the signals’ time of arrival using extremely precise clocks. Changes in distance between the telescopies could be measured with accuracies of 5 centimeters (2 inches) or less, and could be important to the Survey’s earthquake prediction mission. (NASA Release 79-166)
The DOD launched two spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Titan 3D, with no word on mission or orbital elements. A later report in Aviation Week & Space Technology'said that the 10:30 a.m. local time launch put a Lockheed-built high-resolution film-return satellite in an orbit with 244-kilometer apogee, 177-kilometer perigee, and 96.4° inclination, to supplement a KH-11 high-resolution recon vehicle that had been operating in space since June 1978, furnishing data by digital transmission rather than film returned to Earth in reentry capsules. The digital system allowed much longer life for this type of spacecraft, whose usefulness did not depend on depletion of its film pod. “As is often the case with film-return spacecraft,” said Aviation Week & Space Technology, the March 16 launch had included a piggyback payload, probably a ferret mission, put in orbit with 625-kilometer apogee, 623-kilometer perigee, and 95.7° inclination. (WTR cover Mar 16/79; AvWk, Apr 9/79, 18)
NASA said that it would stop acquiring Goes 3 data after February 1980; on July 1 it had shut down the altimeter, primary experiment device. DOD would use the C-band transponders to calibrate tracking and would monitor and control Goes 3 after March 1, 1980. (NASA MOR E-855-75-01 [postlaunch] Dec 27/79) During December: The AFSC Newsreview reported completion of the first phase of construction at Vandenberg Air Force Base’s Space Shuttle facility. Launch eomplex 6, built in the 1960s for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program, had never been used (the MOL program was canceled in 1969) and was available to WSMC as a Shuttle launch site, Phase 1, carried out by Morrison-Knudsen, Inc., under a $3.9 million Army Corps of Engineers contract, had moved 680,000 cubic yards of earth and 10,000 cubic yards of reinforced concrete and had dismantled 2,400 tons of steel. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 79, 6)
Rockwell International said that its Autonetics Strategic Systems Division would develop an airborne imaging-sensor autoprocessor under a $1 million contract with the U.S. Air Force Avionics Laboratory covering design, fabrication, and testing. The device would automate functions such as target recognition and cueing for sensors such as the forward-looking infrared sensor (FLIR) used in tactical fighters for air-to-ground combat. (Rockwell Release ESG 19)
The Washington Star reported that three U.S.-built Singapore air force jets had disappeared simultaneously at noon December 19 during a training flight from Clark Air Force Base near Manila, Philippines, toward a bombing range 20 miles away. Maurice Baker, Singapore ambassador to the Philippines, said “the astonishing thing is that they all disappeared at the same time without a trace.” The planes were on the same route flown by four Philippine air force planes when they mysteriously disappeared more than 5 years ago. (W Star, Dec 21/79, A-7)
Today newspaper said that representatives of Western Union and Hughes Aircraft Company had announced plans to launch Westar 3, an $8.3 million spacecraft bought in 1974 as a ground-based spare to supplement Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and now in orbit over the equator south of Dallas and southwest of San Francisco, respectively. Western Union said Westar 3, needed because of increasing demands on the other two satellites, would be stationed over the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific west of Ecuador. Western Union had made “substantial savings” in buying the spacecraft five years ago when prices were lower: the same item would cost about $14 million if built today. The firm was holding electronic parts for a fourth Westar in a Delaware warehouse. NASA would launch Westar 3 on a Delta from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on or about August 9, it said in a release. {Today, July 20/79, 16A; NASA (press kit) Release 79-96)
Effective this date, Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans Mark announced that the U.S. Air Force would realign its space and missile systems research, development, and acquisition elements, establishing two new organizations in the AFSC: Ballistic Missile Office (BMO) and Space Service Division (SSD). The SSD would assume space-related activities for which SAMSO (the U.S. Air Force space and missile systems organization) had been responsible, realigning operations on the east and west coasts: the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) would be formed at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., and the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif. These centers would report through a Vandenberg unit not yet named. ESMC would include the present Eastern Test Range (ETR), the 6,555th aerospace test group, and 6,550th air base wing. WSMC would include the Western Test Range (WTR) and the 6,595th aerospace test wing. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79, 1)
NASA launched the high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 3 at 1:28 a.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on an Atlas Centaur into an orbit with 492-kilometer apogee, 477-kilometer perigee, 94.3-minute period, 43.6° inclination. It was third of a series designed to survey the sky for X-ray sources, measure gamma-ray flux, and define the composition of cosmic-ray nuclei. The first Heao, launched in 1977 with a 6-month design lifetime, measured and mapped X-ray and gamma-ray sources for 17 months, reentering Earth’s atmosphere in March 1979. It had increased the number of known X-ray resources from 350 to 1,500 and had discovered a new black-hole candidate as well as a dust cloud enveloping a supercluster of galaxies. The second, called Einstein, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built, was launched November 1978 with a 1-year lifetime to examine in greater detail the findings of Heao 1. Heao 3 carried a gamma-ray spectrometer and experiments on a cosmic-ray isotopes and heavy cosmic-ray nuclei. Data from the three observations would cast light on the origins of high-energy radiation in space and the formation of elements and of the universe. (NASA Release 79-113; NASA MOR S-832-79-03 [prelaunch] Aug 10/79, [postlaunch] Sept 20/79; prelaunch summary, Sept 10/79)
DOD launched a “classified payload” at 9:38 a.m. local time from Cape Canaveral on a Titan 3C into a geosynchronous orbit with 36,261-kilometer apogee, 35,802-kilometer perigee, 1,448.6-minute period, and 2.0° inclination. The U.S. Air Force had no comment on press speculation about the launch. The New York Times said “such satellites are used to monitor Russian and Chinese launches [and to warn] American officials if a missile is launched from a submarine at sea.” Aviation Week & Space Technology said that the payload had “orbital characteristics of previously launched early warning satellites.” (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13; NY Times, June 11/79, B-6; W Post, June 11/79, A-9; Today, June 11/79, 1A, 8A; AvWk, June 18/79, 13)
The Washington Star reported that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) had voted to let American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T) and GTE Satellite Corporation, operators of the Comstar satellite system, integrate their domestic communications satellite and ground networks. Before the decision, AT&T could use only ground lines to transmit private line communications. The FCC had put a moratorium on AT&T in 1972 to keep it from cutting circuit costs and further dominating the telecommunications market; since then, the company had been able to use its satellites for some phone service but not for transmission of commercial private-line service. AT&T Comstar craft were currently providing the U.S. mainland with communications to Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. FCC said AT&T would have to file rate schedules if it operated a satellite-only service; the company would integrate the satellites into its “national telephone network,” the Washington Star said. American Satellite Corporation, which already had an operating satellite, wanted the FCC to limit AT&T use of its satellites to services provided through separate subsidiaries; Satellite Business Systems had asked FCC to ensure that AT&T did not fund its satellite services with money from telephone ratepayers. (W Star, July 20/79, E-10)
NASA launched FltSatCom-B, second in a series of five fleet satellite communications system spacecraft, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 2:56 p.m. into a transfer orbit, before firing its apogee kick motor May 6 to move it toward a 23,300-mile altitude synchronous-orbit station over 23 °W, which it should reach in late July. This was the 50th launch by an Atlas Centaur. The TRW-built 4,100-pound FltSatCom 2 was about 880 pounds heavier than any previously launched by this vehicle, requiring it to take a path offset 2.4° from the equator. Like its predecessor FltSatCom 1 launched in 1978, now on station over 100 °W, FltSatCom 2 would link ships, submarines, and planes to various ground-based control centers and would provide service to White House communications centers. The Air Force reported that about 420 surface ships and 90 submarines contained equipment for communicating by satellite, and the number was growing. (NASA Release 79-49; NASA MOR M-491-202-79-02 [prelaunch] May 1/79, [postlaunch] Nov 5/79; W Post, May6/79, 17; LA Times, May 5/79)
The NAA announced that Sam B. Williams, president of Williams Research Corporation of Walled Lake, Mich., would receive the Collier Trophy, the oldest U.S. aviation award. Williams had designed and developed the world’s smallest high-efficiency fanjet engine, a low-cost lightweight means to realization of the cruise missile. The Williams engine measured 12 x 37 inches, weighed 145 pounds, and produced more than 600 pounds of thrust; it had qualified for both Air Force and Navy cruise missiles. The NAA had presented the trophy annually since 1911 for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in the United States, demonstrated by actual use in the preceding year. (NAA Release Apr 3/79)
“Once again,” wrote editor Robert Hotz in Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine, “the American public is far ahead of its political leadership” in grasping the significance of NASA’s program of planetary exploration. NASA Headquarters was “astounded by the vast amount of unsolicited public reaction to the Viking and Voyager missions,” in the form of 17,000	letters it received in the first weeks after the Mars pictures reached Earth; the “Voyager flybys of Jupiter.. .have aroused similar public interest.” In Europe and Japan, interest in U.S. planetary exploration was even stronger; media coverage there “far surpasses domestic interest.” Hotz criticized the “penny-wise, pound-foolish policy” that would force NASA to use a single spacecraft for future planetary missions, not the dual-spacecraft approach used through Voyager. “Some day,” he added, “the high price for this folly will be paid in spectacular ‘low cost’ failures.” {AvWk, July 23/79, 9)
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)
The U.S. Air Force launched a DOD surveillance spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 11:30 a.m. PDT on a Titan 3B-Agena into an orbit with 323-kilometer apogee, 126-kilometer perigee, 89-minute period, and 96.4° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but press reports said that the launch was probably a low-resolution search-and-find mission; this type of system would remain in orbit about 2.5 months. (NASA wkly SSR, May 24-30; D/SD, May 31/79, 149; AvWk, June 11/79, 23)
