NASA issued a prelaunch summary of the GOES-D mission, sixth of a series designed for continuous cloud-cover observation from synchronous orbit. The program had two prototypes (Sms 1 and Sms 2) developed by NASA and follow-on craft (GOES-A through GOES-F), funded by NOAA of the DOC. The NOAA-funded craft were designated Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). Since the Sms 1 launch in May 1974, the satellites had continuously viewed Western Hemisphere weather patterns and relayed video scenes from orbit as part of everyday television weather reports. The reports five were produced by Ford Aerospace; GOES-D, GOES-E, and GOES-F would be from Hughes Aerospace. The primary instrument on previous craft was a visible/infrared spin-scan radiometer with one visible and one infrared channel. GOES-D would be the first of three carrying a modified VISSR sounding the atmosphere in 12 infrared bands, acquiring temperature and moisture data profiles at various levels. NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) program required two operating satellites at all times to cover Atlantic and Pacific ocean approaches, as well as the American landmass. Sms 2 launched in 1975 and Goes 3 launched in June 1978 were covering east and west stations, respectively; Sms 1 and Goes 1 and Goes 2, none fully functional, were on operational standby. GOES-D, initially located at 90 °W for a demonstration of the atmospheric sounder, would later be located either east or west depending on operating need. Should one of the operating craft fail before the demonstration ended, NASA would configure a time-sharing operating mode to continue coverage. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [prelaunch summary], Sept 4/80)
LaRC staff working this summer at NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory at Norman, Okla., guided a modified F-106B jet fighter plane through severe southwest thunderstorms to show that lightning could strike not just once but two or even three times in the same pilace. Most lightning study had been at ground level; LaRC was studying its effect on planes in flight. The F-106, holder of a world single-engine speed record set in the 1950s, was still used by the Air Force and could fly up to 50,000 feet (15,250 meters); most flights would be around 15,000 feet (4,500 meters), the altitude where lightning was most statistically likely to strike. LaRC used an F-106B on loan from DFRC, considered top choice for the mission because of its thick wing skins and its larger-than-average bay with room for much experimental equipment. All F-106B work was on storm hazards, divided into those that did or did not involve lightning (those unrelated to lightning were turbulence, wind shear, and storm-hazards correlation). Hazards from storms were factors in aircraft operations and design. Through the summer, WFC instruments would map thunderstorms and the exact location of the F-106B in them, to compare with pilot and instrument observations. (NASA Release 80-130; LaRC Release 80-56)
Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported the launch March 3 of a DOD ocean surveillance system from Vandenberg Air Force Base on an Atlas F into a 1,115-kilometer by 1,053-kilometer (715 by 654 mile) orbit with 107.1-minute period, and 63.5° inclination. The report said that, on the basis of earlier tests, the system would use three spacecraft carried into orbit on a mother satellite and dispersed into parallel orbits with latitude as well as time/distance separation. (Earlier clusters developed by the NRL under codename Whitecloud were launched April 30, 1976, and December 8, 1977, into orbits having parameters nearly identical to those of last week’s launch.) The feasibility of using multiple satellites to eavesdrop on and direction-find USSR ships and submarines was first demonstrated by three NRL spacecraft launched December 14, 1971, and dispersed into separate orbits. The 1976 and 1977 missions that preceded the March 3 launch incorporated a 107-minute orbital period to allow about 1,666 miles between successive cluster passes. From a 700-mile altitude the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2,000 miles away, offering overlapping coverage on successive passes. Similarity of displacement distances perpendicular to the orbital planes of the 1976 and 1977 clusters indicated the use of interferometry to pinpoint the location of Soviet vessels. Deployment of the active satellites by the carrier normally occurred over a period of days; late last week, NORAD was still logging the mission as a single spacecraft. (AvWk, Mar 10/80, 18) —Aviation Week <4 Space Technology reported that the U.S. Court of Appeals had upheld a FCC authorization of January 1977 that allowed Satellite Business Systems (SBS) to own and operate a specialized all-digital domestic communications satellite system. AT&T, Western Union, AmSatCorp, and the U.S. Justice Department had appealed the FCC ruling. SBS had proceeded to develop the system, its first satellite scheduled for launch in October 1980. (AvWk, Mar 10/80, 22)
A partnership of the American Institute of Architects, Pacific Gas & Electric, and NASA’s ARC announced selection of the architect for a space-age advanced technology house to be built at ARC and opened to the public late in 1982 [see February 12]. The house, about 2,500 square feet, with additional facilities to accommodate visitors, would incorporate experimental’techniques, new materials, and systems originating in the U.S. space program. Advanced technology that let astronauts live in the hostile environment of space under a controlled life-support system would be used in the house, as would self-contained water and sewage systems, recycling all its water and disposing of wastes by incineration; heat from the incineration would serve as an energy source. Energy-saving and water-saving design features would make the house 80% self-sufficient. (AIA/PG&E/ARC anno, Sept 17/80)
NASA launched Intelsat 5A F2, first of a new communications satellite series, from ESMC at Cape Canaveral, Fla., at 6:31 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur, into a transfer orbit with 35,950-kilometer apogee, 166.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.75° inclination. ComSatCorp fired the kick motor December 8 to put the craft into near-geosynchronous orbit at 15 °E for tests. By mid-1981 the communications satellite would be on station at 338.5°E. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-80-01 [postlaunch] Dec 29/80) —NASA issued a press kit describing the spacecraft, which weighed 1,928 kilograms (4,250 pounds) at launch. Built by Ford Aerospace using system components developed by firms in France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Japan, and Italy, it had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits and 2 television channels, almost double the capability of earlier Intelsats. Cost of the launch was about $76.6 million, including $34 million for the spacecraft and $42 million for the Atlas Centaur and launch services. INTELSAT, with headquarters in Washington, D.C., would reimburse NASA for costs of the vehicle and launch services, under an agreement signed in May. (NASA Release 80-179)
NASA reported that X-ray data from Heao 1, a high-energy astronomy observatory launched in August 1977 and terminated in 1979, had revealed a superhot superbubble of gas—a gigantic shell about 6,000 light years away from Earth and 1,200 light-years in diameter—in the constellation Cygnus, the Northern Cross. Dr. Webster Cash, of the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at Boulder, and coinvestigator, Dr. Philip Charles of the University of California at Berkeley, had analyzed the information from a cosmic X-ray instrument on the observatory that had been devised by Dr. Elihu Boldt of GSFC and Dr. Gordon Garmire of CalTech. In a speech for delivery to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in San Francisco January 16, Cash explained that parts of the bubble had been seen before in brief X-ray glimpses, but no one realized what was being observed: one part was thought to be a supernova remnant, another part to be hot gas escaping from a galaxy. Because of its site, the bubble was not visible in its entirety until Heao 1 picked it up in an X-ray sweep. Cash said the huge halo was never spotted before because “it flows so energetically that it cools through emission of x-rays” instead of more normal emissions visible in the optical or infrared regions of the spectrum. A cool gas cloud known as the Great Rift of Cygnus, measuring 800 to 1,300 light-years, could be seen obscuring the Milky Way in Cygnus on a dark night; this cloud, containing “enough material to make 5 million stars,” lay beside the bubble and served to hide its central area from Earth view. Supernova explosions impacting this cloud over millions of years could compress and heat its interior, forming a shell of superheated hydrogen materials that became the superheated bubble visible in X-ray data today. Cash said that these explosions were a major mechanism for making new stars: Earth’s Sun might have formed at the edge of a similar bubble, he said. (NASA Release 80-3)
The Washington Star reported lliat llie Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had declared llie basic design and certification process of llie McDonnell Douglas DC-10 satisfactory, but had fined llie manufacturer $300,000 for poor control of quality during the manufacture of DC-10 enginemounting pylons. The National Transportation Safety Board blamed American Airlines maintenance procedures for allegedly cracking one such pylon on a DC-10 that failed over Chicago May 25, 1979, causing a crash in which 273 persons died. McDonnell Douglas agreed to pay the fine, denied any wrongdoing, and said it was accepting the fine “to avoid further expense and the disruption of business.” After the Chicago crash, Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt asked the National Academy of Sciences to investigate procedures used by the FAA to certify planes [see December 12, 1979], The academy named a committee of its National Research Council (NRC) to handle the investigation. Jack D. Howell of the Airline Pilots Association (APA) told investigators that a “protective relationship” between the FAA and the manufacturers had allowed the companies to “use their own employees as ‘FAA-designated representatives’” to oversee plane design and production. In discussing the FAA report, FAA Administrator Langhome Bond defended the procedure for certifying planes. (W Star, Jan 24/80, A-7)
JSC reported that its television engineers were working on modifications of a U.S. Air Force camera for live television broadcast by crew members on spacewalks outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA would buy three systems for flight, training, and qualifications at a cost (including integration, testing, and mission planning) of about $750,000. The camera (which would include a battery pack, FM transmitter, antenna, and a receiver inside the orbiter, with other support hardware), located on an astronaut’s visor assembly, as miners’ lights are mounted on their foreheads, would see what the astronaut saw and send black-and-white pictures to a television monitor watched by crew members on the spacecraft. A wide-angle lens would give a 19.7-mm focal length with a 32° horizontal field-of-view; lens range would be present to focus from about 15 inches to the distance needed. The inside crew members could see hardware or spacewalk activity in real time, helping make joint decisions on repair. (JSC Release 80-052)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported the death of John A. (Shorty) Powers, 57, who joined NASA as a U.S. Air Force lieutenant colonel to help manage the original seven Mercury astronauts and became known as “the voice of Mercury control.” Powers, who retired from NASA in 1964, was found dead of natural causes January 1 at his home in Phoenix, Ariz. (AvWk, Jan 7/80, 21)
The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans M. Mark proposed establishment of a consolidated space operations center near Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado, combining two major mission elements of the U.S. Air Force: satellite control and direction of future DOD Shuttle operations. The Colorado location, prime candidate out of 13 potential sites, would offer proximity to the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) complex at Cheyenne Mountain; it would employ about 300 military, 100 U.S. Air Force civilian, and 1,400 contractor employees. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb/80, 1)
NASA reported that GSFC had chosen Canadian Astronautics, Ltd., to negotiate a $3,042,500 contract for local-user terminals to process signals from search-and-rescue instruments aboard the NOAA-E, NOAA-F, and NOAA-G satellites in the early 1980s. The instruments would relay signals from distressed ships and aircraft to the terminals, which would use them to locate the distressed craft and aid rescue operations. The first terminal would be at Kodiak, Alaska, with others at Scott Air Force Base, 111., and the Coast Guard station at San Francisco. The Soviet Union, Canada, and France would demonstrate the search-and-rescue capability. (NASA Release 80-87)
ARC reported on a space-technology assessment workshop held at the University of Santa Clara in California on robotics, automation, remotely operated systems, and artificial intelligence vital to future missions such as an orbiting space factory, a self-directed deep-space robot explorer, a fully automated Earth-resources and Earth-environment monitor, or a lunar base able to expand through self-replication of its elements. The 10-week workshop would end August 29 with an oral report and submission of other reports for publication. Drawing on work by research institutions such as; Stanford University, MIT, and SRI International as developers of computer-based “intelligence,” the program participants included 18 professors of eng ineering, mathematics, and science, 15 NASA engineers and scientists, and several representatives of manufacturer groups. The workshop emphasized four areas: —A versatile “intelligent” satellite information system able to select and interpret the data from its sensors to give specific items to a specific user, unlike previous systems recording everything they saw to produce great masses of superfluous data. —A deep-space exploration system for reconnaissance, exploration, and intensive surface study of planetary bodies, specifically Saturn’s moon Titan, bigger than the planet Mercury and with its own atmosphere. Uniting functions of previously separate craft (orbiter, atmosphere probe, mobile surface explorer), the vehicle would observe an unknown environment and modify its “knowledge model” and exploration techniques according to its observations. Systems of this sort could explore distant bodies in the solar system such as outer planets and their satellites, comets, and asteroids; such systems would be required for exploring planetary systems of other stars when communications distances and flight time of many years would preclude manned involvement. —A permanent automated Earth-orbiting facility initially geared to process Earth-supplied raw materials in the space environment; later it would make progressively larger use of nonterrestrial materials from the asteroids and moons of Earth and other planets. The workshop considered a number of processing and manufacturing techniques adaptable to a space environment, starter facilities capable of producing a wide range of items, and the tools that would be needed to expand the facility’s capabilities. —A factory on the Moon to use lunar materials and replicate itself, its first major product being another lunar factory or factory segment. Such a self-replicating facility had been of theoretical interest for some time as a way of rapidly expanding space resources. The workshop had studied types of logical organization for such a factory, and requirements for an Earth-based demonstration of the concept. (ARC Releases 80-69, 80-70; NASA Release 80-134)
Press reports said that the U.S. Air Force wanted to spend about $1.4 billion to replace the wings of 81 “trouble-ridden C5A cargo transports.” In 1965, Lockheed Corporation had decided to reduce the weight of C5A wings by 5 tons each, so as to underbid Boeing on a contract for building aircraft capable of carrying outsized loads. Robert B. Ormsby, Jr., president of Lockheed-Georgia, which built the planes, told a congressional hearing that the company’s sole objective was to reduce wing weight to “the absolute minimum within the design requirements” and denied any company plan to replace the wings later when they should prove unsatisfactory. The 10,000-pound weight reduction apparently caused cracks in the aircraft calling for wing replacement: “Ormsby did not explain why Lockheed did not know that the modification would reduce the effective life span of the wing from the 30,000	hours specified by the Air Force to an estimated 7,100 hours,” the Washington Star noted. Principal focus of the hearings was on whether the 30,000-hour service life presented by Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force as justification for the $1.4 billion wing-replacement program was really necessary. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), chairman of the subcommittee on priorities and economy in government of the House-Senate Joint Economic Committee, said Lockheed’s $2 billion cost overrun on the contract, discovered in 1968, was the largest in defense procurement history. He said the $1.16 billion Lockheed-Georgia would get for wing replacement would be “the biggest cost in history to correct a mistake.” When Ormsby said that his firm would make a $140 million profit on the contract, Proxmire said “a lot of businessmen would love to make a mistake like that.” The subcommittee heard David Keating, legislative director of the National Taxpayers Union (NTU), charge that such a profit would set up “a terrible incentive system.” The message to defense contractors would be, “The more inefficient you are, the more profit you make. Build failures into the system and you’ll be rewarded.” Ormsby responded that, in terms of the critical need for the C5A in the nation’s defense, the $1.4 billion was a “bargain” for taxpayers. Paul C. Paris, director of the center for fracture mechanics at Washington University (St. Louis), said that the U.S. Air Force set up a Structural Information Enhancement Program (SIEP) after receiving a 3-volume report from Rand Corporation suggesting that C5As could serve under “present constraints on operational use” until the year 2000 without significant modification. The U.S. Air Force had put “severe restrictions on the C5A to prevent it from being flown in accord with its design specifications,” Paris said, or it would have lasted “fewer than 3,000 flight hours”; it was “absolutely incredible” that.a major aircraft producer would miss the fatigue life of a wing by a factor of more than 10. He said the SIEP assumed “since the [wing replacement] was going to be done, other less expensive options were not to be considered.” (Paris was the only member of the SIEP steering committee not an employee of Lockheed or the U.S. Air Force.) The Rand report recommended appointing a panel of independent specialists to assess the situation; Proxmire, Paris, and the NTU wanted the assessment done by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment. (W Star, Aug 26/80, A-8; W Post, Aug 26/80, A-8)
INTELSAT said that the full launch sequence for Intelsat 5A F2, world’s largest and most advanced commercial communications satellite, was completed successfully December 10 when the craft unfolded its antennas upon command from the Washington, D.C., control center relayed through a ground station at Fucino, Italy. Launched December 6 on an Atlas Centaur into a highly elliptical orbit, the satellite went into near-circular orbit when the apogee motor was fired December 8. For the next two days the control center staff had been activating it into operational configuration, unfurling its giant 51-foot (15.6-meter) solar arrays and locking its sensors on the Earth, spinning up the momentum wheel to stabilize it facing Earth’s surface. Final operation was antenna deployment. Intelsat 5A F2 would now drift in equatorial orbit to its station as primary Atlantic Ocean communications satellite by May 1981, when it would begin serving as communications link between the western hemisphere and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. (INTELSAT Release 80-29-1)
NASA announced award of a $70,072 million contract to McDonnell Douglas for Delta expendable launch vehicle services. The company would continue for 2 years the launch services work it had done for the past 18 years, including mission-peculiar vehicle changes, checkout, and launch. KSC would supervise the work at ESMC and Vandenberg Air Force Base for GSFC, which had overall Delta management responsibility. (NASA Release
NASA reported award of contracts to Martin Marietta and Aerojet worth $750,000 and $350,000, respectively, for a liquid-propellant boost module to increase the cargo-carrying capacity of the Shuttle’s external tank. The goal would be to provide additional thrust by adapting portions of the Titan, still used by the U.S. Air Force as its heaviest intercontinental ballistic missile. The companies, which had been building the Titan and its engines for the U.S. Air Force, were considered the logical choice for adapting the booster to the Shuttle. The studies, managed by MSFC would be completed by the end of September 1980. (NASA Released 80-32; MSFC Released
The Washington Post reported that Ihe House Armed Services Committee had voted $50 million to expand production of Fairchild Industries, A-10 plane from a one-seat to a two-seat configuration. The aircraft was originally designed to accommodate two cockpits. Fairchild said DOD would save $10.5 million a year in fuel costs because it would not need a second plane to follow the first in training flights. Besides the added seat, the new model had the capability of flying in bad whether and at night. The company tested the two-seater for five months in 1979 and turned over the prototype to Eglin Air Force Base for testing; the U.S. Air Force had completed its tests and was assessing results. (W Post, Mar 27/80, B-l)
A small device flown in space for the first time had detected small changes in the Sun’s brightness over periods of days to months, NASA said. An experiment on the Solar Max satellite had registered fluctuations of about a tenth of 1% in solar radiation, corresponding to a change of up to 10°C (18 °F) in the Sun’s average temperature. This trend lasting for several years could make major alterations in Earth’s climate; measurement of even the slightest change in the Sun’s emitted heat and light might enable scientists to predict future changes in climate. A drop of 1% in the output of solar radiation would lower Earth’s mean temperature by more than a degree (2°F); if solar radiation decreased by only 6%, the entire Earth would be covered with ice. Evidence showed that Earth had been cooling down for about 90 million years; it was about 8°C (15°F) warmer 150 million years ago than it was today and might cool by 10 ° or more in the next several million years. Cycles with frequencies ranging from 22 years to millions of years had caused ice ages ranging from glacial epochs to “little ice ages.” Most recent of the latter, beginning in the mid-17th century and lasting about: 200 years, was a 1.5 ° drop from mean global temperature of 14°C (58 °F): it resulted in observable increase of glaciation in the Alps. (NASA Release 80-124) August 7.The Washington Post reported that schoolteacher Janice Brown, 32, piloted Paul MacCready’s solar-powered Gossamer Penguin as high as 12 feet off the ground for 14 minutes, 21 seconds, going 2 miles along a desert streambed at Edwards Air Force Base in the first sustained flight by an aircraft powered only by the Sun. The top speed was 16.5 mph. The Gossamer Penguin had a 72-foot wingspan and weighed about 68 pounds, including the bank of 2,800 photovoltaic cells mounted above the wing. Unlike other electrically powered aircraft, Penguin had no storage batteries and relied only on direct solar power. (WPost, Aug 8/80, A-6; Indl Dsgn, Sept/Oct 80, 18; FRC X-Press, Aug 22/80, 2)
The Washington Post reported the death of Walter R. Dornberger, 84, who as a German general had supervised Wernher von Braun’s work on the V2 rocket during World War II. Cause of death June 26 was not given in either the Washington Post or Aviation Week & Space Technology. Dornberger was visiting in West Germany. He had come to the United States in 1947 after two years in a British prisoner-of-war camp; like more than 100 other German-born rocket scientists who worked for the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, he became a U.S. citizen. He also worked for Bell Aerosystems Company, where he was a vice president. A volunteer in the imperial German army of World War I, Dornberger was a career soldier to the end of the second war. In 1932 he was given charge of a group of scientists working on rocket concepts and moved to Peenemunde in 1937. When the first test of the V2 October 3, 1942, was successful, Dornberger asked von Braun: “Do you realize what we accomplished today?” Von Braun said “Yes, today the spaceship was born.” In 1958, nearly three years before President Kennedy voiced the goal of landing a man on the Moon by 1970, Dornberger predicted that man would be on the moon in 10 years: “whether he is Russian or American depends on how much money Congress is willing to spend,” he said. (W Post, July 2/80, B-6; AvWK, July 7/80, 25)
ARC reported that its Earth-resources survey aircraft (U-2) was helping the U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and California Department of Forestry fight fires by providing real-time infrared imaging of smoke-obscured landscapes. The images, used for the first time October 2 during a fire at Kings Canyon National Park in the Sierra Nevada where thick smoke blocked aerial viewing, gave the size, shape, direction of burn, and hot spots of the fire. Crews had to hike four hours each way to get to some areas. Steep terrain would endanger firefighters and equ ipment if the fire perimeter was unknown. Flying at 21-kilometer altitude (about 65,000 feet), the plane used a Daedalus multispectral scanner with a Fairchild charge-coupled linear-array scanner to send infrared (IR) images directly to ARC, which transferred the hard copy of processed information immediately to U.S. Geological Survey maps of the area. Within 10 minutes, fire control headquarters would receive a telecopy for use in deploying manpower and equipment. The U-2 could photograph a fire for up to 5 hours and transmit anywhere within 500 kilometers (300 miles) of ARC, located near San Francisco, covering virtually all forested lands in California. (ARC Release 80-90)
Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post that the controversial B-l bomber, “like the wondrous Phoenix of Egyptian mythology, seems about to rise from the ashes” 3 years after the President “shot it down in flames”: the House Armed Services Committee had voted $600 million for B-l research and procurement. The committee had asked Rockwell International, “which still hopes to build the big bird,” to prepare a brochure comparing the B-l with the FB-111 preferred by the U.S. Air Force to carry cruise missiles. The Post said an internal Air Force report prepared for Rep. Robert Carr (D-Mich.) indicated that Rockwell had “drastically” oversold B-l capabilities. The brochure “grossly understated the range of the FB-111” by almost 900 nautical miles, comparing it on a low-level mission with a B-l flying at a higher, fuel-saving altitude, the U.S. Air Force noted. Rockwell also “fudged on the delivery dates it promised in the brochure” by three to four months in one case, almost a year in another. The U.S. Air Force report said that there were “many other areas that are inaccurate.” (W Post, May 21/80, B-16)
NASA announced appointment of Roy S. Estess as deputy manager of NSTL, replacing Henry F. Auter, who retired in February 1979. Estess joined NSTL in 1966, working on the Saturn V acceptance tests and directing the advanced planning for Shuttle testing at NSTL. Since 1977 he had managed satellite remote-sensing research in NSTL’s Earth resources laboratory. (NASA anno Aug 29/80) —The New York Times reported the death from a heart attack at her home in California of Jacqueline Cochran, first woman to fly faster than the speed of sound and director during WWII of the Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots (WASPS), which trained more than 1,200 women to fly transport planes. Brought up in poverty and working in a cotton gin in Georgia at the age of 9, she took her first flying lesson when 22 and in 1935 was the first women to enter the Bendix transcontinential air race, winning the Bendix trophy in 1938. She had married Floyd Odium in 1936 and served as a captain in the British Air Force Auxiliary, returning to the United States after Pearl Harbor. She set more than 200 flying records, breaking the sound barrier in 1953 in an F-86 jet fighter plane. In 1961 she set a new altitude record of 55,253 feet and in 1964 a women’s world speed record of 1,429 mph in an F-104G SuperStar. She retired in 1970 as colonel in the Air Force Reserve. (NY Times, Aug 10/80, 40)
NASA reported award to United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation, of a contract for a two-ship recovery force to retrieve used Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters from the Atlantic Ocean. This supplemented a contract under which the firm assembled and processed solid-fuel rocket boosters for flight. The ships would locate and retrieve expended booster casings, parachutes, and other equipment from the Atlantic and deliver them to a disassembly facility at Cape: Canaveral Air Force Station. The disassembly facility was on the eastern shore of the Banana River, a shallow area where an endangered species, the sea cow or manatee, made its home. The ships would use a 425-HP waterjet stern thruster instead of propellers that could maim or kill the manatees [see May 29]. The ships, UTC Liberty and UTC Freedom, were being built and would be delivered in October 1980 and January 1981; both would be used on each Shuttle mission, each retrieving one booster and its components. At liftoff, the boosters would bum simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shuttle. After about two minutes they would be jettisoned and land in the Atlantic about 257 kilometers (160 miles) downrange from KSC, their descent being slowed by three parachutes on each casing. Each vessel would carry four parachute-rollers to handle the three main and single drogue parachutes on each booster and cranes to hoist aboard the collateral flight equipment. The ships would carry equipment to plug the nozzles, pump water out of the casings, and ready them for towing to the disassembly facility, where they would be cleaned and taken apart for shipment to Utah and reloading with solid-fuel propellant. Each casing could be used for up to 20 missions, reducing the cost of flight operations. The ships would also have sophisticated electronic communications and navigation gear such as radars, sonars, loran, direction finders, fathometers, and gyrocompasses. (NASA Release 80-89)
NASA announced that it would join the California council of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) in building an Advanced Technology Display House to open in 1982 at Ames Research Center (ARC), to demonstrate new materials and technology from aerospace and energy research. The sponsors signed on February 4 this first-of-a-kind partnership agreement under which AIA would contribute innovative architectural expertise; PG&E would share its research on energy conservation; and NASA in association with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) would translate aerospace technology into the “down-to-earth challenge” of home building. The design would include self-contained water and sewage-treatment systems and energy-saving lighting, plumbing, ventilation, electrical wiring, and appliances, with extensive use of solar energy, all managed and monitored by a centralized computer. Using advanced systems and materials instead of those now available to the building industry, the AIA would design the house to allow addition or deletion of components (office space, physical fitness areas) and to be dismantled for exhibition across the United States. Wider use of the innovations would lead to economies in mass production and put the new ideas within reach of average customers. (ARC anno Feb 12/80)
Radio Corporation of America (RCA) said it would lease capacity on an American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) satellite to make up for its own satellite that disappeared after launch [see December 11, 1979]. Eleven cable television companies that were to use the lost satellite could now begin sending programs to cable systems as early as April 1. Loss of RCA Satcom 3 had threatened the cable television industry; twenty channels were in use on one RCA satellite, and eleven more had been scheduled for the lost satellite. Under the arrangement with AT&T, RCA would pay $70,000 a month for each channel which it would then lease at $40,000 a month; an 18-month lease would lose RCA about $5.9 million including expenses. (W Star, Feb 21/80, C-9)
MSFC announced that NASA had signed a $183,960,000 contract with ESA for a second Spacelab to be delivered in 1984. Like the first, the new Spacelab would be built by ERNO of West Germany, prime ESA contractor, with at least 26 subcontractors in ESA nations as well as the United States to make components and subassemblies. MSFC was responsible for technical support; JSC would handle operations; Kennedy Space Center (KSC) would be responsible for integrating Spacelab with the Space Shuttle and for launch. (MSFC Release 80-11)
NASA announced that a sunspot hotline set up at GSFC would keep the public informed about solar flares during the 1980 peak cycle of activity. Daily recorded messages would contain information on sunspots, solar flares, geomagnetic storms, and the impact of solar activity on radio transmissions, for instance. The recordings provided jointly by NASA and NOAA through its space environment services center in Boulder, Colo., would originate in the SMM facility at GSFC. The “Solar Max” spacecraft launched February 14 was an orbiting solar observatory carrying seven instruments whose data, coordinated with data from scientists at ground-based observatories throughout the world, would permit the most comprehensive investigation of solar flares ever made. Information from these sources would be relayed to GSFC on a 24-hour basis so that NASA scientists could determine which active regions of the Sun to study during the next 24 hours. (NASA Release July 23:The Soviet Union launched Soyuz J7 at 9:33 p.m. Moscow time, carrying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and a 33-year-old Vietnamese air force pilot, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, first Asian space traveler and sixth citizen of an eastern-bloc country to be part of the USSR’s Intercosmos program. The Soyuz would link up within 24 hours with the orbiting Salyut 6 space station where Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin had been working for more than three months. The Salyut’s docking port had been cleared July 19 by jettisoning cargo ship Progress 10, which burned up reentry. (W Post, July 24/80, A-15; Today, July 24/80, 1A; W Star, July 20/80, 2; July 24/80, A-7)
In the first transcontinental balloon trip, a father-son team landed the 75-foot-tall helium-filled Kitty Hawk on Canada’s Gaspe peninsula at 7:27 EDT after a May 8 liftoff in San Francisco, Calif. Maxie Anderson, 48, and his son Kris, 23, of Albuquerque, N.M., had planned to land in Kitty Hawk, N.C., but were blown by brisk winds toward Maine and Canada. They had met with bad weather beginning with strong winds, rain, and snowstorms over Wyoming. Despite their failure to land at Kitty Hawk, the team set distance records: a previous balloon record was set last year by a 2,002-mile flight that ended in a snowstorm in Ohio. The Andersons on May 11 had gone 2,417 miles. In August 1978 Maxie Anderson and two companions had crossed the Atlantic in 137 hours in the balloon Double Eagle II from Presque Isle, Maine, to Paris. The Washington Star said in a May 21 editorial: “Mr. Anderson says he has no plans for further record-breaking trips, but refuse to believe it. There’s the Pacific Ocean just waiting to yield to helium and human dexterity.” During a visit to North Carolina the week after the flight, Anderson was inducted into the Man Will Never Fly society, a group with the motto “Birds Fly; Men Drink.” The society’s Dr. Ed North said it had awarded Anderson and his son memberships without knowing whether they were drinkers. “They missed their landing site by over a thousand miles,” North said, “so I just assumed that they were.” (W Star, May 12/80, A-l; May 20/80, A-2; May 21/80, A-12)
ARC announced plans to flight test the parachute system for the Galileo Jupiter-atmosphere probe, third and last test of the system at the Naval Weapons Center test range at China Lake, Calif. Previous tests revealed the need for improvements, which had been made on the chutes to be tested. On completion of the test program, the design would be ready for delivery. Early in 1982 a U.S. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory balloon would carry a fully equipped probe to 100,000-foot altitude over the White Sands missile range and release it in a drop like the Jupiter descent, including parachute and hardware staging. When launched by a Shuttle and released from its carrier at the planet in September 1987, the parachute would slow descent of the probe in the turbulent atmosphere, using its six instruments to measure chemical elements and compounds, weather patterns, and pressures. (ARC Release 80-81)
NASA reported results of a coordinated balloon and rocket launch at WFC August 13 to measure fair-weather electric fields. A balloon carrying Aerospace Corporation instruments measured vector electric fields on six booms and evaluated the data with an on-board COSMAC microprocessor. At 30-kilometer altitude, it saw unexpectedly large fields for about one hour. Rockets carrying payloads from Cornell and Penn State Universities launched 20 minutes apart during the balloon flight, both saw anomalously large electric fields that peaked near 70 kilometers. The results would call for revision of present theories, as they suggested that some other generator of electricity was active in addition to the thunderstorm-driven system and the ionospheric system. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 23/80)
U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., said in an interview that a current chill in U.S.-USSR relations would accelerate the development of weapons designed to wage war in outer space or knock down USSR satellites for spying, navigation, and communications. Allen said that, although he still hoped for an agreement on continued noninterference with satellites maintained in space by both the United States and the Soviet Union, the U.S. Air Force was experiencing pressure to move quickly on antisatellite weapons. He indicated that extra money would go for weapons already in the works such as the “flying tomato can” (operating by collision with a target) rather than more distant possibilities such as lasers. (W Post, Jan 11/80, A-l) This was the first time the Chinese press had mentioned training of space crews. FBIS said that the new publication would contain an article on space food and that the simulations of space life had already been made into a documentary film. The Wen Hui article did not say when or if China would send someone into space; however, during U.S. Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s visit, a deputy chief of staff for PRC armed forces said a manned space program was not one of China’s top priorities. FBIS also reported publication in a Shanghai paper of pictures of a dog that had returned from space; an editorial in that paper called China the third nation to master the technology of satellite retrieval. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua, Jan 12/80; Hong Kong Wen Wei Po, Jan 14/80; W Post, Jan 13/80, 16)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
NASA announced an MSFC award to Martin Marietta and Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company of contracts to define a liquid-propellant boost module for the Shuttle external tank, to increase its cargo-carrying capacity to 5,400 kilograms (12,000 pounds). Under the new terms, modifying initial program-definition contracts let earlier in 1980, the two firms would study adapting Titan hardware and systems to the boost module. They had been building Titans for years; the U.S. Air Force had used Titan 2 in the mid-%1960s to launch Gemini and was still using it. Martin Marietta, under a contract valued at $1.18 million, would carry out follow-on studies and design activities on the overall system; Aerojet, under a contract for $782,500, would work on modification of the Titan 3 stage 1 engine. A modified version of Titan had launched communications satellites and other Earth orbiters as well as deep-space Viking and Voyager payloads. The first use of the augmenting booster would be in 1986. (NASA Release 80-154; MSFC Release 80-126)
The Washington Star said that Boeing Company had awarded Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., a multimillion-dollar contract to build forward-fuselage parts for a new-generation 757 jetliner. The award by Boeing Military Aircraft Company as subcontractor for Boeing Commercial Aircraft Company was the third given to Fairchild, which received in October a contract for fuselage above the wing and in November a contract for leading-edge wing slats. The twin-engine 757 would fly in 1982. (W Star, Jan 8/80, B-4) —The United States should develop a way to send nuclear wastes into outer space, Stanley G. Rosen told an American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Francisco. The Washington Star said Rosen, a test manager for the U.S. Air Force Defense Satellite Communications system, described the problem of ’’extremely toxic" residues from nuclear-power programs around the world. Extraterrestrial disposal of such wastes would have a “short-term risk” during launch and injection, but “zero risk” thereafter, he said. (W Star, Jan 8/80, A-5)
The Department of Commerce (DOC) reported that more than 700 representatives of business firms, trade associations, educational institutions, and state and local government agencies had responded to NOAA’s request for assistance in developing a national civil operational land remote-sensing satellite system. At March meetings in Seattle, Chicago, Tallahassee, Washington, D.C., and Albuquerque, NOAA satellite managers received many suggestions for using such a system in food production, mineral exploration, land-use planning, resource assessment and management, and environmental protection. Wilbur H. Eskite, Jr., of NOAA’s task force, who chaired the meetings, said that interest in an operational system offering a continuity of data within specific timeframes was “larger than we had believed” before the meetings [see April 6]. Questions raised at the meetings that would require policy decisions included what instruments to carry into orbit, their capabilities, how quickly and in what form users should receive the data, and whether education and government agencies should pay the same fees for data as profit-making companies. The White House made NOAA responsible last November for moving to an operational program of satellite remote sensing. (NOAA Release 80-55)
A military communications satellite fired into orbit from Cape Canaveral in an Allas Centaur January 17 had “settled into temporary orbit” and was performing superbly, according to U.S. Air Force Col. George Breton, mission director. The 4,100-pound Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft originally was scheduled for launch in December 1979. (WPost, Jan 19/80, A-9)
Aerospace Daily reported that malfunction of a portable life-support system caused a flash fire April 18 at JSC in which Robert Mayfield (employed by the contractor, Hamilton Standard Division, United Technologies) was hospitalized with second-degree burns. The system included two tanks of oxygen pressurized at 3,000 pounds per square inch. The fire started during a performance test when a regulator was switched to the extravehicular activity mode. Extensive damage occurred to a test spacesuit and the life-support system as well as the cleanroom at JSC’s crew systems laboratory. Mayfield was reported in stable condition April 20. JSC had appointed a board to investigate the accident. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 289) —Aerospace Daily reported an Aerospace Corporation study for the U.S. Air Force on the risk that a large active satellite might collide with debris from inactive satellites or launchers. Probability of collision for a large satellite on a 1,000-day mission in low orbit (500 to 1,500 kilometers up) was high because of the great concentration of debris at those altitudes. As the objects were moving in different directions, velocity for any satellite would be at a maximum. Collision in synchronous orbit was less likely to the extent that the objects were all moving in the same direction; however, debris in those orbits tended to collect at certain points because of Earth’s gravity. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 294)
The Wall Street Journal reviewed the competition for locating the Large Space Telescope’s science institute at one of three sites, each the protege of a university consortium: Princeton University in New Jersey, the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, and the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory west of Chicago. NASA teams visiting the sites would make a decision in October.	, In November 1979, five sites were being promoted with two others as minor contenders: Princeton, Hopkins, Fermilab, the University of Colorado, and the University of California at San Diego (UCSD) plus the Universities of Arizona and New Mexico, where numerous ground telescopes were already located [see November 18, 1979]. Usually the site for an astronomical installation would require clear skies and steady air, but “any old kind of sky” would do for the Space Telescope, the Wall Street Journal said, as the images its computers received would originate above Earth’s atmosphere. The winning manager would provide his own building, either a new one or a remodeled existing one; a resident staff of 100 to 150 persons; and room for a constant flow of visiting astronomers. {WSJ, Aug 4/80, 15) MSFC reported that students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) had returned to the center to continue a study begun last January on in-space assembly of large structures in MSFC’s neutral-buoyancy simulator, this time with a manned maneuvering unit they had built themselves. The MSFC simulator, a 1.3 million-gallon water tank, closely approximated a zero-gravity environment. The students had spent three weeks on a NASA-MIT project, assembling in the tank a tetrahedral truss containing 48 parts: 36 tubular beams 11 feet long with 12 joints, largest in number of components ever tested in the simulator. Since their January stay, the students had modified the beams and joints (designed and made in MIT machine shops) on the basis of data derived from their work at MSFC and had been building an alternative crewed maneuvering unit. Testing it at MSFC would show whether it would be of use in assembling large space structures; like one previously built by MSFC engineers, it had instead of the gas jets needed to move it in space five small motor-driven propellers to move it in the tank. The motors were enclosed to prevent injury to other divers or damage to hoses and lines in the simulator. The unit would fit on the backpack worn over a pressurized space suit. (MSFC Release 80-103)
NASA announced that scientists studying data from Heao 2 had confirmed the emission of X-rays from Jupiter, making the giant planet the only one besides Earth to produce X-rays. Heao 2, launched November 13, 1978, carried a focusing X-ray telescope with four different instruments that could be positioned at the focus, including the imaging proportional counter used to view Jupiter. Dr. Albert Metzger of JPL, leader of the scientific team making the discovery, reported it to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society at the University of Maryland last week. The X-ray find indicated the power needed by the intense radiation belts in the Jovian magnetosphere: from the brightness observed, scientists said that energetic electrons in the system emitted nearly a quadrillion watts of power. To maintain the radiation belts, an equal amount of power had to come from the planet’s rotational energy and the force of the solar wind. Also, energetic ions and electrons impacting the surfaces of satellites orbiting inside the Jovian radiation belt might also produce X rays; observing those X rays might help determine the composition of Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. (NASA Release 80-98)
The Washington Star reported that the American Newspaper Publishers Association (ANPA) approved a proposed system of satellite communications between wire services and newspapers. A joint task force representing ANPA, UPI, and Associated Press (AP) conducted a two-year study of economic, technical, legal, and regulatory aspects of such a system. (W Star Apr 22/80, C-6)
Aviation leaders from across the United States attended a banquet at the Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C., to honor Dr. Paul B. MacCready, designer of the Gossamer Condor and Gossamer Albatross, who won the Robert J. Collier trophy for the first human powered flight across the 22-milewide English Channel. Master of ceremonies was NBC news correspondent Peter Hackes, a fellow enthusiast of sail planing. The audience saw the film of the Channel flight and applauded the touchdown of the Albatross on the beach at Cap Gris Nez, France. MacCready accepted the trophy for himself and for the “engine” of the Albatross, cyclist Bryan Allen, who was unable to attend. MacCready reported that NASA was negotiating to use his backup aircraft Gossamer Albatross II in tests aimed at design and operation of a remotely powered vehicle at 100,000 feet altitude. The Albatross’s extremely light weight “exaggerates the apparent mass effects in stability and control, and also the effect of turbulence on wing efficiency.” “These are areas heretofore unexamined and deal with phenomena never before encountered,” he added. (NAA newsletter May/June 80; NAA Release May 19/80)
Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission. Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F.	Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy. Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
The Washington Post reported that a U.S. Air Force estimate of the cost of building a West Coast launch pad for the Shuttle was $82 million short. Less than 3 years ago, the estimate was $118 million for a Vandenberg Air Force Base pad to launch polar-orbiting (as opposed to equatorial-orbiting) satellites. Military satellites used a polar orbit to cover the globe as it rotates; spacecraft could not use the Florida facility for launches into polar orbit because of the danger of coming down on land in case of a mishap. First phase of the Vandenberg program (excavation of the area where the launch pad would be built) was complete, the U.S. Air Force said, but bids for the second phase ranged from $103.9 to $112 million instead of the $79.6 million U.S. Air Force had estimated. Bidders said inflation caused the higher bids, especially the price of assembled electrical equipment and copper cable. U.S. Air Force could ask permission of Congress to reprogram funds from other construction projects to the Vandenberg construction. (W Post, Apr 17/80, A-14)
JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced appointment of Dr. Freeman Dyson, theoretical physicist and leader in studies of new systems for spacecraft propulsion, as a distinguished visiting scientist. A professor at Princeton University’s Institute for Advanced Study, Dyson participated in Project Orion at the General Atomic Laboratory, San Diego, from 1958 to 1965, studying the potential use of atomic explosions to propel crewed spacecraft. In 1977 he led a laser-propulsion study for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and was later active in studies of solar sailing and NASA’s SETI (research for extraterrestrial intelligence) project. Author of “Disturbing the Universe,” Dyson would join Jacques Blamont of France, Klaus Hasselmann of Germany, Giuseppe Colombo of Italy, Michael Longuet-Higgins of the United Kingdom, and Richard Goody and Gene Shoemaker of the United States as a JPL distinguished visiting scientist. (JPL anno Sept 22/80)
NASA said that JPL would arrange for media coverage of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter over a 47-hour period on or about November 11-13, relaying live television to television stations, science centers, and planetariums across the United States. The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., also planned to change its regular closing time from 5:00 to 8:30 p.m. during the encounter to handle the expected crowds and had scheduled special programs around the encounter. (NASA Release 80-164)
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told President Carter that he would leave January 20 to become the first president of the American Association of Engineering Societies, a federation created in January of 39 major engineering societies of the United States representing more than a million engineers. In a memorandum headed “Dear Colleagues,” Frosch said that he could “no longer ignore the competitive opportunities available to me and to my family in private life. . .1 continue to be devoted to our common interests in aeronautics and space.” Frosch was sworn in as NASA administrator June 21, 1977. He had been associate director for applied oceanography at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution since 1975. He had attended Columbia University, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1947, a master’s in 1949, and a doctorate in theoretical physics in 1952. He had been assistant secretary of the Navy for R&D, assistant executive director of the U.N. environment program, and deputy director of DOD’s DARPA. (NASA Release 80-151)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that it had extended for 18 months a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Boeing Company for safety, reliability, and quality-assurance engineering support. The extension, valued at $11,184,430, brought the total value of the JSC contract with Boeing to $36,712,703. The extension would cover current and future JSC programs for space vehicles and for ground-support equipment, facilities, and payloads. (JSC Release 80-001)
