DFRC said that its newly refurbished Canberra bomber would be the test airplane for an atmospheric-turbulence measurement program to gather data on sudden wind changes creating abrupt and uneven pressures on different areas of an aircraft. Engineers would use the information to improve aircraft design and operation, with special attention to approach and takeoff during strong winds and unstable atmospheric conditions. Project engineers chose the B-57B because of its ability to withstand high g forces; its wings were extremely rigid and strong enough to recover from upsets during severe turbulence. Its cockpit held two crewmen, so that a meteorologist could fly as observer during the tests. Wen Painter, project manager for the program, said that scientists do not fully understand wind-shear phenomena and expect the flight tests to produce valuable data. The B-57B would fly at Edwards Air Force Base, Denver, Oklahoma City, Huntsville, Cape Canaveral, and Wallops Island, all of which exhibited distinctive types of turbulence. Other NASA centers participating in the study would be ARC, LaRC, and MSFC. (DFRC Release 81-21)
NASA appointed Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, deputy chief of staff for systems at Air Force Systems Command headquarters, Andrews Air Force Base, as associate administrator for the Office of Space Transportation Systems. Abrahamson, former test pilot and manager of the development program for U.S. Air Force’s F-16 fighter, would succeed John F. Yardley, who left NASA in May to become president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation. In 1979, Abrahamson was one of five on a special panel selected by NASA to assess STS management; he began his job at Andrews in July 1980. He had been an astronaut in the Air Forces’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program from August 1967 until the program was canceled in June 1969. He then served on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council in the Executive Office of the President. A command pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours in jet and conventional fighter aircraft, he was promoted to major general May 1, 1978. (NASA Release 81-159; NASA anno Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 3/81, 15)
NASA reported that Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, former head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics, had become associate administrator at NASA Headquarters for aeronautics and astronautics, effective July 1, replacing Dr. James J. Kramer, who retired in October 1979. Before accepting the NASA Headquarters position, Kerrebrock had been a member of the U.S. Air Force scientific advisory board, the National Research Council’s aeronautics and space engineering board, and the NASA Advisory Committee. He had directed MIT’s gas-turbine laboratory from 1968 to 1978. He received his Ph.D. from CalTech in 1956; from 1951 to 1953 he was a researcher in aeronautics at the Lewis laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). (NASA Release 81-91)
ARC reported the first NASA-piloted test flight of its “flying research facility,” a helicopter-type aircraft equipped with fixed wings and jet engines, over San Francisco Bay at speeds of up to 120 knots (138 mph) for 45 minutes. Warren Hall of ARC piloted the flight; copilot was Lt. Col. Bob Merrill, deputy director of U.S. Army flight tests at Edwards Air Force Base. Designed for studying advanced rotor systems in actual flight, the craft had the highly reliable type of rotor used on presidential helicopters. The wings and engines provided the lift needed in studying rotors too small to support the research aircraft alone. A second rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA) had been flown at ARC in the basic-helicopter configuration. Located at ARC, the two aircraft constituted a national facility for in-flight verification of rotor-system technology; they could be flown as helicopters or equipped with the fixed wings and auxiliary jet engines to enhance test capability. The two craft, built by the Sikorsky Division of United Technologies for LaRC and the Army’s technology lab at Moffett Field, California, were transferred to ARC in 1979 for the joint NASA-Army research program. (ARC Release 81-67; NASA Release 81-194)
The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur the Soyuz 40 spacecraft crewed by Leonid Popov, who in 1980 achieved a world space-endurance record of 185 days with fellow cosmonaut Valery Ryumin, and Dumitru Prunariu of Romania’s air force. Tass said the ship would dock with orbiting space station Salyut 6,. occupied since March 14 by Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh. This flight, ninth in the Intercosmos program of launching a Soviet cosmonaut with one from another country, would complete the first round that began in March 1978 with representatives from Bulgaria, East Germany, Poland, Cuba, Hungary, Vietnam, Czechoslovakia, and Mongolia. (W Star,
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported on the May 23, 1980, failure of Ariane flight L02. The cause was “clearly identified” as inherent instability in one of the four launch-vehicle engines. All external causes had been excluded, and the manufacturer was able to reproduce the failure at a single-engine test stand. Devices for fuel injection in the combustion chamber provided unstable despite positive tests during development. The fault, “unfortunately a very common phenomenon with liquid-fuel rocket engines,” had occurred in “most rocket programmes. . . notably in the American programmes.” ESA said that it had abandoned the injector in its present form and was working on modifications. The report concluded with a tentative launch schedule to be confirmed after the modifications were validated. (ESA Info Bltn, Jan 28/81 for release Feb 2/81)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
President Reagan announced the nomination of business executive James Montgomery Beggs as administrator and Dr. Hans Mark as deputy administrator of NASA. If confirmed, Beggs (who was executive vice president and a director of General Dynamics Corporation, which he had joined in January 1974), would be the sixth person to head the civilian space agency, succeeding Dr. Robert A. Frosch. Beggs had been associate administrator in the Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART) at NASA in 1968-69, leaving to become undersecretary at the Department of Transportation (DOT). Mark, who became secretary of the Air Force in July 1979 the being undersecretary since 1977, was formerly director of NASA’s ARC. (NASA Release 81-51; MSFC Release 81-50; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A-12; W Post, Apr 25/81 A-4)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
NASA launched a 90-pound solar mesosphere explorer from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, at 7:27 a.m. EDT on a two-stage Delta into a polar orbit at an altitude between 535 and 550 kilometers with 95-minute period and 97.4° inclination. The satellite, carrying five sensors to monitor atmospheric constituents between 19 and 50 miles up, would study conversion of molecular oxygen to ozone, a layer protecting Earth against ultraviolet radiation and possibly being depleted by refrigerant chlorofluorocarbons. The University of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics developed the instruments and would manage the mission under contract to JPL. Riding piggyback atop the Delta was a smaller craft built by amateur radio operators at the University of Surrey in England. Uosat (University of Surrey satellite) was ninth in a series of Oscar (orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio) satellites launched as a second payload on U.S. rockets. Using a voice synthesizer, it could broadcast ionosphere data to amateur receivers. (NASA Release 81-106; NASA MOR S-887-81-01 [prelaunch] Sept 17/81, [postlaunch] Oct 16/81; NY Times, Oct 7/81, B-ll)
NASA launched FltSatCom-E for the Naval Electronic Systems Command at 4:16 a.m. EDT from KSC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,790-kilometer apogee, 166.7-kilometer perigee, and 26.6° inclination, and turned the craft after it separated from the Centaur over the U.S Air Force Space Division. Designated FltSatCom 5 in orbit, the TRW-built DOD communications satellite with a five-year design life would join four similar craft now in geostationary orbit 22,300 miles over the equator at different locations around the Earth, forming a worldwise system to provide two-way communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and presidential command networks. FltSatCom 5 would serve over the eastern Pacific. DOD would reimburse NASA for Atlas Centaur and launch services. LeRC had management responsibility for development and operation of the Atlas Centaur; KSC was responsible for checkout and launch. (NASA Releases 81-32, 81-93; NASA MOR 0-491-202-81-05 [prelaunch] Aug 4/81; D/SD, Aug 7/81, 211)
NASA said that it had picked Jack R. Lousma and C. Gordon Fullerton as commander and pilot for the third flight of Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The backup crew would be Thomas K. Mattingly II and Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. Lousma, a colonel in the U.S. Marine Corps, was mission pilot on Skylab 3, logging more than 1,427 hours in space as he and his crew accomplished 150% of their assigned goals. Fullerton, a colonel in the U.S. Air Force, piloted the Shuttle Enterprise on its first, third, and fifth flights in the approach-and-landing tests in 1977. The third Columbia flight, a seven-day and three hour mission of 116 orbits set for March 1982, would carry a payload (OSS-1) developed by NASA’s Office of Space Scinece and would further test the remote manipulator arm for inserting future payloads into space. (NASA Release 81-187)
The Washington Post said that a USSR satellite that fell into the sea off the coast of China August 23 might have “lost its way to the Moon.” The Soviet foreign ministry said that Cosmos 434 was not nuclear-powered and posed no danger of nuclear contamination: the Washington Post said that the Soviet Union seemed eager to allay any fears of radioactive debris like that Cosmos 954 strewed over Canada’s “sparsely inhabited” Northwest Territories in January 1978. The Soviets said that the reentered craft was an “experimental lunar cabin.” This description tallied with a long-held belief that Cosmos 434 was relic of an unsuccessful manned lunar mission planned in the 1960s by the Soviet Union to rival the U.S. Apollo program, which had put 12 men on the Moon by the time it ended in 1972. Between November 1970 and August 1971, the Soviet Union had launched four unmanned satellites that performed complex maneuvers in Earth orbit simulating those of a lunar-landing mission. A two-volume book on the Soviet space program published in 1979 by the American Astronautical Society said that the satellites (Cosmos 379, Cosmos 382, Cosmos 398, and Cosmos 434) seemed to be practicing acceleration toward the Moon, braking into lunar orbit, landing on the Moon, and returning to Earth. The Soviet Union never disclosed the purpose of the satellites, but U.S. analysts believed them to be flight tests of a propulsion unit for manned lunar spacecraft. As the 50th anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution neared, observers thought it likely that the Soviet Union would mark 1967 by putting a man on the Moon; in 1968; the year before the first U.S. moon landing, Soviet cosmonauts were saying that, when the Americans reached the Moon, Russians would be there to greet them. The Soviet program apparently had a series of setbacks that “cooled the leadership’s enthusiasm,” the Washington Post said. In June 1969 the first attempt to launch the G rocket (a giant new booster like the U.S. Saturn 5) was said to have ended in a mammoth explosion demolishing the launch complex. It also apparently exploded in the early stages of flight during two other tests, in the summer of 1971 and on November 24, 1972. (W Post, Aug 30/81, A-25)
NASA announced the selection of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), a consortium of 14 universities, for final negotiation of a contract to establish, operate, and maintain a science institute for the 13.1-meters (43-foot) Space Telescope scheduled for launch on the Shuttle early in 1985. The space telescope science institute, making scientific investigations using the telescope for at least 15 years, would be located on the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The estimated contractor cost for an initial 5-year contract would be $24 million. Additional funding would be needed later for a guest-observer and archival-research program. The contract had options for three 5-year extensions. The institute would receive data sent from the telescope via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and NASA’s communications network through the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), where the institute would operate a space telescope support center. Investigations would be able to ask GSFC to point the spacecraft at any desired field-of-view. The 2.4-meter (96-inch, mirror in the telescope could image 350 times the volume of space now visible from Earth. (NASA Release 81-12; MSFC Release 81-11; Nature, Jan 29/81, 339)
The Senate confirmed the appointment as NASA deputy administrator of Dr. Hans Mark, former secretary of the Air Force and former director of NASA’s ARC. Mark, a physicist and nuclear engineer, became diretor of ARC in February 1969 and undersecretary of the Air Force in 1977. He had been secretary of the Air Force from July 1979 until 1981. Mark had taught at Boston University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), the University of California, and Stanford University. He was chairman of the nuclear engineering department at Berkeley from 1964 to 1969, administering its research reactor. (NASA spl anno, July 9/81; NASA Release 81-51)
Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting adminsitrator, left the agency July 11 to become corporate vice president for science and engineering at General Dynamics Corporation, St. Louis, Mo., in charge of research, engineering, advanced product and program development, and development and implementation of corporate engineering and research policy. NASA’s new chief, James M.	Beggs, who began his new job July 9, had been executive vice president for aerospace at General Dynamics. Lovelace had been acting administrator of NASA since the departure of Dr. Robert A. Frosch in January 1981; he had actually retired as deputy administrator in December 1980 but at Frosch’s request had agreed to remain through the first flight of the space shuttle Columbia and appointment of a new administrator. Lovelace had entered federal service in 1954 with the U.S. Air Force at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio, and became director there in 1967. He went to Andrews Air Force Base in 1972 as director of science and technology for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command and in 1973 became acting deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development. He came to NASA in 1974 as associate administrator, Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) and was appointed deputy administrator of NASA in June 1976 by President Ford. Lovelace recently received the Presidential Citizens Medal for his work on developing the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, July 2/81; NASA Release 81-88; NYTimes, July 6/81, D-6)
Press reports said that a Texas-based firm called the Percheron project was preparing to launch the first U.S. privately owned space rocket into a 50-mile suborbital flight from Matagorda Island northeast of Corpus Christi. Backers of the project, named for a breed of large French draft horses, hoped to launch their rocket powered by kerosene and liquid oxygen at the end of July, but had run into trouble with the FAA, which said they must seek waiver of air-traffic rules preventing “nonconventional” use of U.S. air space above 12,500 feet. An FAA spokesman said that an application for waiver could take more than two weeks to resolve and could end by restricting Percheron to a flight no higher than 14,500 feet and no further out to sea than the three-mile limit over which FAA had jurisdiction. A flight would also call for extensive coordination with the Coast Guard to protect shipping and oil rigs in the area. Percheron was the idea of Gary C. Hudson, a “self-taught engineer” seeking to head a company pioneering corporate space ventures. In 1979 he met a fellow enthusiast, Houston developer David Hannah, described as “a disciple of Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill,” the Princeton physics professor famous for his ideas about the commercial and social possibilities of space colonies. Hannah, a supporter of the U.S. space program, had developed a slide show on commercial uses of a cheap, privately owned space vehicle; to launch Percheron, he raised $1.2 million from a number of investors including an oilman and rancher who owned part of Matagorda Island. Hudson rounded up a crew of engineers, scientists, and technicians, some from NASA’s JPL, others from private aerospace firms. So much information and so many plans were available that production of Percheron took only six months from final design. The 55-foot single-engine rocket used in clusters might one day orbit a 5,000-pound geosynchronous payload with a conical module able to withstand reentry heat and return reusable components to Earth. (W Star, July 23/81, A-l; July 28/81, A-7; W Post, July 29/81, A-l)
Biggest and best customer of the Space Shuttle, developed and operated by a civilian agency, would be the Department of Defense (DOD), said the Washington Star in one of a series of articles on the Shuttle program. At least 21 of 75 spaceflights planned before 1986 would be military missions, and neither NASA nor DOD would say what the flights were for. DOD had contributed millions of dollars to the Shuttle program in hardware and personnel, including a multibillion-dollar facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base for launches into polar orbit. Although the Shuttle would serve both civilian and military purposes, the two sides showed differing degrees of confidence: current boosters had reached orbit only 90% of the time, 10% dumping expensive satellites into the sea. “We have yet to achieve routine access to space,” said Lt. Gen. Richard C. Henry, commander of the U.S. Air Force’s Space Division. Shuttle reliability should be “as close to 100% as you can get.” Most NASA missions slated for the 1980s and beyond could not be flown without the huge cargo bay of the Shuttle. The military, however, would keep its Adas and Titan expendable boosters just in case. Space, said Henry, was the high ground, “crucial for collecting and disseminating information, for reducing the confusion of battle, even for improving combat efficiency. . . . Everything we put up is supportive of our national security, but nothing is combative.” DOD, he added, had “made commitments far in excess of any civil users.” (W Star, Mar 24/81, A-8)
NASA said that the most likely date for ferrying the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia back to KSC would be April 25 for the flight to Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma and April 26 for the flight from Tinker to KSC. Delays in deservicing were “mainly due to first-time-thru problems,” the agency said, referring to the lack of interface between Columbia and the mate/demate device “because of the unavailability of OV-2” which had not been checked out with the new ground-servicing equipment “for form, fit and function.” NASA noted that the three-day stretch in the schedule had covered leaks in quick-disconnect systems, new position of the work stand, the “unexpected OV-102 configuration (engine-bell placement that no longer fitted into the mate/demate device), and changes in operational maintenance instructions. A NASA press release pointed out that deservicing the orbiter involved “removal or containment of hazardous propellants such as toxic hypergolics and cryogenics,” inspecting its systems (including the thermal protection system), and raising the orbiter, with its 17-piece tailcone in place, to a stand where it could be fastened to its 747 carrier. Reviewing events, Aviation Week Space Technology said that ground personnel wearing protective suits had trouble connecting hoses to orbiter interfaces for off-loading propellants and purging systems because of limited space; operations were complicated by wind, rain, and lightning, with a series of four power losses in service facility, each requiring a two-hour minimum to power up again by following a checklist. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 21/81; NASA Release 81-50; DFRC Release 81-18; AvWk, Apr 27/81, 30-31)
Johnson Space Center’s (JSC) Space News Roundup said that a conference sponsored by NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), attended by representatives of major U.S. industries, heard briefings on systems developed for the space program that were applicable to Earth-based activities. Representatives of Dow Chemical, Exxon, ITT, Johnson & Johnson, Teledyne, 3M, Xerox, and numerous other corporations learned about pharmaceutical production in Earth-orbiting laboratories, life-support systems designed for space suits, and an electromechanical alternative to conventional hydraulic actuators. Bryan Erb of JSC’s Earth-resources division described the use of satellite observations to predict crop growth or locate mineral deposits or oil sources. From 1974 to 1978 JSC had managed the Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), showing how sensors on an orbiting platform could read and relay to Earth the characteristic signatures of Earth features used by scientists and engineers to make mathematical models on a worldwide basis. The AgRISTARS (agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing) project was carrying the measurements further, reading out thermal conditions, predicting soil moisture, and analyzing crops in the visual (as compared to infrared) spectrum. Erb said a worldwide remote-sensing system should be available within the next 20 years for managing Earth resources. Another innovation would be to work in space with living cells and proteins to develop products for fighting disease. Products like beta cells, enzymes, and immunoglobulins produced by kidney cells were already available in hospitals, but at astronomical cost. JSC’s Dennis Morrison said that on the ground this kind of work was limited to a microbiological level; working in space with larger amounts would mean a 20 to 50% improvement. Pituitary, kidney, and pancreas cells would be among candidates for spaceflight, even though weight limitations would delay early commercial processing. (JSC Space News Roundup, Jan 30/81, 4) During January: NASA reported Orbiting Astronomical Observatory Oao 3 (Copernicus), the heaviest and most complex observatory ever launched by the agency and instrumental in discovery of the first black hole (Cyg X-l), had finished its career at the end of 1980 after 8.5 years of operation. Launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) August 21, 1972, with a life expectancy of 1 year, its performance was “astonishing,” said GSFC engineers and scientists. Orbiting at an altitude of 740 kilometers (460 miles), Oao 3 used its supersensitive ultraviolet telescope, largest ever put into orbit, to view the heavens “with a precision and clarity never before possible,” producing spectral readings invisible to ground-based observatories because of the obscuring effects of Earth’s atmosphere. The telescope was capable of pointing accuracy equivalent to seeing a volleyball from a distance of 400 miles. During its lifetime, Oao 3 served more than 160 investigators from the United States and 13 foreign countries in observing more than 450 unique objects. Formal scientific investigations using Oao 3 ended December 31, 1980, but a series of engineering tests would continue into mid-February, when NASA would terminate contact with the spacecraft. GSFC engineers were not sure whether it would orient itself permanently toward the Sun, begin a permanent orbital tumble, or combine the two. (NASA Release 81-10; Goddard News, Jan 5/81, 1)
DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC. Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9) During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.” Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
A U.S. Air Force launch team from WSMC, Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, launched NOAA-C under NASA direction from WSMC at 6:53 a.m EDT on an Atlas F into a polar orbit with 863-kilometer apogee, 845-kilometer perigee, 101.9-minute period, and 98.9° inclination. The 371-centimeter-high spacecraft, 188 centimeters in diameter weighing 723 kilograms in orbit, was fourth of eight advanced weather satellites to be launched in the Tiros-N series to measure Earth-atmosphere temperature and humidity, sea-surface temperature, and proton-electron flux near the Earth. Designated NOAA 7 in orbit, the spacecraft with a two-year design life carried the most versatile scanning radiometer ever launched, gathering visual and infrared images and other measurements in five spectral channels. (Two earlier craft in the series carried four-channel radiometers: NOAA 6 was still operational, but Tiros N was turned off February 21 after operating for twice its design life.) NOAA 7 also carried a joint U.S. Air Force-NASA instrument to monitor in the spacecraft vicinity any environmental contamination from its propulsion systems; such contamination could degrade performance of future instruments planned for launch on similiar satellites. Successful launch of NOAA 7 meant that two polar-orbiting satellites would circle the Earth, viewing virtually all of its surface at least twice each 24 hours. NOAA routinely used data and imagery from the polar orbiters as well as from two geostationary spacecraft it was operating. NOAA 6 and NOAA 7 would transmit unprocessed sensor data in real time to ground stations in more than 120 nations, while passing overhead. Four more satellites in this series would be launched through 1985 on a call-up basis to ensure uninterrupted data flow. NOAA 7, built by RCA Astro-Electronics, under contract to GSFC, industry interface for NOAA, cost about $15 million to build and $7.5 million to launch. (NASA MOR E-615-81-03 prelaunch summary, June 2/81; [prelaunchj June 9/81; NASA Release 81-76; NASA wkly SSR, June 25/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 24, 30/81; SPX-332)
The NASA centers which were directed in April to merge reported the steps being taken to complete the action, approved by the agency’s new administrator, James M. Beggs. As of October 1, DFRC, Edwards, Calif., would become a directorate of ARC, Mountain View, Calif., reporting to ARC director C.A. Syvertson; it would retain its name and its “essential identity” but would function as an operational element of ARC. Aeronautical research at the two locations would be integrated and staff functions for the two centers would be combined. Several ARC projects, such as the quiet short-harid research aircraft (QSRA) and the tilt-rotor research aircraft would be moved to DFRC over the 30-month consolidation period. WFC in Virginia would become an operating clement of GSFC at Greenbelt, Md., responsible for suborbital projects and operations. WFC’s applied sciences directorate would be a new instrument-systems division of GSFC’s applications directorate. GSFC’s management operations directorate would absorb WFC’s technical support and administrative directorates, except for electronic and mechanical shops. (NASA Release 81-107; WFC Release
In an accompanying statement, Frosch reviewed the situation of the inertial upper stage (IUS) to be used on the Shuttle for launching spacecraft into outer space from Shuttle orbit. Within resources offered by the 1981 and 1982 budgets, the best alternative seemed to be modifying the Centaur instead of proceeding with a three-stage IUS, in order to have “that very powerful combination available for first launches in 1985. No other alternative upper stage is available on a reasonable schedule or with comparable costs. Therefore, NASA will expand discussions with the Air Force on the best means for providing upper stages. . .[and continue with] the two-stage IUS, which both we and the Air Force are counting on.” (NASA Release 81-14)
DFRC said that it was readying Shuttle orbiter Columbia for its return to KSC on its Boeing 747 carrier plane. DFRC was deservicing the orbiter after its 54-hour second flight, draining liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuels, removing pyrotechnic devices, and purging toxic chemical and fuel cells used in the propulsion systems. DFRC would attach a tailcone to the orbiter covering its three main engines and two orbital-maneuvering engines. The ferry flight would take two days, with a refueling and overnight stop at Bergstrom Air Force Base near Austin, Texas, or Dyess Air Force Base near Abilene. Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, manager of the orbital flight tests, would accompany Columbia back to KSC. (NASA Release 81-181; ARC Release 81-34)
The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television. The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency. Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than 17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed. As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time, a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.” A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
NASA’s Atmosphere Explorer 5 reentered Earth’s atmosphere after 31,268 orbits and more than 5'A years of service. Launched from KSC November 20, 1975, the 720-kilogram (1,587-pourd) AE-5 carried 15 highly specialized instruments to gather data on Earth’s near-space environment. It was the first spacecraft using on-board propulsion to make large orbit changes and to use a central computer to make all data acquired immediately accessible to members of investigator teams at terminals in their own facilities. The last signal from AE-5 came over Hawaii, and no signal was received when it was due over Ascension Island. Trajectory of the descent was across the Pacific, Central America, and toward the Atlantic; the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) confirmed reentry into the atmosphere over the Caribbean east of Nicaragua at 9:57 a.m. EE'T. (NASA Release 81-86)
