NASA said that it would change the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket boosters, reducing weight and increasing payload capability about 6,000 pounds (2,720 kilograms) by replacing 8 of the 11 metal booster motor-case segments with 4 segments made of composite filament. Other components, such as the metal forward and aft domes and the external-tank attachment area of the metal case, would remain. NASA had issued a request for proposals to develop the filament-wound case. The lightweight case would be needed in high-performance launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base into near-polar orbit, helping to compensate for the loss of lift in west coast launches that could not use Earth’s rotation to boost their velocity. The lightweight case could also boost extra-heavy payloads into orbit from KSC. First use of the motor would be in 1985. After plan approval NASA would have Thiokol Corporation make test firings directed by MSFC of solid-fuel rocket motors with filament-wound casings. (NASA Release 82-32; MSFC Release 82-19)
ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time. The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48) During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
MSFC shipped the induced environment-contamination monitor back to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) after servicing it in preparation for the third Shuttle flight. The desk-sized detector consisted of 10 instruments to check the environment in and around the Shuttle cargo bay for contaminants that might damage or interfere with sensitive equipment. The monitor would play a dual role on the next mission: besides carrying out its normal functions, the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED filAMB 32i 1,000-pound package would serve as a load to exercise the remote-manipulator arm. All instruments on the monitor operated successfully in its first flight on the second Shuttle mission; data collected then were still being analyzed. (MSFC Release 82-7) —A month-long analysis of the data produced by the monitor on the second Shuttle flight clearly identified every contamination-producing activity (such as thrust firings and water dumps). On future missions, the monitor could differentiate contamination from other sources. It recorded low humidity in, and successful sealing of, the cargo bay from engine byproducts during ascent and descent; few particles of matter larger than five micrometers, but a number of smaller particles well above expectations; a 90% reduction of water molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours in orbit; and a temporary cloud of particles from using the attitude-control system or from dumping of water. Project scientist Edgar Miller of MSFC said that, when the orbiter flew with the cargo bay pointing ahead, molecular readout was high because orbiter-generated particles were deflected back into the bay; action would be taken to keep this from happening while using sensitive instruments. The third Shuttle flight, planned for seven-days, would test the monitor in high temperatures from the planned solar orientation of the cargo bay, compared to the mild levels produced by the Earth orientation of the second flight. The remote manipulator would move the monitor to selected points for readout during the flight. (MSFC Release 82-14; NASA Release 82-13)
A formal ceremony in Washington, D.C., marked the acceptance of the Canadian-built remote-manipulator system as “ready for operational use” on the Space Shuttle. NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Dr. Larkin Kerwin, head of Canada’s National Research Council (NRC), signed an agreement declaring the device (already successfully used on STS-2, STS-3, and STS-4) operational. Although NRC thus fulfilled its obligations under a 1975 memorandum of understanding, it would continue to monitor the arm system on future missions. Next use of the arm would be on STS-7 in April 1983. (NASA Release 82-168)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
NASA announced the selection of four of five crew members for the first DOD Shuttle mission, STS-10, scheduled for launch from KSC in the last quarter of 1983. The commander would be Thomas K. Mattingly; pilot, Loren J. Shriver; and mission specialists, Ellison S. Onizuka and James F. Buchli. The fifth crew member, an Air Force manned-spaceflight engineer, would be named later. (NASA Release 82-146; MSFC Release 82-90; NY Times, Oct 7/82, A-18)
Presidential Science Adviser Dr. George A. Keyworth announced the names of 13 U.S. scientists and engineers to a White House Science Council. Chairman of the council was Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president, Bell Laboratories; vice chairman was Edward Frieman, vice president, Science Applications Inc. Other members were Harold M. Agnew, president, General Atomic Company; John Bardeen, emeritus professor, engineering and physics, University of Illinois; D. Allan Bromley, professor of physics, Yale University (chairman, American Association for the Advancement of Science); George A. Cowan, senior fellow, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory; Edward E. David, president, Exxon Research and Engineering (former science adviser to President Nixon); Donald S. Frederickson, resident fellow, National Academy of Sciences (former director, National Institutes of Health—NIH); Paul E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); Robert O.. Hunter, president, Western Research Company; Arthur K. Kerman, director, MIT Center for Theoretical Physics; David Packard, chairman, Hewlett Packard; Edward Teller, Hoover Institute, Stanford University. Lt. Col. Thomas H. Johnson, special assistant to Keyworth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would study issues with “significant technical components”; it was not meant to be demographically representative of U.S. science but rather would consist of “people with first-rate technical credentials and excellent judgment.” The New York Times noted that in an interview last summer Keyworth said that “good judgment is hard to find” among scientists because “our profession is one of the few where arrogance has been condoned if not nurtured.” A presidential science advisory committee formed in 1957 was abolished in 1977 by President Nixon, angry when some of its members took public stands against his policies. The new council, known by its initials WHSC (whisk), was meant to be more modest, the New York Times said. It would have its first meeting in March. (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; NY Times, Feb 18/82, A-12)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached. The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean. Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hartsfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights. The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command. Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release 82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1) During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86) —NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful ApolloSoyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands and Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, the Spacelab payload specialists representing the European Space Agency (ESA), had arrived at MSFC to complete training for the first Spacelab flight set for September 1983, a seven-day joint U.S.-ESA mission to carry out 70 investigations in five different disciplines. Of the four payload specialists in training, one American and one European would actually go into space; the other two would provide ground support to those in orbit. (MSFC Release 82-11)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
Crowds estimated at half a million watched Columbia’s fourth return to Earth, the first to use a concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. Among about 30,000 guests invited by NASA to the occasion were President and Mrs. Reagan. His comment at the touchdown was “Happy Fourth of July, and you know this has got to beat firecrackers.” The fourth flight, STS-4, was classified as the last of four test flights but carried more than 22,000 pounds of cargo, including a secret military payload. Although security considerations kept it from being photographed for viewers, the 50-foot mechanical arm designed to move objects in and out of the cargo bay and capture objects in space had been in use on this flight to move an 800-pound contamination monitor around the cargo bay. The runway, about 300 feet wide and 15,000 feet long, was about the size of the one at KSC made for routine Shuttle use after the seventh flight. The fifth (and first operational) flight scheduled for November would carry two commercial communications satellites, one for Canada and one for Satellite Business Systems; each .customer would pay NASA $21 million if the spacecraft reached orbit safely. Shuttle Program Manager Glynn S. Lunney said that NASA would do well to achieve one launch per month by the late 1980s and, ultimately, 24 to 30 per year. (NASA MOR M-989-82-04, July 19/82; NY Times, July 5/82, A-l, 8; WPost, July 4/82, A-l, A-ll; July 5/82, A-l; July 6/82, A-9)
Space Shuttle Columbia began a year-long vacation as the second operational Shuttle, Challenger, began final engine tests at KSC in preparation for a three-day mission in January 1983 with a four-man crew. After its landing at Edwards Air Force Base, Columbia was scheduled to return to KSC for “six dozen minor modifications” after completing its first commercial venture, STS-5. The modifications would prepare it for the December 1983 launch of Spacelab, built for NASA by ESA. NASA spokesman said that the first five flights had proved that the Shuttle could launch satellites into space with “remarkable accuracy”; demonstrated that four men could do high-pressure jobs in a cabin the size of a pickup camper; and showed that the Shuttle, like an airplane, worked better the more it was used. (USA Today, Nov 17/82, 3A) —MSFC said that it had sent NASA’s first inertial upper stage (IUS-1) to Cape Canaveral to ready it for launch in Challenger’s payload bay in January 1983. The first of six to be built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command, IUS-1 was an unmanned system for pushing payloads to high altitudes unreachable by the Shuttle in its 150-mile orbit. The two-stage vehicle, 17 feet long and about 9 feet in diameter, weighed more than 16 tons, had more than 64,000 pounds of thrust, and could carry up to 5,000 pounds of payload to geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up. At KSC, the IUS would be mated to a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS), first of four planned for launch to replace present ground stations and improve command and telemetry functions for the growing number of operational satellites. NASA hoped to have the four-craft system in operation late in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-103)
NASA said that it was relocating the Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ATS 1 from its station at 149 °W to a new position about 50 farther west, at 162 °E. Maintaining orbit position in its present location required maximum use of its thrusters; moving to the new station would put ATS 1 into a more stable position and substantially reduce the stationkeeping power requirement. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had considered several options to conserve on-board fuel supplies, which had been estimated adequate until mid-1982 .The new location should prolong stationkeeping through 1983 and reduce the need for center contract from biweekly to quarterly. (NASA Release 82-4)
NASA announced the selection of American Airlines to negotiate a contract for a new helicopter-simulation system to be installed at ARC, funded by the U.S. Army and used by both agencies. The $16 million system, designed to duplicate cockpit configurations and flight handling of helicopters, would aid in rotorcraft design and allow simulation of experiments, flight tests, and evaluation of improvements in basic helicopter technology. Pilots and engineers could simulate sight, sound, and motion of helicopter flight, using the system either stationary or in the vertical-motion simulator. (NASA Release 82-52; ARC Release 82-13)
The Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather scan had discovered a huge cloud orbiting the Earth and had tracked it for five weeks, but could not explain what it was. The cloud, about 10 to 12 miles high (just above the flight paths of most commercial jets), had probably circled the Earth four or five times. The best guess was that it resulted from an unnoticed volcanic eruption. On March 10 NASA said that the “mystery cloud” detected over Hawaii definitely came from a volcanic eruption. Chemical analysis of samples showed that it consisted entirely of sulfuric acid, ruling out nuclear explosion or a meteorite, either of which would have produced fragments of rocky material. The cloud had been measured from the equator to Germany, about 50-f8-N, with the heaviest concentration of particles found by a Langley Research Center (LaRC) research aircraft at 20 °N. No volcanic source for the cloud had been identified. Scientists from ARC were studying atmosphere-circulation patterns to see how gas from an equatorial source could spread over the northern half of the Earth. Sulfur gases injected into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions tended to remain for months, as there would be no rain to remove them; changing gradually into drops of sulfuric acid, the volcanic cloud would increase over time in depth and density as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly reflective clouds of the acid, like those on Venus, could prevent solar heat from reaching the ground, but the current cloud apparently had not produced any climate changes. A NASA research plane flying from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) to Costa Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the cloud content while doing previously scheduled data-gathering on local volcanoes. LaRC would continue taking radar data; also, an ARC U-2 aircraft would make follow-on flights beginning March 23. (ARC Release 82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA Release 82-45; W Post, Mar 6/82, A-4; NY Times, Mar 7/82, P-24) Heavy rains all day March 17 left more than an inch of water on the “dry” lake beds at Edwards, where Columbia had landed after its first two flights. NASA said that it was cheaper to move landing equipment to White Sands than to postpone the flight until Edwards dried out: each day of delay in launching the Shuttle cost the agency $3 million. A special landing team immediately began loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would carry it the 1,000 miles from Edwards to White Sands. The equipment should be in place late on Sunday, March 21, ready for use should an emergency occur after liftoff. The upcoming flight, third of a series of four test flights before the Shuttle began carrying payloads into space later in 1982, would subject the spacecraft to temperature extremes to see how it endured long exposure to dark and light. It would also include further tests of the 50-foot robot arm designed to handle Shuttle payloads. Exposure of the Shuttle tail would test pumping of fuel and restarting rear engines under extremely high or low temperatures. Exposure of the 65-foot-long cargo bay carrying more than 21,000 pounds of instruments and experiments to the extreme heat encountered in space would show how materials carried into space over the next 10 years would survive. The open cargo bay aimed at the Sun would also seek exposure to solar flares, for which scientists were still seeking explanations. Lousma and Fullerton flew from JSC at Houston to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., near KSC in T-38 jet trainers Saturday, March 20, and planned to spend most of Sunday in preflight briefings. KSC said that the countdown had been virtually trouble-free and ahead of schedule. Liftoff from pad A, launch complex 39, took place Monday, March 22, at 10:59 a.m.; EST after an hour’s delay caused by failure of a protection circuit in the controller, for the heated nitrogen purge of the main engines, required before introduction.of cryogenic fuel. Countdown stopped for reestablishment of heater'control. Initial orbit elements were 240-kilometer apogee and perigee, 89-minute period, and 38° inclination. Operations began in the fourth hours of flight with the opening of payload doors, removal of ejection suits, and activation of the Office of Space: Sciences experiment package (OSS-1). Later reports indicated that the crew suffered from motion sickness after the exertion of removing the space suits; incidence of motion sickness had been less on Mercury and Gemini when astronauts had less area to move in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had taken time on longer flights to get used to weightlessness before active exertion. Scheduled for the second day was deployment of the robot arm; for the third was practiceiin grappling payload packages and extending a set of sensors over the edges of the cargo bay to measure plasma (electrically charged gases) in Earth orbit. The fourth and fifth days would see further tests of the arm, more thermal testing, and two brief ignitions of the maneuvering rockets to see how they performed after long periods of cold. The sixth day would have more thermal tests and experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day would be for shutdown and landing preparations. All activities planned for day one were accomplished; OSS-1 experimenters reported “excellent data.” Thermal attitude tail-to-sun prevailed throughout the sleep period. A survey with the remote manipulator system (RMS) camera showed several low-temperature white tiles missing or damaged on the nosecone. Also, three pieces of black tiles (about 1 1/2 tiles) had been found 700 feet south of the launch pad; others had been found on and near the beach. All had been sent to JSC for identification and analysis. On Tuesday, the first day in orbit, the “wrist” camera on the manipulator arm went dark, and flight directors postponed the critical grappling test to devise a way to do the test without it. That camera served as the crew’s eyes whenever the end of the arm took hold of an object in the cargo bay. Planned use was to raise an 82-pound package and move it around the bay; the instrument inside would measure electrical disturbances caused by the spacecraft and its motion through the electronically charged ionosphere. Instead, the crew extended the robot arm far over the cargo bay and used the “elbow” camera to transmit “the best television ever seen of the earth” from 150 miles up. The crew turned on the monodisperse latex reactor [see January 19] for 14 hours; the solution would be stirred every 30 minutes for the rest of the mission. Ground control changed the activity schedule to allow for crew rest and troubleshooting; day four activities would be done on day three and vice versa, a prelaunch-planned option. Problems were reported with the environmental control and life-support systems and with the waste-control “slinger”; NASA said it had initiated “backup procedures.” Besides suffering from motion sickness, Lousma had been kept awake by loud radio static, probably from a Soviet radar at Rostov on the Black Sea, said to be the most powerful in the world; it was called Woodpecker by radio ham operators because of its noise, heard from Spain to parts of China. STS-3 lost three main radio links to Earth Friday, March 25, through the Shuttle’s transponders that locked on and amplified ground signals and carried nearly all data on Shuttle condition and its speed and location. Two ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radio channels carried voice transmission, however, and the astronauts were using the remaining transponder, a backup UHF voice line, and the FM-radio line to relay information to Earth. Gene Kranz, deputy flight director at JSC, said that the mission would go full time unless the high-power transponder link was lost. A premature end to the mission would require a landing somewhere other than at White Sands, because of bad weather with overcast skies and high winds that blew dust across the runways and created haze thick enough to obscure the landing site. Two days away from the scheduled landing, the crew had completed all the thermal tests on Columbia: baking tail, nose, and top in unimpeded sunlight and chilling the same parts in the icy cold of space for hours. They had restarted the Shuttle engines hot and cold, opened and closed cargo-bay doors under both conditions, and repeatedly tested the mechanical arm under varying conditions with excellent results. In the last possible opportunity, less than a day before the end of the mission, the crew pointed their solar telescope directly at the Sun and got a solar flare (an event on the Sun’s surface they could not have predicted) “almost as if it were planned.” Dr. Robert Novick of Columbia University, where the X-ray polarimeter was built, said that this was the first time that an instrument in space with this sensitivity had witnessed a solar flare. On Sunday night, March 28, the crew went to sleep two hours earlier than usual in preparation for landing Monday. About 40 minutes before the time scheduled for touchdown, astronaut John Young in a Grumman Gulfstream jet tried a practice landing on the White Sands runway and found visibility completely obscured. The Columbia crewmen were about to fire rockets to begin descent. “That’s the first time I’ve seen it this bad,” Young told mission control in Houston. “I think we ought to knock this thing off.” Less than 15 minutes later, mission control ordered a day’s delay. The two astronauts unpacked to await word from mission control on where and when they would return. Landing finally occurred at 9:04 a.m. MST on Tuesday, March 30, on a dry lake bed at White Sands. Touchdown point was 1,092 feet past the runway threshold; rollout distance was 13,732 feet. The crew left the orbiter 45 minutes after landing, and postflight operations proceeded without incident. (NASA Release 82-29; NASA MOR M-989-82-03 [prelaunch] Mar 13/82, [postlaunch] May 5/82; NASA MOR E-835-03-82-01, OSS-1, [prelaunch] Mar 17/82, [postlaunch] Sept 20/82; Spacewam SPX-341; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 24, 25, 29/82; NY Times, Mar 18/82, A-18; Mar 20, 7; Mar 21, 1; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 30, A-l; WPost, Mar 19/82, A-7; Mar 21, A-l; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 25, A-2; Mar 27, A-2; Mar 29, A-l; Mar 30, A-l)
NASA announced a week-long series of Shuttle checks to verify readiness for launch. Prime and backup crew members would fly a mock liftoff, return to launch site, and descend from orbit to a simulated landing on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The first 99 hours would be checkout of individual orbiter systems (electrical distribution, environmental control, instrumentation, flight control, and propulsion), the external tank (power, instrumentation, range safety, and tumble-valve systems), and solid-fuel rocket boosters (hydraulic, electrical, instrumentation, and range-safety systems) as well as critical electrical and mechanical connections between Shuttle elements. The second part of the tests would simulate portions of the mission, the launch, a return-to-launch-site abort with the orbiter’s system in control, and descent from orbit. (NASA Release 82-19)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles. Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16) During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination. The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1) During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000,	and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers. In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
Three astronomers at the University of Hawaii, using NASA’s infrared telescope facility on Mauna Kea and data from Voyager 2, announced the first measurement of the sizes of four of the five known moons of Uranus. Voyager 2 was heading for Uranus after a successful flyby of Saturn 10 months ago, and the new calculations would be useful in planning the scientific studies to be done after arrival. Uranus was so far from Earth, about 3 billion kilometers (2 billion miles), that it was visible only through telescopes. Sizes of the moons were figured from their infrared (heat) radiation. NASA had built the Mauna Kea telescope, most sensitive in the world for measuring faint infrared sources, to provide support for spacecraft exploring the planets; Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii team, also a member of the Voyager project, said that the Moon data were exactly the sort of support NASA had in mind. The moons of Uranus, smaller than Earth’s, were all as large as any of Saturn’s except Titan, the giant moon that was the only planetary satellite found to have an atmosphere. Oberon, largest of the Uranus moons, had a diameter of about 1,690 kilometers (1,100 miles). Besides measuring the Uranus moons, the astronomers reported that Triton, largest moon of Neptune, and the planet Pluto were both too small and too cold for any heat radiation to be detected; the weakness of the sources led them to decide that Triton must be smaller than Earth’s Moon. Triton and Pluto, “based on our current knowledge,” might be very similar; past speculation suggested that Pluto might have been a escaped moon of Neptune. (NASA Release 82-104)
