Reps. Les AuCoin (D-Ore.) and Norman Dicks (D-Wash.) sent a letter to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger warning that "Congress would not excuse any attempt by the Department of Defense to circumvent" a congressional ban on antisatellite weapon testing, the Washington Post reported. The warning came after the Post reported that a DOD official discussed plans to continue development of a $4 billion U.S. antisatellite weapon despite a week-old law that banned tests against an object in space as long as the Soviets did not test such a system. The DOD official said a possibility under study was to fire a test weapon against "a point in space" rather than at two targets put into orbit December 12 [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and DOD, Dec. 12]. The Air Force "won't do anything in direct violation" of the congressional language attached to an omnibus spending bill signed into law by President Reagan, but "we will find a way to go ahead," the DOD official had said. Although the congressional action stopped testing, it did not halt the overall antisatellite program, for which Congress increased by $15 million a Pentagon request for $150 million in FY 86 to develop the system. The increase, a congressional aide said, was to show the Soviet Union that the U.S. program would be available for testing if Moscow broke its moratorium. The spending bill also had a special $5 million item for the Air Force "to carry out a research program to develop new and improved verification techniques to monitor compliance with any antisatellite weapon agreement that may be entered into by the U.S and the Soviet Union." Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said he hoped to bring arms-control supporters in the House together to discuss antisatellite weapons. The long-term goal of arms control, he said, was "to promote stability." In the antisatellite area, he added, that meant finding a way to make secure the superpowers' high-altitude satellites that monitored nuclear forces and provided early warning of an attack. (IV Post, Dec 28/85, A5, Dec 25/85, A1)
Kenneth Adelman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, told a U.S. House foreign affairs subcommittee that the U.S. should not change its military plans, such as delaying a test of its new antisatellite weapon, to assist in negotiating an arms control agreement, the Washington Post reported. Adelman argued that testing "would not impair" negotiations and "can constitute an incentive to the Soviet Union to reach agreements on a wide range of issues." Although the Air Force had set September 13 as its first test of the antisatellite weapon against a target in space, congressional sources said the Reagan Administration might step up its test plan because of the negotiations or the November summit meeting. As of mid-July, the Air Force had no plans to test the weapon in September, because it had returned both the weapon and its instrumented target to their manufacturer for repairs expected to take through October. Thus when House-Senate conferees met in July to iron out differences on the 1987 defense spending bill, the Pentagon agreed to a provision that limited the Air Force to three tests against a target in space through the end of FY 86. "They said they would not have a test before the new fiscal year began in October," one conferee recalled. Pentagon sources said Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and President Reagan agreed in early August to test the weapon against an old U.S. satellite "to show resolve." Critics of the weapon, including four members of Congress, had filed suit in U.S. District Court in Washington seeking to block the test, arguing that Reagan had not met a congressional requirement that he certify he was negotiating "in good faith" to get an agreement with the Soviets limiting such weapons. Oral arguments in the case were set for September 12. Rep. George Brown Jr. (D-Calif.), one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, told the subcommittee the presidential certification was "less than candid" and "circumvented the intent and will of the Congress." Brown also criticized the weapon, which was two years behind schedule, saying that the Pentagon talked about "how vital to the national security the system is, right up to the day they cancel it." (W Post, Sept 12/85, A26)
National Space Transportation System manager Dr. Glynn Lunney, who was a member of the Space Task Group that inaugurated U.S. manned space flight, announced he would leave NASA in the near future, the Johnson Space Center Space News Roundup reported. Lunney, whose career almost exactly spanned the period of U.S. efforts in space, began his government service in 1958 with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, NASA's predecessor, at Lewis Research Center. He then moved to the Space Task Group and with it to Houston when it became the Manned Spacecraft Center. Later he became head of the mission logic and computer hardware section, chief of the flight dynamics branch, flight director for the Gemini program, and, in July 1968, one year before the first manned landing on the moon, chief of the flight director's office. He then served as special assistant to the manager and then manager of the Apollo spacecraft program. With the advent of the Space Shuttle program, he became manager of the Space Shuttle payload integration and development program responsible for directing the planning and implementation for all payloads and payload carriers in that program. Since 1981 he served as manager of the National Space Transportation Systems Program with responsibility for overall systems management and integration of all elements of the program. Among the awards received by Lunney were the Lawrence Sperry Award, the Arthur S. Fleming Award, the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award, the Allan D. Emil Memorial Award, the W. Randolph Lovelance II Award, three NASA Group Achievement Awards, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, an Outstanding Leadership Medal, Senior Executive Service designations, and an honorary doctorate of laws from the University of Scranton. Lunney was a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (JSC Space News Roundup, Apr 12/85, 1)
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
NASA announced that the American Flight Echocardiograph (AFE), sponsored by the life sciences division of NASA's space science and application office (OSSA) and developed by the medical sciences division at Johnson Space Center, would fly on STS 51-D, the first of three planned flights of the equipment with follow-on activity determined by data results. The objective of AFE was to obtain data on in-flight cardiovascular changes during space flight. Most changes seemed to result from the shift of body fluids out of the legs and into the chest and head in weightlessness. The brain apparently detected this shift and interpreted it as an increase in blood volume. Normal responses to this "overload" were an increase in urination and a decrease in thirst, reducing blood volume from an acceptable level. Other effects of weightlessness included changes in heart size, an increase in the amount of blood pumped by the heart, and a decrease in the resistance to the flow of blood through the arteries. Most of these latter changes were normal responses to weightlessness; however, when combined with the reduced blood volume, they made effective functioning on return to earth difficult. Determining the important cardiac and vascular changes during adaptation to weightlessness and during the readaptation to gravity after a flight would reveal how the cardiovascular system responded to unusual stresses. This would be valuable in the development of more effective countermeasures to the detrimental effects of spaceflight and in understanding the functioning of the circulation in general. The AFE equipment used very high frequency sound waves (echocardiography) to obtain in vivo cardiodynamic structural and functional data. A probe held next to the skin sent high-frequency sound waves (ultrasound) through the skin and into the body. It then detected their reflections, or echos, from organ surfaces. The electronic circuitry of the echocardiograph calculated the distance travelled by the ultrasound pulse from the delay between the transmission of the pulse and the detection of its echo. Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, a co-investigator on the project, had trained to use the AFE to image her own heart from several different angles. Every day in flight she would record her own echocardiogram and those of up to three other crew members as time and circumstances permitted. Dr. Seddon would obtain the first echocardiogram as soon as possible after orbital insertion and midway through and prior to sleep on the first flight day. During the three flights on AFE, NASA planned to acquire data on about 10 crew members, along with pre- and postflight data. (NASA MOR E-420-51-D-14 [prelaunch] Apr 12/85)
NASA announced that during 1985 it began a series of research flights under simulated airline conditions to evaluate the effects of an operational environment on new technology for smooth, or laminar, airflow over aircraft wings [see Aerospace R & D/Aeronautics, July 8]. Previous research had shown this technology could reduce aerodynamic drag from 25 to 40% under laboratory conditions and could provide significant fuel savings. However, insects, ice, and other obstructions could disturb laminar flow in actual flight service. To test the system in an operational environment, NASA's Ames/Dryden Flight Research Facility's business-sized Jet Star, equipped with two experimental laminar flow control devices, was based in Atlanta and flown in and out of commercial airports in the southeast and midwest, including those in St. Louis, Cleveland, and New Orleans, to test the devices in humid summer climates. While based in Pittsburgh to test the devices in early autumn east coast conditions, the plane flew in and out of airports in Boston; Chicago; Chattanooga; Cleveland; Charleston, W.Va.; Washington, D.C.; Detroit; Bangor, Maine; New York; Kalamazoo, Michigan; Oklahoma City; Albuquerque; and Denver among others. The flight tests would continue in 1986 with the plane based in Cleveland during January. (NASA Release 85-170)
In its postlaunch report dated July 23, 1986, NASA announced that it had launched on September 9, 1980, GOES-D (subsequently designated GOES-4) from KSC by a Delta 3914 launch vehicle. The GOES (Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite) satellites provided near-continuous high-quality day and night observations of earth and its environment, including cloud cover; weather; proton, electron, and solar X-ray fluxes; and magnetic fields. During placement of GOES-4 and its apogee boost motor (ABM) into transfer orbit, NASA observed lower than expected temperatures for the ABM and decided to fire the motor at second apogee in lieu of the nominal third apogee. Performance of the ABM was nominal and resulted in placement of the spacecraft in desired drift orbit. GOES-4 arrived September 20, 1980, on-station at the 98° west longitude checkout position. On February 26, 1981, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) moved GOES-4 to the GOES-west operational position at 135° west longitude, replacing the ailing GOES-3 spacecraft. NASA modified the ABM thermal design for follow-on spacecraft to avoid recurrence of the low temperature problem. On May 22, 1981, NASA launched GOES-E (subsequently designated GOES-5) from KSC on the Delta 3914. Spacecraft performance during transfer orbit maneuvers was nominal, and NASA fired the ABM on the third apogee of the transfer orbit. GOES-5 arrived on-station June 5, 1981, at the predetermined checkout position of 85° west longitude. On August 5, 1981, NOAA placed GOES-5 at 75° west longitude where it became the operational GOES-east satellite. An additional mission objective for both GOES-4 and 5 was demonstration and assessment of the temperature and moisture soundings from the VISSR Atmospheric Sounder (VAS); Goddard Space Flight Center initiated a VAS demonstration project to achieve this objective. In 1981 the VAS demonstration project conducted a ground truth field experiment that provided four days of simultaneous, high-density ground-based observations and satellite data. This data showed VAS to be a versatile and valuable instrument with potential applications beyond the severe local storm discipline. Some of these additional areas included hurricane and tropical cyclone research, cloud climatology, and diagnosis of moisture patterns and upper-air circulation. As a result of the VAS demonstration project, NOAA made provision for geosynchronous soundings a requirement for the next generation of GOES satellites. Under a 1973 basic agreement, NASA had the responsibility under NOAA reimbursable funding to design, engineer, procure, and launch polar and geosynchronous weather satellites to implement the U.S.'s operational meteorological satellite program. After on-orbit checkout, NASA handed over the spacecraft to NOAA for routine operations. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [postlaunch] July 23/85, E-612-81-03 [postlaunch] July 23/85)
The TOMS, or Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, aboard Nimbus-7 made measurements the previous week indicating that the gas cloud ejected from the Nevado del Ruiz volcano in Columbia released twice as much sulfurous gas into the sky as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and five times as much as the 1982 eruption of Galung-gung in Indonesia, the NY Times reported. Dr. Arlin Krueger of the Goddard Space Flight Center said that within 14 hours of the November 13 eruption, the cloud spread over an area of 600,000 sq. km (230,000 sq. miles). NASA researchers designed TOMS to monitor changes in earth's protective ozone layer, and it scanned the stratosphere at a succession on ultraviolet wavelengths whose relative intensities provided an index of ozone abundance. But the TOMS readings could also identify sulfur dioxide. The sulfur cloud, 14 hours after the main eruption, spread chiefly to the east, covering most of Colombia and part of Venezuela. One arm of the cloud reached as far south as the equator in Colombia and as far north as Lake Maracaibo in Venezuela. Because TOMS was not used for day-to-day weather forecasting, it was not ordinarily subjected to a rapid-analysis process. As soon as the Colombian eruption occurred, however, Dr. Krueger and his colleagues began to study its readings. The sulfur dioxide, he said, "shows up very well." Although estimates of the cloud's volume were preliminary, Krueger said it appeared much smaller than that formed by the eruption in 1982 of El Chichon in southern Mexico. Visible and infrared data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration satellites had traced El Chichon's dust, which formed a narrow plume, through one complete circuit of the globe from April 5 to April 15, 1982. Although Nevado del Ruiz's sulfur cloud was extensive, it did not appear sufficient, with its associated ash cloud, to have an effect on climate. Whereas El Chichon's sulfur cloud was traced around the world, researchers expected del Ruiz to dissipate within days without any severe environmental effects. (NYT, Nov 19/85, A14)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility had launched at 1:46 p.m. EDT June 24 and 1:46 p.m. EDT June 26 Nike-Orion sounding rockets for the University of Illinois to investigate the daytime mid-latitude ionosphere between 96 and 241 statute miles above earth. Specific mission objectives were to investigate differential absorption of radio waves; determine the electron density profile; and investigate the irregular structure of the electron density profile in terms of neutral turbulence, plasma instabilities in the mid-latitude region, and gravity wave effects. The 120-lb. payloads reached peak altitudes of 110 statute miles, and preliminary results indicated all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The Nike-Orion was a two-stage, solid-propellant unguided sounding rocket about 30 feet long. Researchers would correlate scientific data from the missions with information from a similar study of the daytime equatorial ionosphere conducted March 1983 in Peru as part of Project CONDOR. Dr. L.G. Smith, University of Illinois project scientist, noted the studies were important "because turbulence is the major unsolved problem of the atmosphere and ionosphere." (GSFC Release 85-19)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $139,000 follow-on contract to Martin Marietta Corp. to study a system for reclaiming unused propellant from Space Shuttle external fuel tanks and transferring it to an orbiting space station, Aerospace Daily reported. Martin Marietta Corp's New Orleans, Louisiana, manufacturing facility would perform the work on the preliminary design study. The contract followed one let in February 1984 and valued at $250,000 to examine the basic "propellant scavenging" concept. The system under study would consist of two to four propellant collecting or scavenging tanks in an aft cargo carrier affixed to the rear of the Space Shuttle external tank. After Space Shuttle launch and cutoff of the main engines, residual liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen would drain from the external tank into the collection tanks aided by a thrust system designed for zero-gravity conditions. Once filled with fuel, the scavenging tank assembly would separate from the aft cargo carrier as a self-contained, remote-controlled vehicle with its own propulsion system. After the vehicle moved into position beside the space station, technicians aboard the station would send an orbital maneuvering vehicle (OMV) to bring it to the space station fuel depot for transfer of the reclaimed propellant to permanent tanks. When out of fuel, the scavenger vehicle would return to earth in the Space Shuttle cargo bay for reuse on later missions. The proposed system would be capable of reclaiming and transporting up to 25,000 lb. of propellant per mission, depending on the Space Shuttle payload. Unused fuel on Space Shuttle missions to date had ranged from 9,500	to 28,300 lb. of the total 1.6 million lb. of propellant carried by the external fuel tank on each flight. It was currently estimated that the space station would require some 250,000 lb. of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants each year. Martin Marietta said the proposed system would result in reduced costs for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the space station; the company estimated the system could provide propellants at an average cost of approximately $350 per lb. NASA had studied other methods of scavenging fuel from the Space Shuttle external tank but found them to have a higher cost per lb. or to provide fewer opportunities for transporting the cryogenic fuels to the station. (A/D, July 12/85, 61) During July. Yvonne Clearwater, in an article in Psychology Today, described the work of the Space Human Factors team, an interdisciplinary team of which she was a member, to determine what could make the proposed space station a congenial habitat for living and performing highly sophisticated work. The team—representing psychology, architecture, and engineering— was defining what "habitability" meant in space by looking at the critical relationships among environment, psychological well-being, and performance. Clearwater said the team would begin by developing architectural and interior-design guidelines based on behavioral research. NASA contractors and development engineers at Johnson Space Center would then use the guidelines in designing and building the space station. The team would then turn to examining social and psychological issues such as crew selection, training, and support; organization and management; and operations planning. Although recommendations would focus on the physical and social-psychological environments separately, the team had to consider all the factors together in the planning process, because they interacted in the real world, whether on earth or in space. In contrast to the Soviets, who placed a high priority on the mental wellbeing of their space crews, NASA originally had focused on technological engineering rather than behavioral science. In addition, the early astronauts had little interest in psychological support or intervention; reportedly the first seven U.S. astronauts announced they would not tolerate psychologists. Clearwater pointed out, however, that NASA had grown more sophisticated and more sensitive to the fact that body-mind-environment interactions affected the health and performance of people. The formation of the Space Human Factors Office at Ames Research Center reflected NASA's commitment to psychological as well as physical health of space workers. The challenge was to troubleshoot the proposed space station systems and settings while they were still being developed conceptually by, first, identifying the environmental conditions likely to be significant stressors; second, defining the kinds of psychological, emotional, and behavioral problems these could produce; and finally, showing how such problems might affect work performance. Clearwater concluded that by defining and meeting human needs in space environments, it might be possible to create more supportive places for living and working on earth. (Psychology Today, July 85, 34)
In May an armament division F-16 from the U.S. Air Force's 3246th Test Wing fired an advanced, medium range air-to-air missile (AMRAAM) over White Sands Missile Range in the first guided launch of its full-scale development program, the Air Force System Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Armament division officials said the successful flight verified AMRAAM's interface with the F-16's avionics system and the performance of its active radar guidance capabilities. AMRAAM is an all-weather, all-aspect radar missile designed to replace the AIM-7 radar missile. AMRAAM is smaller, lighter, and faster than AIM-7 and had an active radar seeker that would permit air crews to "launch and leave" or to execute simultaneous multiple-target attacks during a single intercept. Pilots could launch AMRAAM from beyond visual range, because it received target information from the launch aircraft's avionics systems. After launch, the aircraft could pass target information to the missile, or the missile could use its own inertial reference unit and microcomputer to guide inertially toward the target. During the terminal phase, the missile's active seeker would take over and guide the missile to the target. The Air Force and Navy had a contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for full-scale development of AMRAAM, with Raytheon Co. designated as "follower" contractor to introduce competition during the production phase. The previous December an AMRAAM separation/control test vehicle flew a preprogrammed course to evaluate the missile's autopilot, control system, aerodynamic characteristics, and safe separation from the aircraft. The Air Force planned over the next three years more launches from several aircraft including the F-14, F—15, F-16, and F—18. Plans also called for combat aircraft of the United Kingdom and Federal Republic of Germany to carry AMRAAM. (AFSC Newsreview, June 28/85, 4)
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA announced that one of the satellites in the COSPAS/SARSAT system, an international program with the U.S., USSR, Canada, and France serving as major partners, made possible the rescue of a man 140 miles off Cape Henry, Virginia. On April 17 Jack Boye departed Miami to sail to New York Harbor for the dedication of a memorial to Vietnam veterans of Airborne 173, his wartime squadron. Three days into the sail his radio went out, and a storm caused the sloop's electrical and electronic equipment and engine to fail and the boat to capsize. When the boat rolled over and started filling with water, Boye activated an emergency position-indicating radio beacon that trailed at the stern of the boat. An orbiting Soviet sea and rescue satellite, one of three USSR and two U.S. satellites equipped with sea and rescue equipment in the COSPAS/SARSAT satellite system, first received the distress signal and beamed it to the Rescue and Command Center at Scott Air Force Base, Illinois, who alerted rescue forces. After an electronic search for the distress signal, a Coast Guard aircraft located the sloop and requested assistance from a navai ship in the vicinity. The USS Detroit sent a whaleboat with the ship's doctor to the sloop. To date, the COSPAS/SARSAT system had been instrumental in the rescue of more than 400 people. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the U.S. portion of the system; Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for system research and development. (NASA Release 85113)
In a letter to the editor in the NY Times, Saunders Kramer, a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society, commented on the NY Time's report of speculation in a London newspaper that debris from a satellite reentering the atmosphere may have struck the Air-lndia jetliner that crashed in July [see Aviation/Civil Aviation, July 29]. "You dismiss that possibility as 'bizarre,'" Kramer wrote, "Not quite." Kramer then related a tale of an incident that occurred in the early 1960s, when passengers on a airline flight from Honolulu to Tokyo saw at 30,000 feet a white flash and heard a thud. "After they landed at Tokyo, inspection revealed a smooth dished-in area (about 18 inches across) on the plane's right wing leading edge between the two starboard engines," Kramer continued. There was no evidence of a bird collision. When the navigator returned home, he related the tale to Kramer, who checked North American Air Defense Command'a (NORAD) space-tracking data bulletins, which showed reentry of satellite debris at the time and location of the Pan Am flight. "We concluded that the debris had indeed struck the plane," Kramer wrote. "The propulsion section of the last stage of a satellite booster is frequently massive enough to survive reentry. Had it struck the tail section severely or struck the cockpit from above, it is certainly conceivable, however remote, that destruction of the aircraft could have been instantaneous," Kramer concluded. (NYT, Aug 2/85, A24)
Scientists at the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory's (AFGL) Space Physics Div. developed a computer program that predicted the electrical effects of the highly charged polar space environment on spacecraft. These effects could range from the production of noise in circuits to system failure in extreme cases, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Called Potential of a Large Object in the Auroral Region (POLAR), the code simulated in three dimensions the electrical interaction of the Space Shuttle or any other space vehicle with the polar space environment in the region from 100 to 600 miles above earth. Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base would orbit through the polar region, and the polar charging code could provide important data for the design of large space structures such as space stations. Lockheed Corp. used POLAR to predict the effect of charging on the Space Shuttle in low-altitude polar orbits with payloads funded by the Air Force Space Test Program Directorate and other Air Force and NASA programs. RCA performed calculations with POLAR for the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program vehicles. NASA's Spacelab 2 mission scientists used POLAR to predict the electrified gaseous environment, or plasma, of the Space Shuttle when the Plasma Diagnostics Package, a free-flying satellite, deployed. And NASA's LAGEOS Satellite Project Office would use POLAR to study charged particle drag on this laser reflecting satellite. POLAR was a successor to NASCAP (NASA Charging Analyzer Program), the computer code AFGL developed with NASA to model charging of Air Force satellites at geosynchronous altitude. The European Space Agency (ESA) had used that code to design weather and TV relay spacecraft, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used it to design the Galileo satellite. POLAR would incorporate data derived from future spacecraft flights and would become a computer-aided design tool for the construction of the advanced extravehicular mobility unit, the manned maneuvering unit, the NASA-proposed space station, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 7) Transatmospheric Vehicle
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
"The Dream Is Alive," a new IMAX movie that was perhaps the most advanced film of its kind ever made, opened today at the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum, the Washington Post reported. The $3.6 million production, narrated by Walter Cronkite, was the first ever shot almost completely on location in space and was an informal sequel to "Hail, Columbia," the story of the U.S.'s first Space Shuttle. Because the film was shot on three of the most dramatic and action-packed Space Shuttle flights of the previous year, it was essentially a video yearbook full of special happenings, the Washington Times reported. The film showed the rescue and repair of the Solar Max satellite, the deployment of the 100-foot-tall solar array that someday could help power the space station, launching of two communications satellites, and the first spacewalk by an American woman. Among what appeared to be special effects produced in Hollywood were the immensity of Hurricane Josephine as seen from 200 miles overhead and the silence of a satellite drifting noiselessly in the blackness of space. The astronauts who shot the footage said the IMAX format came as close to capturing the real view and the true feel of spaceflight as any format ever had. IMAX expert Graeme Ferguson, who produced and directed the film, said the next step was to modify an IMAX camera so it could be taken outside the Space Shuttle. (W Post, June 22/85, D1; W Times, June 20/85, 3B)
The Washington Post reported that Fairchild Industries would sell its 50% interest in American Satellite Co. and Space Communications Co. for $105 million to Continental Telecom Inc., which owned the other half of the two joint ventures. Observers considered the two satellite communications subsidiaries Fairchild's leading growth opportunities. American Satellite of Rockville (Amsat) provided private and general satellite communications services. It transmitted regional editions of The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, and other newspapers and had won a large number of government contracts. Space Communications of Gaithersburg (Spacecom) owned and operated the tracking and data relay satellite system for NASA, provided communications to the Space Shuttle, and was building a $122.8 million communications network for the Air Force. Fairchild president Emanuel Fthenakis said the company decided to sell its interests in Amsat and Spacecom to consolidate its other businesses. "We are addressing the same market with more than one company," he said. "The main reason is to consolidate our activities and address these markets with our wholly owned subsidiaries." Analysts said the move showed Fairchild was unwilling or unable because of troubles in its other operations to invest the large amounts of capital required to continue to expand the two companies. (W Post, Aug 9/85, B1)
The U.S. Navy implemented a plan announced earlier by Navy Secretary John Lehman to abolish the Naval Material Command and to restructure the Naval Electronics Systems Command to integrate space systems, force ships, and aircraft systems into a Space and Warfare Systems Command, Defense Daily reported. The actions were part of a two-year-old plan to decentralize acquisition management in the Navy and streamline the decision making process. Defense Daily reported the Navy as saying a major impact of the reorganization of Navy acquisition management would be improved accountability by eliminating a reporting layer. Adm. James Watkins, chief of Naval Operations, said the space aspect of the reorganization was part of a total package intended to bring the Navy "up to speed" in addressing space needs. "We are trying now to put our act together. We have established the Navy Space Command. . .putting in my office the Space and C3 Directorate, rather than just C3," Watkins said. "The Space and Warfare Systems Command will be our technical depository, working with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other laboratories to work our projects in space, of which there are many. . .This is a nice stepping stone on the route to a unified space command," Watkins added. He also pointed out that the Navy and the Air Force, and perhaps the Army, would rotate into the unified space command that President Reagan would establish on October 1,1985. Therefore, Watkins said, he saw the reorganization as important not only within the Navy, but also within the unified command system to achieve a higher level of command decision. (D/D, Apr 10/85, 225)
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Administrator Donald Engen, citing improvements in scheduling practices and air traffic control, told airlines today that on April 1 he would remove minute-by-minute restrictions on the number of flights at airports in Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, and the New York City area, the Washington Post reported. He said delays would continue to occur but should be reduced and more manageable. Before the restrictions, the air traffic system had experienced an unprecedented number of delays, averaging 1,400 daily 15-minute or longer delays nationwide the previous August. Between November 1 and January 31, 1984, average daily delays dropped to 863, a reduction of 46%. Not all delays were attributable to airport congestion or air traffic control problems; the FAA generally blamed about 60% of them on weather. Also likely to contribute to a decrease in delays was the increasing ability of the FAA to monitor traffic nationwide through its computer system and to redirect planes to less-busy routes. Engen noted that the airlines had indicated they would continue to operate the schedules adopted under the restrictions and would not revert to the bunching of large numbers of operations within short time periods. (W Post, Mar 15/85, A16)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
NASA earmarked about $3.2 million in FY 86 funding for continuing work on the proposed space station at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to define processing requirements, evaluate maintenance and resupply activities, and assess facility needs, the Spaceport News reported. The funding, an increase over the previous year, would pay for studies to further the Phase B definition and preliminary design effort expected to continue through early 1987. NASA planned for the early 1990s the first launch of a space station element. KSC studies were intended to identify ground processing options and launch preparation concepts. In addition, KSC contractors were evaluating what facilities were needed for processing the station elements and payloads. KSC was also studying how NASA should approach the ongoing maintenance and resupply activities that would support continuous on-orbit operations. KSC space station activity in FY 86 was expected to require the equivalent of about 180 NASA and contractor workers. (Spaceport News, Oct 25/85, 2)
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Geobotanical Remote Sensing Group was developing technologies of spectral analysis to acquire a total picture of earth's vegetation—wild and cultivated, trees and plants—the JPL Universe reported. The group was adapting techniques developed for space exploration to devise, build, and test spaceborne instruments that would work in conjunction with ground-based monitoring, data-recording, and analysis devices. The group was employing every available technology—radar, microwave, and infrared analysis—as well as effective procedures for using them. The goal was to develop technology to identify types of vegetation, the area of coverage, and general conditions from field to field, area to area, continent to continent. JPL was working closely with the University of California in the project, particularly the university's Kearney Agricultural Center, to diagnose crop conditions based on factors such as irrigation, insect infestation, and the spread of plant diseases. In the program, satellites bounced radar off earth's vegetation, in a sense taking its pulse and temperature. At the same time, ground-based studies used, among other techniques, a truck-transported basket like a cherry picker to gather radar as well as infrared measurements similar to those from Landsat and other earth-surveillance satellites. Particularly helpful to the program was JPL's Space Shuttle imaging radar, which was unaffected by darkness or obscuring clouds. The instrument was on an October 1984 Space Shuttle mission and would fly again in 1987. Data analysis in the program employed several approaches. In one, analysts gave a computer a statistical model and commanded it to survey recorded data to seek out similar conditions throughout the globe, thus providing insights into vegetation identity and condition. Other studies concentrated on the use of physical models to relate spectral data to parameters such as green-leaf area and water status. Comparison of space-derived and ground-based images and data determined how they differed and how they complimented one another. This permitted monitoring of crop and natural vegetation conditions on a worldwide basis and offered insights into the effects of acid rain and other pollution on crops and forests, in lakes and ponds, and into conditions and changes of arid lands. (JPL Universe, Aug 23/85, 1) During October. The Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-G was not the first NASA orbiter to carry retroreflectors for laser ranging in space, the Goddard News reported. Apollo astronauts in the late 1960s placed reflectors on the moon, and NASA launched in 1976 Lageos, a retroreflector equipped satellite. Laser ranging had become routine in space and was available for a variety of measurement tasks. At Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Crustal Dynamics Project (CDP) scientists analyzed data received from satellite laser ranging (SLR) to study the movement and deformation of crustal plates that determined earth's shape. The scientists also analyzed data received from lunar laser ranging (LLR) to study polar motion and earth rotation, which led to earth's wobble. At GSFC there was an international system of cooperating laser networks. All systems, such as the Goddard Laser Tracking Network (GLTN), provided data to the CDP through conventional SLR and lunar laser ranging. The GLTN consisted of a series of transportable and fixed systems throughout the world and other international laser networks also supported the CDP. Satellite laser ranging had attained major advances since the inception in 1965 of the GLTN. Tracking efficiency had improved from 65% in 1981 to 75% in 1985; instrument accuracy, from 10 cm to 1 cm. The laser transmitter and sensitive photomultiplier receiver were the most essential equipment in any laser tracking system, because they provided and processed the signals from which the measurements were made. Current laser transmitters shot short-pulsed beams that lasted 200 trillionths of a second, the time it took light to travel about two inches. Recently, the Federal Republic of Germany asked GSFC scientists to assist in preoperational tests of its new Modular Transportation Laser Ranging System (MTLRS) 1, because GSFC had the Mobile Laser Ranging System (MOBLAS) 7 for a calibration standard of comparison. During the daily tests, the two systems simultaneously tracked the same satellite, then scientists compared data obtained from MTLRS 1 to that from MOBLAS 7. The closer the measurements, the better the calibration; MTLRS 1 measured within 1 cm of the MOBLAS 7. MTLRS 1 later would participate with other European and U.S. systems to perform satellite laser ranging in West Germany, Italy, Greece, Egypt, Israel, and Turkey. (Goddard News, Oct 85, 4)
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
NASA announced finalists in its Teacher in Space Project would arrive in Washington, D.C., beginning June 22 to attend a national conference sponsored by NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) as part of the selection process in the program. Through June 27 the 114 elementary and secondary school teachers would hear from NASA officials and other experts in space science and exploration, including discussions about their responsibilities if chosen to fly aboard the Space Shuttle, and participate in workshops sponsored by NASA's educational affairs division to provide a hands-on learning experience about NASA and its programs. During the week, a national selection panel would interview the finalists. On June 25 the teachers would attend a reception on Capitol Hill with members of Congress and on June 26 meet with President Reagan. (NASA Release 85-92)
As a result of White House prodding, the Air Force had signed an agreement to use NASA's Space Shuttle for at least eight flights a year for 10 years starting in 1988, and the Air Force would get a discount when NASA worked out a new pricing policy for the start of FY 89, the Washington Post reported. The Air Force would pay a fixed fee at the start of each fiscal year, then a per-flight charge less than commercial and other government customers would pay. Under the agreement, NASA would drop opposition to an Air Force plan to buy 10 single-use unmanned rockets to orbit two satellites a year for five years starting in 1988, and NASA and the Department of Defense would work together to ensure a fully-operational and cost-effective Space Shuttle. NASA hoped the Space Shuttle would begin to break even in 1987, as the agency anticipated making from that time on 24 Space Shuttle flights yearly for 10 years. The new agreement called for the Air Force to use one third of all Space Shuttle flights for the 10 years starting in 1988. The agreement also permitted the Air Force to pick the single-use rocket it would use to orbit secret satellites too small for economical use of the Space Shuttle. (W Post, Feb 27/85, A22)
NASA announced that scientists from the U.S., France, the United Kingdom, and West Germany released their findings from the rendezvous on September 11 of the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although some ICE data confirmed the traditional portrait of a comet, other information was unexpected. Perhaps most surprising was detection of electrical wave (plasma) disturbances and high-speed molecular species coming from the comet more than a day before rendezvous. The spacecraft's Plasma Wave Experiment, developed by TRW's Dr. Frederick Scarf, detected the electrical waves while ICE was 1,429,200 miles from the comet. Scientists had theorized that first detection might occur just a few hours before the spacecraft crossed the comet's tail. A few hours after initial detection, but still one day before intercept, two of ICE's instruments discovered electrically-charged particles (ions) as far as 1,130,000	miles from the comet. The Energetic Proton Experiment, directed by Dr. Robert Hynds, Imperial College, London, and the Low-Energy Cosmic Ray Experiment, directed by Dr. Dieter Hovestadt of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, West Germany, detected these ions. According to Hynds, it was believed solar ultraviolet light ionized gas molecules escaping from the comet's nucleus, then the solar wind picked up and accelerated the ions back toward the comet. In another finding, Dr. Samuel Bame of the Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that, in contrast to the hot electrons on the outskirts of the comet, its tail consisted of a dense narrow structure of cool plasma. The Radio Wave Experiment of France's Meudon Observatory made this same finding. The ICE's Ion Composition Experiment, directed by Dr. Keith Ogilvie of Goddard Space Flight Center, made the first direct measurements of molecules in a comet. The experiment found mainly water vapor ions, confirming the "dirty snowball" model of comets. A major prediction confirmed by the ICE data was that the magnetic structure of the comet's plasma tail consisted of two parallel lobes, each threaded by a magnetic field of opposite polarity. ICE's Magnetometer Experiment of Dr. Edward Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory mapped this structure, which was predicted in 1957 by Nobel physicist Dr. Hannel Alfven. Putting conflicting scientific conjectures to rest, the ICE mission revealed that no clear-cut bow shock—a surface moving ahead of the comet like that through which a jet aircraft passes as it breaks the sound barrier—accompanied the comet. Instead, researchers found around the head of the comet what they called "a transition region" in which the solar wind was heated, compressed, and slowed. Neither the ICE spacecraft nor its instrument payload suffered any detectable damage as a result of the impact with the comet's dust. (NASA Release
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate confirmed on November 18 Dr. William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator; Graham, who was a founder and executive of R&D Associates, was nominated by President Reagan on September 12. Graham had served for three years as chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament and previously served as a member of the President-elect's transition team. Before founding R&D Associates in 1971, Graham spent six years with the Rand Corp. and before that three years active duty at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, as a project officer directing a group conducting experimental and theoretical research on strategic system survivability. Graham had been a consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and served on many international and national boards and advisory groups including the National Academy of Science/National Research Council Committee on Undersea Warfare, the Air Force Science Advisory Board Task Force on Manned Strategic System Vulnerability, the U.S.-United Kingdom Joint Working Group on Atomic Weapons, the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, and the Defense Science Board System Vulnerability Task Force and Associated Task Forces. His memberships in professional and honorary organizations included Tau Beta Pi, the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics, the New York Academy of Science, the Council on Foreign Relations, the board of directors of the Committee on the Present Danger, the Defense Preparedness Association, the Ethics and Public Policy Center, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1959 Graham received a B.S. degree in physics from the California Institute of Technology and in 1961 an M.S. degree in engineering science and in 1963 a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, both from Stanford University. (NASA Release 85-155)
NASA announced it selected Dr. F. Drew Gaffney, an associate professor of medicine and cardiology and director of echocardiology at the University of Texas Health Science Center, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, and Dr. Robert Phillips, a veterinarian and professor of physiology and nutrition at Colorado State University, to serve as payload specialists for the initial Spacelab Life Sciences (SLS-1) flight. NASA also selected Dr. Millie Hughes-Fulford, an associate professor of biochemistry at the University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, and a medical researcher at the Veterans Administration Medical Center, to serve as a payload specialist for SLS-2. Dr. Hughes-Fulford was the first woman to serve as a prime payload specialist for a Space Shuttle flight. The flights were intended to improve significantly knowledge about living beings in the space environment and were a major step in preparing men and women for life aboard the space station scheduled for launch in the early 1990s. NASA would shortly select for the SLS-2 mission a second payload specialist, who would then train with the three already announced. (NASA Release 85-62)
NASA announced that astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Universities of Hawaii, Arizona, and Texas were observing Pluto and its only known satellite, Charon, as the two alternately moved in front of one another in a series of eclipses that occurred every 124 years or twice in each orbit of the sun. Each time Charon passed between Pluto and earth, a portion of Pluto's surface was blocked from view, resulting in a dimming of the combined light from both bodies. When Charon moved behind Pluto, their roles reversed. Measurements of the times, durations, and changes in brightness of the events would allow astronomers to calculate the masses, diameters, and densities of Pluto and Charon, permitting development of models of the two bodies' composition. Current estimates of Pluto's density had an uncertainty of 50%, not accurate enough to derive information on its composition. However, researchers thought Pluto's density was about that of water, making it the lowest-density planet known that had a solid surface. The new measurements indicated that the combined brightness of Pluto and Charon diminished by 4% during the eclipses, a dimming that lasted about two hours and was superimposed on a 30% brightness change that occurred over a 6.4-day period. The longer change in brightness happened because one hemisphere of Pluto was 30% brighter than the other. Very little was known about Pluto and even less about Charon, including when or even if the five-year-long series of eclipses would begin. In order not to miss any of the earliest events, the astronomers had established an observing network at McDonald Observatory in Texas, the University of Arizona observatories, Palomar Observatory in California, and Mauna Kea Observatory in Hawaii. Dr. Edward Tedesco of JPL had been the first to see and measure an eclipse of Pluto by Charon January 16 from Palomar; Richard Binzel observed another eclipse February 17 from the McDonald Observatory; and Dr. D. J. Tholen observed a third eclipse February 20 from the Mauna Kea Observatory. Pluto and Charon's great distance from earth and relatively small sizes made them the solar system's most difficult objects to observe. (NASA Release 85-36)
NASA announced it has named effective November 3 Lewis Rinker deputy inspector general, Office of Inspector General (OIG). In that position, Rinker would assist the inspector general in the direction and management of nationwide OIG programs. Since joining NASA in October 1980, Rinker served in various management positions, the most recent of which was assistant inspector general for technical services and also served as the acting deputy inspector general. Before his NASA work, Rinker served in managerial positions with the U.S. General Accounting Office and was an industrial engineer and procurement analyst with the Air Force Systems Command. Rinker received his B.S. degree in engineering from Johns Hopkins University and was doing graduate work at George Washington University. He was a senior member of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers and a member of the Association of Government Accountants and the Association of Federal Investigators. (NASA anno., Nov 5/85)
'The Eagle has landed.' In a dramatic and compelling moment in history, the first humans had reached solid ground beyond our own planet . . . "Space exploration is little more than a quarter century old. In that brief period, more has been learned about the cosmos and our relation to it than in all the preceding centuries combined. The ever-increasing knowledge gained from peaceful space exploration, and the uses to which that knowledge is put, potentially benefit all those on Spaceship Earth . . . "In recognition of the achievements and promise of our space exploration program, the Congress, by Senate Joint Resolution 154, has designated July 20, 1985, as "Space Exploration Day . . . PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	4o3 "I call on the people of the United States to observe the occasion with appropriate ceremonies and activities." (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, July 22/ 85, 924) U.S. Air Force
The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
The Lewis News reported that NASA had completed conceptual designs for its space station and that industry had submitted proposals for definition studies and preliminary designs of various station components for which NASA expected to award 18-month contracts in April. NASA would award contracts in April 1987 for the next phase of the program—the final design, development, launch, and assembly of the station. Contrary to most large NASA projects, for which an industrial prime contractor coordinated various aspects of a project, NASA would oversee the entire space station program because the station's operational life would extend over a long and indefinite period. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the system engineering and integration function; Lewis Research Center (LeRC) was responsible for the power system. The space station power system was vital for two major reasons: the quantity of electrical power available to governed station capabilities and, since the power system required large areas of solars cells or mirrors, the size of these areas affected station configuration and operation. Plans called for initial power demands of 25 kw for housekeeping needs of a crew of six and 50 kw for experiments and customer applications. Comparing this power system to the largest previously in space—the Skylab manned-mission system, which generated 16 kw—the magnitude of the power station challenge became evident. LeRC personnel would consider a variety of power system technologies, making selections based on detailed studies of the tradeoffs among options. Studies would examine how the options influenced the performance, risk, and cost of the power system and space station, with consideration given to station growth and satisfaction of later needs. In addition, LeRC had to design a system that would be available on schedule, function reliably for an indefinite life with only on-orbit maintenance, be user-friendly, and remain within cost limits. (LeRC News, Feb 8/85, 2)
NASA announced it selected the first participants in a program to assimilate discoveries from space astronomy experiments into a comprehensive modern astrophysical theory in order to use more effectively future experiments such as the Hubble Space Telescope, the Gamma-ray Observatory, the Solar Optical Telescope, and similar planned projects. After evaluating 49 proposals from 300 individuals at 80 institutions, NASA selected seven groups to participate in the astrophysical theory program. Dr. Richard McCray and a scientific team from the University of Colorado would study detailed ways in which spectra form in a variety of astrophysical sources such as stars, supernovae, and active galactic nuclei. Dr. Jeremiah Ostriker and colleagues from Princeton University would analyze the most distant observable parts of the universe to determine possible effects of the theoretical "big bang". Dr. Pierre DeMarque and a team from Yale University would develop computer models of the sun to examine the internal motions and magnetic fields that caused sunspots, solar flares, and solar wind. Dr. Roger Chevalier and his team from the University of Virginia would study the hot gases that appeared to surround clusters of galaxies, individual galaxies, and supernova remnants to determine the origin and motion of the gases as well as their effect on the development of galaxies. Dr. Ronald Taam and colleagues from Northwestern University would study the origin of rapid bursts of high-energy radiation from neutron stars and globular clusters in order to model the ignition, nuclear evolution, and propagation of burning fronts on surfaces of neutron stars and to understand the nature of hot plasma confinement in magnetic fields near such subjects. Dr. David Black, heading a team from Ames Research Center and the University of California, Santa Cruz and Berkeley campuses, would investigate various physical and chemical processes taking place in the formation of stars, concentrating particularly on the stars' origins in giant molecular clouds in interstellar space and the protostellar/protoplanetary disk-shaped nebulae surrounding fledgling stars. And Dr. Simon White and a team of scientists from the University of Arizona would study questions regarding star and planet formation, including properties of star-forming regions, galaxy formation, and evolution. NASA would bring the researchers together in 1986 to exchange information and to encourage a better understanding of the advances that science has made with data acquired from space research. (NASA Release 85-59)
Two groups of scientists, who were making observations at infrared and radio wavelengths, reported the strongest evidence so far of a supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the NY Times reported, strengthening the theory that very massive black holes existed in the cores of all galaxies. Astrophysicists had already deduced that black holes might be at the cores of some distant galaxies. Eight physicists and astronomers from the University of California, Berkeley, reported in the British journal Nature their infrared observations showing gas whipping around a core at 100,000 to 400,000 miles per hour. They concluded the gas was in the grip of a black hole four million times the mass of the sun. The group measured the velocities near the center of the core with sufficient precision to show that they decreased further out in a way to be expected if controlled by gravity from a single central object. They believed this ruled out a dense cluster of stars, proposed by some astronomers, because that gravity field would be more uniform. Radio astronomers using coordinated observations with antennas in West-ford, Massachusetts; Green Bank, West Virginia; Fort Davis, Texas; and Gold-stone, Hat Creek, and Owens Valley, California; and the 27 antennas of the very large array in New Mexico aimed the antennas at a radio source, a suspected black hole, almost directly in the center of the Milky Way called Sagittarius A (in the constellation Sagittarius). The results indicated that the source, despite its enormous mass and output of energy, was smaller than the orbit of Saturn. Donald Lyndon-Bell of Britain's Royal Greenswich Observatory and Martin Fees of Cambridge University had proposed 14 years before that there might be such an object there. Astronomers using improved radio and infrared techniques had mapped in more and more detail the Milky Way core, which was 30,000 light years from earth. They could not see the core with visible light because of dense clouds of dust and gases. (NVTJune 7/85, A15) June 22\ NASA announced that the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) observed for the first time the comet Giacobini-Zinner while the comet was approximately 87 million miles from earth on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. IUE would continue observations of the comet as it moved closer and ultimately became the target of the world's first intercept, on September 11, 1985, of a comet by a satellite, the International Cometary Explorer (/Cf) spacecraft. The June 22 IUE observations of Giacobini-Zinner produced ultraviolet spectrograms—graphic depictions of the intensity of light over a range of ultraviolet wavelengths—revealing emissions of two molecules, carbon monosulfide and another known as the hydroxyl radical. Preliminary evaluation indicated that the ultraviolet emissions from both molecules were somewhat brighter than expected at this stage of the comet's development. The IUE had taken the ultraviolet "pulse" of not only nearby solar system objects such as comets and planets, but also extragalactic objects such as quasars, providing research data to more than 1,000 astronomers around the world. Scientists, engineers, and technicians at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center designed and integrated the spacecraft, which was launched in 1978 as a cooperative venture of the British Science Research Council, the European Space Agency, and NASA. (NASA Release 85-103)
After spending 18 months at the factory in Palmsdale, California, Columbia, the flagship of the Space Shuttle fleet, returned for operational duty to Kennedy Space Center (KSC), the JSC Roundup reported. Columbia had undergone hundreds of modifications to reconfigure the ship from a developmental flight vehicle to a fully operational orbiter. Columbia flew the first five Space Shuttle missions, and NASA modified the spacecraft at KSC for the October 1983 STS-9 Spacelab 1 flight. Following its return to KSC and removal of the Spacelab 1 payload, NASA in late January 1984 ferried Columbia to California atop the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft. Rockwell International performed five major modifications to the orbiter during its stay at the orbiter production plant. Structural modifications to the wings and midfuselage included strengthening of lower wing surfaces and installation of heavier straps across the orbiter's belly. Rockwell added a heads-up display to the forward flight deck to allow the Space Shuttle commander and pilot to view critical flight information on a see-through panel while they looked through the forward cockpit windows. Production workers removed the commander and pilot ejection seats, which were installed on Columbia for the initial development Space Shuttle flights, and replaced them with standard seats. Overhead blowout panels were also removed. Rockwell modified two orbital maneuvering system pods to make them compatible with the other orbiters in the fleet and replaced the thermal protection tiles on the pods with the advanced reusable surface insulation blankets. Production personnel also installed supplemental instrumentation to gather developmental engineering data. In addition, workers removed and replaced approximately 5000 high-temperature tiles from the orbiter's underside, because engineering analysis indicated several areas where greater heat protection was needed. About half of the wing leading edge panel assemblies was removed and modified to strengthen the supporting structure of the reinforced carbon-carbon panels, an infrared imaging device was installed on the vertical stabilizer to provide a temperature profile of the upper wing surfaces during reentry, and instrumentation was added to the nose cap to provide improved entry air data. During the trip from California to KSC atop the 747 shuttle transport, rain damaged more than 1,000 of its head shield tiles, the Washington Post reported. NASA said that between 200 and 300 of the tiles required replacement. Damaged areas were around the windows and on the forward facing tiles. According to NASA policy, Space Shuttle transports were forbidden to fly through visible rain. However, the shower did not appear on ground radar or on the 747's onboard radar system. NASA had scheduled Columbia to fly next in December on mission 61-C. (JSC Roundup, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 19/85, A17)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Americans on board were commander Henry Hartsfield, Jr.; Air Force Lt. Col. Steven Nagel, pilot; and mission specialists Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, a biomedical engineer, Marine Corps Col. James Buchli, and Air Force Col. Guion Bluford, Jr., who had a doctorate in aerospace engineering. The two West Germans in the crew were Dr. Ernst Messerschmid and Mr. Reinhard Furrer, both physicists. The eighth crew member, Dr. Wubbo Ockels, a physicist from the Netherlands, represented the European Space Agency (ESA), which provided several scientific instruments in the Spacelab. The Europeans had prime responsibility for conducting the experiments; Bluford and Dunbar would assist them. Spacelab D-1, designed, built, and checked out in Europe, was flown to KSC for installation in Challenger's cargo bay. The V\fest German space agency's center in Oberphaffenhofen, near Munich, controlled scientific operations during the flight; ground control for flying the Space Shuttle was in Houston, as usual. Spacelab D-1 carried 76 experiments on racks that lined its walls. German researchers designed most of the experiments, which were for German and other foreign universities, research institutes, and industrial enterprises as well as ESA and NASA; other experiments were from France, Spain, Italy, Britain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the U.S. All experiments were intended to take advantage of the weightlessness of space to study various processes that were normally affected by gravity. The Washington Post reported that West German officials said Spacelab was a major step toward what they hoped would be a larger laboratory module attached to the permanently manned space station that NASA envisioned for the 1990s. Most experiments were in materials processing. Along two sides of the Spacelab, the experiments were in racks containing small furnaces for heating metals and making alloys that were lighter and stronger than anything produced in full gravity of earth. Other materials processing experiments would study the flow of liquids in weightlessness; yet others would grow very pure and large crystals that could lead to improvements in electronic semiconductors. In a variety of life sciences experiments, the crew would study the growth of plants (corn and lentils) under microgravity conditions. Other studies were on how embryos of frogs and insects developed in weightlessness. Crew would use tadpoles for tests on how weightlessness might affect the development of vestibular, or balance, organs in vertebrates. ESA's vestibular sled ran down a pair of rails in Spacelab's center aisle. Experimenters would accelerate and tilt crew members riding in the chairlike device to test how the human balance system in the inner ear responded to weightlessness and a moderate gravity force, because it was thought the inner ear, which relied on gravity to function normally, might be the source of astronauts' motion sickness. Crew would use instruments in the cargo bay outside the Spacelab for navigation tests, such as synchronization of atomic clocks in space with those on the ground, checking for any discrepancies caused by weightlessness, and precise distance measurements by radio signals between the Space Shuttle and the ground. To accommodate the crew of eight, NASA installed an extra sleep station, bringing the total to four. Crew would conduct laboratory work in shifts around the clock. Despite early concern over the condition of the Space Shuttle's steering jets, mission control gave the Challenger the go-ahead for orbital operations. Later the mission control flight director said a valve malfunction prevented the flow of fuel through one line to Challenger's steering jets, but NASA considered an alternate line sufficient for regular operation to maneuver Challenger. Flight controllers also reported erratic temperature readings on one of the three fuel cells that generated electricity, but with crew supervision the affected unit was operating at full strength. (NASA Release 85-145; NASA MOR M-989-61-A [prelaunch] Oct 28/85; NY Times, Oct 31/85, B13; W Post, Oct 31/85, A30)
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)
Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah) today joined five astronauts and a French pilot for the final two-hour practice aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger, which they would fly in two weeks, the Washington Post reported. They had run through launch procedures and checked all spacecraft systems to avoid any surprises at liftoff, ending with a simulated liftoff at 4 p.m. Garn, who would fly on Challenger as a congressional observer, was chairman of a subcommittee that oversaw NASA funding. The other non-NASA spaceman was French Air Force Lt. Col. Patrick Baudry, who would serve as a payload specialist. (WPost, Feb 18/85, A14)
Lockheed Georgia, manufacturer of the C-5B Galaxy, resumed flight testing of the aircraft after it replaced about 12,000 fastener nuts on the plane, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Lockheed-Georgia grounded the plane after its September maiden flight when quality control inspectors found that construction crews had installed aluminum, instead of steel, nuts on the first eight planes. The mistake slowed production and temporarily halted certain aircraft flight testing. Col. Thomas Stover, acting C-5B program director for Aeronautical Systems Division, said, "It is important to note that flight safety was never an issue. The concern was for development of maintenance problems 10 to 15 years down the road." Stover explained that steel nuts were stronger and lasted longer than aluminum nuts and that, although there were about 3.7 million nuts for each C-5B, only 35,000 had to be steel. Lockheed-Georgia spokesman Dick Martin said workers installed the wrong nuts because some engineering drawings, used by supervisors and assembly line workers, were not specific about nut type. He said about 35% of the nuts had to be replaced on the first aircraft. The Air Force had scheduled the first C-5B for delivery by January 1, and Lockheed-Georgia still expected to deliver the aircraft on time because the company had been four weeks ahead of schedule before the delay caused by the replacement. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 6/85, 4) Simulation Technology
The Soviet Geophysical Committee of the USSR's Academy of Sciences presented Dr. Alexander Dessler, director of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Space Science Laboratory, a bronze medal for his contribution to fulfillment of international geophysical programs, MSFC announced. The committee awarded 1,000 medals, 100 to American scientists, commemorating the 100th anniversary of the first international geophysical program, the First International Polar Year, 1892-1983. Scientists receiving the award made important contributions to international geophysics in such areas as solid earth, oceans, atmospheres, solar-terrestrial relations, and the geophysical programs in Antarctica and space. Since beginning his scientific career in 1956, Dessler specialized in research in low-temperature physics, atmospheric electricity, and space physics and authored more than 100 technical papers on these subjects. Dessler was a Fellow of the American Geophysical Union and the American Association for the Advancement of Science and served as an officer of the International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. (MSFC Release 85-11)
NASA announced that, based on a review of engine data following the July 29 Space Shuttle mission 51-F launch, Marshall Space Flight Center and Kennedy Space Center engineers believed that failed sensors—not an engine failure—were the probable cause of the main engine No. 1 shut down [see Space Transportation System/Missions, July 29]. The data suggested the high-pressure fuel turbopump on that engine performed normally, because there were no indications the pump was running hot. If the pump were running hot, Johnson Space Center flight engineers, who monitored engine performance during ascent, would have expected to see changes in the position of an oxidizer valve indicating an increased flow to supply the pump with more power. Data showed the valve position did not change. A second data indication of normal pump performance was present in the engine discharge pressures, which were monitored by ground controllers and the main engine controller. Based on these indications, NASA engineers reviewing the cause of the engine shutdown tentatively concluded that the main engine controller was receiving faulty data from failed sensors. Resistance measurements taken by the engine controller provided an indicator of pump temperatures, because the resistance increased as the temperature increased. The controller logic was able to distinguish, within certain limits, a valid reading from one that indicated the sensor wire, a very thin wire, was broken or had otherwise failed. The controller recognized the bad reading from the Channel B sensor; the reading from Channel A, however, drifted, indicating a temperature rise above the redline limit. Because of the failure mode in the second sensor, which gave readings above the redline limit but below those that would cause the controller to disregard them as unreasonable and thus indicative of a sensor failure, the engine controller believed there was a possible pump problem and shut down the engine. A temperature sensor on main engine No. 3 also failed. Because there was a history of these temperature sensors failing on previous Space Shuttle flights, NASA decided to develop a new sensor for use on future Space Shuttle flights beginning with mission 51-1. Until such time as NASA confirmed this explanation by an examination of the engine and its various systems, NASA would not launch another mission. Flowever, the agency did not anticipate that this would result in a delay in the next mission. The call "abort to orbit" used to describe the action ordered for the July 29 Space Shuttle flight was the preferred type of Space Shuttle launch "abort" in that it gave the crew, the orbiter, and the ground controllers time to review options and to ascertain that the crew and orbiter were in good condition. In nearly all cases, the abort-to-orbit contingency would allow completion of most of a particular mission's flight requirements. Once NASA determined that an orbiter was in a safe orbit (minimum would be about 105 nautical miles circular), then the crew and ground flight controllers could begin to assess the impact on planned mission activities. In the case of mission 51-F, the orbit achieved was 106 by 146 nautical miles, 40 miles short of the planned designations; the orbiter was at a velocity of 25,760 feet-per-second, which was 110 feet-per-second less than planned. NASA determined all abort modes based on the weight of the orbiter, the inclination of the desired orbit, and other characteristics. Each mode had a specific applicable time and duration during the ascent phase, and crew and ground controllers practiced these contingency situations regularly. (NASA Release 85-114)
The U.S. House Appropriations Committee deleted $7.2 million in FY 86 funds requested by the Air Force to initiate a $350 million program to refurbish Titan II ICBMs for use as space boosters, Defense Daily reported. The committee warned that the Titan II launchers could "only have a further impact on the Shuttle and result in a less efficient use of Shuttle facilities" and pointed out that the Air Force had "not been able to demonstrate why the expensive Titan II refurbishment program is critical to the defense of the nation." The Committee also noted that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration dropped its plans to launch some payloads on the Titan II in favor of launching them on the Space Shuttle [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Revenues Feb. 25 and Oct. 18], "bringing into question whether Titan II is cost-effective on a per launch basis," the committee said. It also cited classified reasons for its action. (D/D, Oct 29/85, 305)
As part of its FY 87 defense budget planning, the Department of Defense (DOD) approved a competition between the Northrop F-20 Ti-gershark and the General Dynamics F—16 Falcon as a fighter interceptor aircraft for the air defense fleet, Defense Daily reported. However, DOD had not decided how many prototype aircraft it would purchase for the competition. Although a FY 86 defense authorization bill specified a competition between the two aircraft, some members of the U.S. House wanted to direct the Air Force to set a minimum number of F—16 and F-20 fighters that it would procure in FY 86 and then institute the competition. The possibility of a competition had set off a price war between Northrup and General Dynamics, with General Dynamics proposing a specially configured F-16C to compete in cost and effectiveness with the F-20. (D/D, Sept 5/86, 12)
NASA today invited Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who chaired the U.S. House science and technology subcommittee on space science and applications, to be a congressional passenger on an unspecified flight of the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Nelson, who represented the district in which the Kennedy Space Center launch site was located, later held a news conference at his office in Melbourne, Florida, to announce acceptance of the invitation. The first congressional Space Shuttle passenger on an April 1985 flight was Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the committee that oversaw NASA spending. Although Nelson, unlike Garn, had no flying experience, he was an outspoken supporter of the space program. (W Post, Sept 6/85, A8)
Space Shuttle mission 51-F was aborted today at three seconds before liftoff when the orbiter Challenger's onboard computer automatically shut down the main engines, Spaceport News reported. Seconds after main engine start, main engine No. 2 lost redundancy to operate the chamber coolant valve. NASA's ground rule restricted launching without an operating backup system in that area of the main propulsion system. Although the valve did assume its proper position after a command from a backup system, the loss of redundancy resulted in a major component failure flag being sent to the orbiter's computers. Challenger Commander Gordon Fullerton later thanked the Kennedy Space Center team on behalf of the crew, saying the team acted quickly and professionally and that at no time did the crew feel apprehensive. In answering a Washington Post reporter's question later, Fullerton said, "We all have mixed emotions here, but we're thankful the system worked the way it should. It was the longest three seconds I've ever experienced." Launch operations manager Thomas Utsman said that crews would strip parts of the malfunctioning engine and that engineers had identified four different parts that could have failed when they should have been pumping fuel from the hydrogen tank into the engine chamber. When the liquid-fuel engines ignited, valves that fed fuel into the chambers were fully open so engines could attain speed instantly. Just before liftoff, the valves were partially closed to cool engines slightly and prevent too much fuel from entering the chamber. The valve on main engine No. 2 failed to close partially, signaling the computer to shut down the system. The first Space Shuttle abort occurred June 26, 1984, when an onboard computer shut down two of Discovery's three engines four seconds before liftoff. That abort triggered an investigation that led to a complete overhaul of Discovery's main engines. NASA had to move Discovery back to the Vehicle Assembly Building where its cargo was removed and placed aboard another orbiter that flew into space two months later. "We don't think the engine valve itself failed the way a valve failed the [other] time we had a launch abort," Space Shuttle program manager Robert Lindstrom said. "I really believe there's a fair likelihood we'll get off again in another week." The delay did have an impact on the mission's objectives. The infrared telescope in Challenger's cargo bay could be operated successfully only in a completely dark sky. Had the flight left on schedule, the sky would have been dark for most of the following seven days until a new moon. NASA had scheduled the next Space Shuttle launch using the orbiter Discovery for August 24. It was not immediately clear how the Challenger's abort would affect that mission. (Spaceport News, July 19/85, 1; W Post, July 13/85, A3)
President Reagan announced that March 31 through April 6, 1985, would be National Weather Satellite Week in a proclamation that said, "The United States' weather satellites have tracked the earth's weather since April 1, 1960, and have brought unique benefits to the American people and the world. "Weather satellites have proven exceptionally valuable in detecting, monitoring, and giving early warning of hurricanes, severe storms, flash floods, and other life-threatening natural hazards, on a local, national, and international basis. "The international weather satellite search-and-rescue program has saved over three hundred lives since 1982. The achievements of the scientific and aerospace communities in developing weather satellites have contributed significantly to the United States' leadership in satellite technology, international cooperation in space, and an integrated global weather forecasting system ..." The proclamation concluded that NASA "has been the world leader in the development of experimental and prototypical weather and environmental satellites. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has demonstrated outstanding leadership in the management of operational weather and environmental satellite systems and programs." (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Proclamation 5314, Apr 5/85, 421)
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Dr. Michael Kaiser of the Goddard Space Flight Center said at a news conference today that, "We see no radio emissions from Uranus that would tell us it has a magnetic field, and we're less than 46 million miles from the planet" with the Voyager 2 spacecraft, the Washington Post reported. "We still pick up Jupiter's radio noise, Saturn's radio noise and even the sun's radio noise but we're not hearing any radio events at Uranus," he added. If Uranus had no magnetic field, it would make it only the second known planet in the solar system without one, Venus being the other. Kaiser said the sign of a planet's magnetic field was its radio noise, generated when protons and electrons poured off the sun and collided with the planet's magnetosphere. This collision triggered the one billion-watt radio signal from earth called the Northern Lights, a 100 billion-watt signal from Saturn, and a signal so loud from Jupiter that it dwarfed every other radio signal in the solar system. "You don't need much to form a magnetosphere that would generate noise out at Uranus's distance," Kaiser said, "so we figure we're either dealing with a planet that has no magnetic field at all or is so bizarre we don't even know what to look for." Kaiser pointed out that a missing magnetic field suggested that Uranus had no internal heat source—no radioactive core such as that which made the rotating earth behave like a dynamo, and no internal heat source such as those that gave the rapidly rotating Jupiter and Saturn a strong magnetic field. "You need an internal heat source to drive a magnetic field," Kaiser said. "A planet's rotation is not enough by itself to create one." Voyager 2, which had been in space for eight years and had passed Jupiter and Saturn, on January 24 would fly within 51,000 miles of the cloud tops of Uranus. Voyager 2 would in August 1989 encounter Neptune, but its flight would not take it near Pluto, the last known planet from the sun. The spacecraft would then pass out of the solar system. (W Post, Dec 4/85, A20)
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pioneered the concept of a satellite system for mobile users and, because a U.S. mobile satellite industry was emerging, was turning its attention to developing technologies critical for future systems, the JPL Universe reported. Similar to cellular phones popular in urban areas, the mobile satellite system (MSS) would provide voice and data communications for the entire North American continent, employing one or two satellites in geosynchronous orbit to relay communications instead of depending on ground-based, line-of-sight relay towers that celluar phones used. There were four categories of MSS users: people who needed uninterrupted communications while they traveled over wide geographical areas, for example interstate truckers; those responding to unpredictable events such as medical emergencies or natural disasters; people working at planned but temporary installations such as oil or gas drilling facilities, mining camps, or archeological excavations; and those in very remote areas. The new technologies JPL was developing included mechanically steerable low-profile and electronically steerable medium-gain vehicle antennas, digital speech compression, digital modems, and multiple-access techniques for integrated voice and data. NASA was working with industry and, through a joint endeavor agreement, would exchange a Space Shuttle deployment for 15% of the channel capacity for two years to test the system. “But first," said Dr. Firouz Naderi, JPL's mobile satellite experiment project manager, "we must further develop the technology and try to squeeze as many channels as we can from a very narrow frequency allocation. That is the biggest obstacle we face." Also, JPL must design sophisticated multi-beam antennas that service "spot areas" and create techniques so frequencies could be reused to provide the most efficient use of the limited spectrum. Recently JPL sponsored a two-day briefing on the state of the industry. Attending were more than 250 representatives of 120 organizations including the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), which would regulate the MSS; 11 of 12 candidate companies that petitioned the FCC for the right to operate the system; communications equipment manufacturers such as General Electric, Harris, and Motorola; Canadian government and industry representatives; banking officials; and potential users of the system. At the briefing, the FCC said it hoped by the middle of 1986 to assign a frequency to the mobile satellite industry as well as license an operator to be in charge of the system. NASA scheduled for launch in 1990 the first generation satellite with a 5 to 7 m antenna. During the program's second phase, NASA would launch from the Space Shuttle a 20m (65 ft.) antenna. NASA then planned for the program's final phase to construct on the proposed space station a 50m (180 ft.) antenna for deployment into geosynchronous orbit. (JPL Universe, Nov 29/ 85, 1) During November. Quoting from the Congressional Record, NASA reported remarks of Rep. Don Fuqua, (D-Fla.) chairman of the House Science and Technology Committee, who introduced the Federal Science and Technology Revitalization Act of 1985. The act ". . . would establish an alternative personnel management system for scientific and technical people in the federal government," Fuqua said. "This is something I have been interested in for a long time, and I am hopeful that the proposal I am introducing will be able to help improve the quality of government-operated federal laboratories by encouraging the recruiting and retention of highly qualified scientific and technical individuals." Major provisions of the bill would permit agencies to include scientific and technical personnel in the new personnel management systems; simplify job evaluation and remove covered positions from the classification requirements of 5 U.S.C., Chapter 51; provide flexibility to develop a salary structure that ensured a competitive position in the labor market and that reflected the hiring and pay policies needed to attract, retain, and motivate a highly qualified scientific and technical work force; increase base pay on performance, not longevity; allow waiver of the pay cap for up to 5% of specially qualified scientific and technical personnel; provide for performance and special awards and remove the pay cap for lump-sum awards; and create a senior scientific and technical personnel service. In May 1983 the Federal Laboratory Review Panel of the White House Science Council chaired by David Packard reported that federal laboratories had several serious deficiencies and, consequently, a number of them did not meet the quality and productivity standards that might be expected, Fuqua explained. The panel reported that salaries at federal laboratories were noncompetitive with the private sector at entry and senior levels and that federal laboratories had to deal with a personnel management system that was cumbersome and had little flexibility. As a result, there existed what the panel referred to as an alarming "inability of many federal laboratories—especially those under civil service constraints—to attract, retain, and motivate qualified scientists and engineers." The panel concluded that administrative and legislative actions should be initiated to create, at government-operated laboratories, a scientific-technical personnel system that was independent of current civil service personnel systems, Fuqua continued. This "bill is the legislative attempt to deal with these very real problems," Fuqua said. "My own experience ... is that the requirements for NASA and Department of Agriculture labs may be very different, but attracting and retaining quality personnel is absolutely essential for the space program and for emerging fields in agriculture." (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 9)
The Senate Appropriations Committee cut the Air Force FY 86 request for development of the advanced tactical fighter (ATF) by $103 million to $140 million and recommended that a unit cost cap be put on the program, Defense Daily reported. The House Appropriations Committee earlier approved $170 million for ATF. Acting on the recommendation of its defense subcommittee, the Senate committee allocated $100 million for the joint advanced fighter engine development program, $13 million for avionics development, and $27 million for continuation of the competitive air vehicle demonstration and validation "for not less than three contractors." Although the committee endorsed the ATF development program "as a long-term counter to Soviet tactical air improvements," it said it "is concerned that the current program does not provide sufficient time to absorb all of the technology" to be incorporated in the aircraft and that the program "entails unacceptable risks." And the committee pointed out that "these advanced technologies would be very expensive to obtain." The Air Force estimated R&D costs for the ATF at $11.8 billion in FY 85 dollars and, after considering a figure up to $40 million, assumed the purchase price would be $35 million in FY 85 dollars. However, the committee pointed out that the Air Force "has not identified how it will reduce ATF costs without deleting technical features previously identified as aircraft requirements." Therefore, the committee directed the Air Force to submit an annual report on the future likely cost of ATF, beginning with the FY 87 budget. It recommended that "a 20% limit be placed on the ATF program unit flyaway costs" above F—15 costs and that this limit be made the baseline of the ATF development program. The ATF would include sustained supersonic dash, internal weapons carriage, blended aerodynamic design including low observable (stealth) technology, and higher thrust (32,000 lb.) engines. It would also have short takeoff and landing (STOL) capabilities, high transonic and supersonic maneuverability, an expanded flight envelope, and improved survivability. (D/D, Nov 7/85, 33)
Recently completed agreements between insurance underwriters and Hughes Communications Services acknowledged loss of the disabled Leasat-3 spacecraft but established a plan under which Hughes and the underwriters would share in communication lease revenues if a plan to repair the satellite during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission was successful, Aviation Week reported. Under the agreement with American and European underwriters who insured Leasat-3, Hughes would provide the funds, estimated at about $10 million, for the rescue attempt. If the rescue was successful, Hughes would regain the cost of the salvage mission through initial lease revenues. The agreements recognized a loss of $85 million for the spacecraft and launch costs. The loss resulted from the failure of the spacecraft on April 13 to activate during an automatic deployment sequence after the spacecraft was ejected from the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery's cargo bay [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 17]. Hughes and NASA v/ere developing equipment and procedures to mount the rescue attempt, johnson Space Center had concluded a critical design review for rescue hardware such as a worksite, stowage assembly, and the capture, handling, grapple, and spinup bars that would be used to stabilize, restrain, and spin the satellite once modifications aimed at restoring ground control were made on orbit. The design review also covered components Hughes was building, such as the remote power unit, spun bypass unit, and a checkout box that would be used to test electronic components on orbit prior to the rescue attempt. Completion of the critical design review enabled NASA to obtain information on the electronic components Hughes was building and to build rescue equipment for the mission, conduct vacuum chamber testing, and begin training for the salvage mission. NASA had already conducted initial neutral buoyancy training in the weightless training environment facility and mass simulation tests in preparation for the mission. (AvWk, July 8/85, 24)
1986.	Military Airlift Command's 89th Military Airlift Wing at Andrews Air Force Base would receive the first jumbo jet in late 1988; the second in 1989. Existing Air Force One aircraft were deficient in three basic ways, Air Force officials said. They were getting more difficult to maintain; they were so crammed with equipment that there was no room for new communications equipment, an emergency medical treatment facility, or improved work areas for the president and staff; and they did not meet Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and had limited performance, especially range. The Air Force said the new aircraft must be certified by the FAA, have three or more engines, and be a model that had at least two years of airline service time. "The two-year in-service requirement guarantees a performance record will be available to evaluate the maturity of aircraft design relative to safety, reliability, and maintainability," said Col. Robert Black, program manager of ASD's Deputy for Airlift and Trainer Systems. Other Air Force One performance requirements under evaluation would call for the aircraft to take off from a 9,300-foot runway and fly 6,000 nautical miles nonstop. The new plane had to have a minimum cruising speed of about 528 mph while flying between 36,000 and 45,000 feet and a high-speed cruise capability of about 575 mph. On the new Air Force One the president and staff would have state-of-the-art communications complete with secure voice terminals and cryptographic equipment for writing and deciphering classified messages. The cabin areas would provide seating for 80 passengers and 23 crew members; and presidential accommodations would consist of an office, stateroom, and adjacent dressing room and lavatory. Other features would be a conference room; guest, staff, press, and Secret Service compartments; and a complete medical treatment facility. Onboard galleys would allow stewards to prepare and serve about 50 meals from each galley. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 20/85, 4) Civil Aviation
In their last full day aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51-B, the crew concluded an array of experiments and prepared for their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Answering questions radioed from reporters at Johnson Space Flight Center, the astronauts reported progress not only in working out space station construction techniques, but also in developing a gravity-free pharmaceutical factory to be based on the proposed space station. Payload specialist Charles Walker of the McDonnell Douglas Corp. was in charge of the experiment for development of a space-based factory for purification of a human hormone produced by genetically engineered bacteria. Astronauts on previous flights had tested the basic purification technique, called continuous-flow electrophoresis in a gravity-free environment; the current experiment simulated an actual production run of the hormone, which might prove useful in treating certain forms of anemia. During the questioning, astronauts Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring and Maj. Jerry Ross acknowledged that they were extremely fatigued after each of their spacewalks and that their hands were stiff and numb after the practice assembly, manipulation, and disassembly of a 45-foot-long truss and a pyramidal module. Nevertheless, the two deemed the exercise a success. "We don't know yet what this will mean for a future space station," Spring commented, "but it's a start. Personally, it was really exhilarating for me out there, face to face with the universe." (NYT, Dec 3/85, C3)
NASA announced that interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers selected seven finalists in the fifth national Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program (SSIP), a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, judges based selection of finalists' entries upon individual scientific or engineering merit for possible flight aboard the Space Shuttle. The national winners and their teacher-advisors would attend in August a special Space Shuttle conference at Kennedy Space Center and view the launch of the Discovery Space Shuttle mission 51—L. NASA would present the finalists and their teacher-advisors with orbiter models, and their schools would receive orbiter models for trophy case display. The sixth year of SSIP competition would open in September 1985. (NASA Release 85-79) During August: NASA announced that the newest solid-fuel rocket booster retrieval ship, the U.S. Air Force's Independence, arrived at Kennedy Space Center for outfitting with retrieval gear. The Air Force specifically designed the ship for retrieval of expended boosters after Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Independence would be the mother ship for west coast booster retrievals, towing one of the boosters and providing room for the majority of the crew and the six main parachutes and the bottoms for both boosters. The ship's first booster retrieval would be mission 51-F set for launch no earlier than July 15. The Air Force would lease another smaller ship to tow the other booster and carry the remainder of the 42-member retrieval crew. Independence, at 199 feet long and with a beam of 40 feet, was larger than its sister retrieval ships, the Liberty Star and the Freedom Star. Those two ships were 176 feet long and had beams of 37 feet. The Independence has both fore and aft water jet thrusters, making it highly maneuverable. The other two ships had only stern thrusters. Halter Marine in Moss Point, Mississippi, built Independence. (NASA Activities, Aug 85, 11)
NASA announced that the third phase of the active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers (AMPTE) magnetotail probe, a U.S., West German, and United Kingdom scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, was underway. Gilber Ousley, AMPTE project manager of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said that the first AMPTE magnetotail release of barium occurred March 21 at 4:20 a.m., EST and that the release conditions had been well within established criteria. The German ion release module spacecraft immediately detected a magnetic field change as expected. The satellite would make one additional release of barium and two of lithium (the tracers) into the earth's magnetotail. The U.S. satellite would analyze the charged-particle space environment around the magnetotail to determine the effects on the environment of the injected elements. Ousley also said that all ground stations except the one in Argentina reported clear weather and that the observatory at Kitt Peak, Arizona, reported visual sighting with the naked eye for about 20 minutes. The airborne NASA Convair 990 and Argentine Boeing 707 observation aircraft had recorded the event. The first phase of the AMPTE project had consisted of lithium releases September 11 and 20, 1984, into solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Lima, Peru. Results of the experiment indicated that the artificial comet was "eroded" by the solar wind much faster than previously anticipated. The only scheduled AMPTE experiment remaining after the March-April releases was formation July 13 or 14, 1985, of another artificial comet on the opposite flank of the magnetosphere from the December experiment. All releases had to satisfy several criteria, including clear voice communications between the U.S. AMPTE science data center located at Johns Hopkins University's Applied Physics Lab and the German Space Operations Center in West Germany, where German scientists gathered to view the data. The latter sent the command for release through their center and NASA's Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the U.S. portion of AMPTE for NASA's office of space science and applications; Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab under contract to NASA had built the U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release 85-42) July II: Dr. Mario Acuna, project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), announced that the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) project, an international scientific experiment to determine how the solar wind interacted with the earth's magnetosphere, would produce on July 18 or 20 at midnight EDT the world's second artificial comet. In the fourth and final phase of the project, a West German satellite would release at 70,000	miles above earth two barium canisters into the solar wind on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere. The release would create an artificial comet expected to be visible in the southwestern United States to the unaided eye for approximately four minutes. In the first phase of the AMPTE project, the West German satellite released September 1984 lithium into the solar wind outside the earth's magnetosphere. Preliminary results of that experiment indicated that less than 1% of the solar wind gained access to the magnetosphere under the conditions in which the releases took place. In the second phase, the German satellite created on December 27, 1984, a barium cloud on the flank of the earth's magnetosphere about 70,000 miles above the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Peru. Data from the artificial comet indicated that the solar wind eroded it much faster than scientists had anticipated. Releases on March 21 and May 13, 1985, of barium and lithium into the earth's magnetotail region ended the third phase of the AMPTE experiments. Acuna said of those releases, "Although, disappointingly, no tracer ions were detected by the U.S. satellite (Charge Composition Explorer) located inside the magnetosphere, this fact is in itself a very significant result. It implies that fundamental revisions to our current models of the magnetosphere need to be made to account for these negative observations." (NASA Release 85-105)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) prime contractor for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster motors, Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division, successfully static fired today a new lightweight version of that motor at its facility in northern Utah, the Marshall Star reported. The firing was the second and final test of the development version of that motor, which contained major sections made from graphite epoxy materials manufactured by Thiokol's subcontractor, Hercules, Inc. Thiokol would perform a final qualification static test of the flight version of the new filament-wound motor in September. NASA had scheduled the first use of the filament-wound motor segments for early 1986 during the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Lawrence Mulloy, manager of MSFC's solid-fuel rocket booster project, said each of the filament-wound boosters would weigh about 28,000 lb. less than the current steel boosters, making possible an increase in Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity of about 4,600 lbs. (Marshall Star, May 15/85, 2)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force completed for the first time Space Shuttle vehicle stacking at Vandenberg AFB's Space Launch Complex-6, the Marshall Star reported. Begun January 12, the stacking consisted of inert solid-fuel rocket-motor segments, an external tank, and the orbiter Enterprise. Unlike facilities at KSC where NASA stacked the Space Shuttle in the vehicle assembly building and rolled it to the launch pad, at Vandenberg NASA and the Air Force stacked the Space Shuttle vehicle on the launch mount (pad). Workers at Vandenberg rolled a mobile service tower and a shuttle-assembly building to the launch mount, then brought booster segments to the launch complex from the booster facility and lifted them into place by a mobile service-tower crane. This first vehicle stacking at the Vandenberg launch complex was part of facility-verification testing before the first Space Shuttle launch from the complex in early 1986. Col. Walter Yager, commander of the Air Force shuttle assembly task force, said minor problems had occurred, but "that's why we have facility verification. We want to ensure properly working systems before we start handling actual flight hardware." Fit and function checks, payload operations, and launch-processing simulations would complete facility verification. (Marshall Star, Feb 7/85, 1)
NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) would transfer spacecraft tracking and data acquisition operations from its Beltsville Tracking Station to its Wallops Flight Facility by early 1986, consolidating the operations to support balloon, sounding-rocket, and aeronautical-flight research. Diminishing need for ground stations due to the new Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) necessitated the realignment. TDRSS would consist of three communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit, providing global coverage by earth-orbiting satellites and replacing the worldwide network of ground stations. NASA had launched the first TDRSS satellite in April 1983 and would launch the second about February 20. GSFC would phase out or transfer to other agencies most of its tracking stations. In addition to Wallops, however, GSFC would maintain ground stations at Bermuda and Merritt Island, Florida, to support Space Shuttle launches from KSC. The White Sands, New Mexico, station was the ground terminal for orbiting TDRSS satellities (NASA Release 85-11)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William Howard Taft gave approval to the U.S. Air Force to begin development of higher thrust derivatives of the Pratt & Whitney F100 and General Electric F110 engines that powered the F-15 and F-16 fighters, Defense Daily reported. The development program, expected to cost between $400 and $500 million, would boost the thrust of the 24,000-lb. thrust F100 and 27,000-lb. thrust F110 to 29,000 lb., about the maximum possible. Air Force Assistant Secretary Thomas Cooper said durability, not thrust, was the key problem for fighter engines and that the new engines would have the same durability as current engines. He said the Air Force planned to start production of the engines in 1989 and to complete annual buys on a shared basis. The Air Force would seek warranties on the derivatives as on current engines, access to proprietary data, and pre-priced production options. Cooper said the new engines, costing slightly more than current engines that were between $2 and $3 million apiece, would have the same dimensions as present engines, could be used in all models of the F—15 and F-16, and could be retrofitted. He pointed out the Navy could also use either derivative engine for its fighter program. Under questioning, Cooper declined to say whether the Air Force planned to buy the Northrop F-20 fighter in FY 87, but said the Air Force was interested in the aircraft and needed more detailed cost data to make a decision. Northrup had offered to supply 396 F-20s over four years at a fixed price of $15 million per plane; however, Cooper said the Air Force required more detailed data on the "bits and pieces" of the program in order to make the cost comparison that people were asking for. (D/D, May 10/85, 57)
NASA announced that it had selected Boeing Aerospace Operations to receive the Flight Equipment Processing Contract (FEPC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Wornick Co. was a Boeing subcontractor. The three-year award with a two-year priced option would begin in January 1986 at an estimated total cost of $76.5 million. The contract also included provisions for two additional unpriced, five-year extensions. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus incentive/award-fee contract arrangement, which included incentive fee for sound cost management and an award fee based on performance. Under the contract, Boeing would assume responsibility for receipt, launch preparation, and postlauch activities relating to the overall process of crew-related flight and flight-type equipment required to support the Space Transportation System program. The contractor would process and resupply individual flight equipment items, which supported the flight crew in its daily operation of the orbiter vehicle, and would operate and maintain support equipment required for the successful processing of the flight equipment, which included extravehicular mobility units, food and medical systems, communications equipment, and other miscellaneous items. In addition to Boeing, NASA conducted final negotiations with Hamilton Standard Management Services, Inc. The selection of Boeing for the contract represented the consolidation into one contract of work currently performed by 16 firms under 19 contracts. (NASA Release 85-174) Military Applications
As part of the continuing Lewis Advanced Turboprop Project (ATP), supported by some 50 contracts and 15 grants, two advanced propeller propulsion systems recently underwent testing, the Lewis News reported. Lewis Research Center's (LeRC) Advanced Turboprop Project Office was directing development of the new highly loaded, multi-bladed propellers for use at speeds up to Mach 0.85 and at altitudes compatible with commercial air support system requirements. Advanced turboprop engines offered the potential of 15 to 30% savings in aircraft fuel burned relative to advanced turbofan engines (50 to 60% savings over the current turbofan fleet). Investigators were developing both single- and counter-rotation propeller systems. Researchers at Wright Patterson Air Force Base were testing in a static propeller test rig the first Large-Scale Advanced Propfan (LAP), designed and built by Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. under a NASA/ LeRC contract. Testing of the nine-foot diameter propfan, powered by an electric drive motor in the rig test, began in late August. At approximately the same time, the General Electric Co. began static proof-of-concept tests of its Unducted Fan (UDF) demonstrator engine at the GE Peebles, Ohio, test site. LeRC partially funded development of this advanced counter-rotating pusher propellers propulsion system. After completing a series of ground tests, both advanced propeller propulsion systems would undergo flight tests starting in mid-to-late 1986. The propfan would be tested in a wing-mount installation on a modified Gulf-stream II testbed aircraft under a NASA-contracted program with Lockheed; the UDF would be tested as an aft-mounted pusher on a Boeing 727 as part of a GE/Boeing cooperative program. The propfan of the LAP program was an example of the application of single-rotation tractor propulsion technology, whereas the UDF was a unique example of counter-rotation pusher propulsion technology. The UDF was unique in that its propellers were directly driven by the multi-stage power turbine without the need for gearbox speed reduction. Normal procedure in propeller installations was to drive the propeller through a reduction gearbox so that both the propeller and its driving turbine operated at close to their optimum speeds for peak efficiency. The APT effort was also addressing more conventional counter-rotation propfan configurations, as well as associated gearbox designs. (LeRc News, Oct 4/85, 1)
President Reagan announced today his intention to nominate William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator to succeed Hans Michael Mark, the Administration of Ronald Reagan reported. Graham, with R&D Associates since 1971, had served there as director of computing operations, division manager, corporate program manager, and most recently senior associate. Before joining R&D Associates, he was a member of the technical staff, physics department, at the Rand Corp.; project officer of the Air Force Weapons Laboratory; and a member of the technical staff of the Hughes Aircraft Corp. research laboratory. Since 1982, Graham had served as acting chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. He had also been a member of the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, a consultant to the Defense Nuclear Agency, and consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. Graham received his B.S. degree from the California Institute of Technology and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University. (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Sept 13/85, 1073)
Assured access to space is one of the Defense Department's "bottom lines" in fulfilling its mission, said Col. Victor Whitehead, deputy for the Air Force Space Command's (AFSC) Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV), "and we're quite proud of our record," AFSC's Newsreview reported. "We've gone three years in a row without a launch failure. In that time we have launched 30 totally successful ELVs. "We've learned over the years what makes a successful launch; we don't go until everything is ready." The Space Command was examining what might be beyond the Space Shuttle and ELVs for space transportation, considering both manned and unmanned systems as a follow-on. "But I don't think you'll see a future scenario in which we will be dependent on a single system," Whitehead said. "There will be alternative ways of flying payloads. Our job is to determine what they are." The colonel pointed out that the Space Shuttle was a very good system, but that the Air Force recognized that if it stopped using ELVs and was dependent on the Space Shuttle alone, "our access to space would be limited if the shuttle, for some reason, is not available. We therefore found we needed a complementary ELV." Whitehead noted the follow-on Titan 34D7 would fulfill this alternative need. "This new booster will give us into the mid-1990s a totally separate way to launch a payload," he said. "We determine it should have the same capabilities as the shuttle in terms of performance, payload, and volume. This way, a payload that could fly on the shuttle can also fly on the Titan 34D7." But it was a true complement to the Space shuttle in that it had "no common modes with shuttle. We have a completely separate set of contractors and separate launch facilities for the shuttle and Titan. If one system is down, the other continues on and flies those payloads," Whitehead concluded. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 26/85, 3) November 2Ch NASA announced it had scheduled an Air Force AF-16 satellite for launch December 12 aboard a Scout launch vehicle from Wallops Flight Center. NASA and the Department of Defense entered into agreements in June 1962 for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle. NASA and the Air Force Systems Command continued the agreement under a memorandum of understanding dated April 19, 1977, and amended May 17, 1983. Under the agreement, NASA maintained the Scout launch vehicle system, and DOD used the system for appropriate missions. The Air Force had requested NASA to provide Scout launch vehicles for the Instrumented Test Vehicle Program. The Air Force would pay in accordance with the existing interagency agreements the costs associated with this launch of a Scout vehicle. (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [prelaunch], Nov 20/85)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
New observations supported the prediction that Saturn's satellite Hyperion was tumbling wildly rather than rotating with a regular predictable period, Science reported. In 1983 Jack Wisdom, who was currently at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues predicted that the combination of Hyperion's odd potato shape and the stretching of its orbit by the gravitational tugs of the larger satellite Titan would prevent Hyperion from rotating regularly. Instead of keeping one face toward Saturn, as the moon faced earth, Hyperion would rotate chaotically, tumbling one way then another, slowing down and speeding up, in a fashion impossible to predict in any detail from its preceding behavior. Since then, Peter Thomas of Cornell University and his colleagues reported analyses of the brightness of Hyperion in Voyager images that indicated a regular 13-day period of rotation during the 61 days of Voyager-2's encounter with Saturn. Jack Wisdom and Stanton Peale of the University of California, Santa Barbara, countered that determining a period from 14 brightness observations scattered over several supposed rotations could not determine whether the rotation was chaotic or not. They found many periods by similarly sampling a numerically generated chaotic light curve. The University of Texas's Richard Binzel, Jacklyn Green, and Chet Opal reported at a recent meeting of astronomers that the light curve of Hyperion they observed in April was "highly inconsistent with a 13.1-day rotation period." On April 16 and 17, Hyperion's magnitude was at a maximum for the 14-day observing period; it faded by 1 magnitude by April 21 and was no brighter 13 days after the first observations. It should have become 1 magnitude or 2.5 times brighter if it had a 13-day period. Although the observations did not prove chaotic rotation, the group said, "they provide strong evidence in favor of the hypothesis." To say much more about Hyperion's rotation, astronomers would have to observe Hyperion nightly for many weeks, something that those assigning telescope time had been reluctant to permit. (Science, Nov 29/85, 1027)
expose wild and lab research gypsy moth eggs and engorged female American dog ticks to weightlessness (GSFC/U.S. Department of Agriculture); and
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) announced it had extended an existing contract with Planning Research Corp. (PRC) to provide engineering services for the Directorate of Engineering Development at KSC and at Vandenberg Air Force Base (VAFB). The $12,421,841 extension brought the total contract value to $66,187,413 and extended the period of performance from January 1, 1986, through September 30, 1986. Under the contract, PRC would design ground-support systems for the Space Shuttle/Centaur program, which NASA would use to inject space vehicles into interplanetary trajectories after deployment from the Space Shuttle. PRC would also provide designs for Space Shuttle launch-support equipment for the Department of Defense (DOD) at VAFB, which would become the second launch and landing facility for the Space Shuttle in the mid-1980s, particularly for launching DOD payloads into polar orbit. Another PRC task under the contract was to provide KSC with designs for Space Shuttle cargo ground-support equipment. (KSC Release 186-85)
Japan nominated three astronaut candidates, one a woman, to fly in January 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, a UPI bulletin in NASA Current News said. The one selected to fly would become the first Japanese in space. Those selected were Takao Doi, a researcher at a NASA center; Mamoru Mori, assistant professor of nucleonics at Hokkaido University; and Chiaki Naito, an assistant at Keio University's Medical School in Tokyo. Japan's National Space Development Agency selected them from among 533 applicants. The Japanese astronaut would conduct a 12-minute experiment during Columbia's one-week mission. The other two candidates would serve as backups. The three would take further medical and space simulation tests at Johnson Space Center and then undergo training before selection in May 1987 of the astronaut to fly on the mission. (UPI bulletin in NASA Current News, Aug 7/ 85) Launch Vehicles
New car buyers in 1988 might find a Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver among their list of options, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "It would essentially be a small TV screen that shows your position on a map," said 1st Lt. John Schoenewolf, GPS cargo manager for the Eastern Space and Missile Center. A small cursor, or mobile electronic dot, would pinpoint a car's location to within 300 miles, he added, and map cassettes could be purchased separately. Before the satellite electronic car map became a reality, along with other GPS applications both military and civilian, the Air Force between 1986 and 1988 would have to launch 28 satellites, the most ambitious launch rate attempted in space-launch history. "We plan to launch the satellites for the GPS system at a rate of one every seven weeks aboard the shuttle." Schoenewolf said. "We will need a total of 18	to start operating the system, and the target year is 1988 to begin operating." The East Coast Navstar GPS launch facility opened in August at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to help make possible the accelerated launch rate. At the facility's ribbon cutting ceremony, Maj. Gen. Donald Henderson said the facility and GPS itself "will revolutionize the way we perform precision navigation." He noted the satellite system would be the largest constellation ever established and would have an influence on everything that floats, drives, flies, or submerges. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 5)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility conducted today a coordinated series of rocketborne experiments to study effects of lightning in the earth's troposphere. Three rocket payloads at different altitudes simultaneously collected lightning measurement data, and a series of ground-based instruments designed to detect the location and characteristics of lightning also made coordinated measurements. Wallops researchers launched at 8:01 EDT a single-stage Orion sounding rocket, 70 seconds later a two-stage Taurus-Orion, and then 57 seconds later a Nike-Orion; all three were solid-propellant sounding rockets. The Taurus-Orion lofted its 297-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 120 statute miles, and the Nike-Orion carried its 303-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 71.5	statute miles. The Taurus-Orion experiment package contained a water recovery system using an eight-foot parachute with flotation bag, flashing strobe light, and recovery beacon. Wallops personnel, following the three rocket series, launched a meteorological data sonde on a small rocket to determine the meteorological characteristics in the upper atmosphere near the time of the other measurements. The Wallops P-3 search aircraft located the Taurus-Orion payload package at 9:45 p.m. that same day about 40 miles offshore, and the next day the Coast Guard cutter "Point Brown" recovered and returned it to the Wallops Flight Facility for refurbishment and future spaceflights. (GSFC Release 8526)
In the first test of the precision location/strike system (PLSS), three TR-1 aircraft picked up a radar signal like one an enemy might use to guide a missile attack and passed the signal direction and time data to a ground station computer. The computer analyzed the data, compared inputs from the three aircraft, and pinpointed where the radar signal was coming from, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. If the source had been an enemy site for radar-directed missiles, artillery, or an anti-aircraft system, the U.S. Air Force could quickly direct an F-16 to it for an attack. The PLSS passed the test by zeroing in on a prepositioned radar emitter the moment its signal started. Lt. Col. Dayl Donahey, PLSS program director for the Aeronautical Systems Division, called it "a giant leap forward" for future wartime capabilities of U.S. tactical forces. "The system performed better than expected at this point in its development testing," he said. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. was developing the PLSS, which featured an integrated, lethal mix of ground-based and airborne electronics. In an operational scenario, the three highly instrumented, high-altitude TR-1 s would fly race-track patterns behind the forward edge of a battle area. Around the clock, in all kinds of weather, the TR-1 listening platforms would detect enemy electronic transmissions. Despite dense electromagnetic interference, the TR-1s could pick up individual pulses of enemy radar. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 23/85, 1)
The military crew of the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51—J deployed today two communications satellites for Department of Defense, the NY Times reported, citing reliable sources. After release from the Space Shuttle, the satellites, known as Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS III) and weighing a ton each and measuring 38 feet long with solar panels extended, rocket engines boosted them to a point 22,300 miles above the earth. According to General Electric Co., which built the satellites but would not confirm their presence on the Space Shuttle, both satellites were strengthened to withstand radiation from distant nuclear blasts and had a device to send emergency action messages from the President to the nation's nuclear forces. The Department of Defense (DOD) scheduled Atlantis to land at Edwards Air Force Base on a date that was classified; NASA and DOD said they would announce the time of landing 24 hours in advance. (NY Times, Oct 5/85, A46)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
Under a 1985 memorandum of agreement, the Eglin Air Force Base's armament division was leading a joint U.S., British, and West German project to determine how a non-nuclear, long-range standoff missile should be developed, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. General Dynamics and Boeing Aerospace Co., which had 15-month contracts to study the possibilities, was working with subcontractors from the other two countries. The countries could use the conventional, low-altitude subsonic missile, launched from air or ground, primarily against airfields. The immediate goal of the project was to design the system, develop a procurement program and schedule, and identify technological transfers among the three countries. The point of the agreement was to save money and eliminate duplication of effort in development of a needed weapon system. One country would build the system, but the others would support the effort. While the U.S. completed the procurement package, England provided most of the threat information needed to design the missile. West Germany was taking an active part in all project phases. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 23/85, 3) NASA and Department of Defense
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
NASA announced it selected April 29, 12:00 noon EDT, for launch of STS mission 51-B, the Spacelab 3 flight, and Dryden Flight Research Center/Edwards Air Force Base, California, as the primary end-of-mission landing site, with KSC as an alternate. Landing was set for May 6 at 12:03 EDT. NASA selected Dryden over KSC for the landing as a result of problems encountered during the STS 51-D mission when the orbiter Discovery's right-hand braking systems locked causing a tire to blow out. Landing conditions had included a crosswind—the first experience at KSC of such conditions—and a higher-than-usual sink rate. A landing at Dryden would provide a greater safety margin for Challenger's tires and brake systems due to the availability of the unrestricted lakebed and the smoother surface. The decision to land at Dryden for the next flight only would enable engineers to determine what corrective actions were appropriate before returning to the KSC runway for nominal end-of-mission landings. (NASA Release 85-63) During April: NASA announced it had scheduled for launch on April 12 from KSC the remanifested Space Shuttle 51-D mission with landing on KSC's Space Shuttle runway after the five-day 78-orbit flight. NASA originally scheduled mission 51-D for March 1 for deployment of NASA's Long Duration Exposure Facility, but cancelled the 51—E Challenger mission and revised the 51-D cargo to include LEASAT-3 and the Canadian communications satellite Anik C-1. Other payloads were the continuous-flow electrophoresis system and the American echocardiograph experiment [see Apr. 12], two middeck student experiments, and two Getaway Special canisters. (NASA Release 85—47)
Sudden squalls almost on top of the launch pad early today forced postponement for at least a day of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the Washington Post reported. A series of unforecasted thunderstorms blew in from the mainland directly across the flight path, and dark thunderheads surrounded the launch pad for five miles in almost every direction. NASA aborted the launch five minutes before liftoff. NASA officials were concerned not only about the Space Shuttle climbing through rain and lightning but also about the crew's ability to see the KSC runway in case they had to make an emergency landing the early minutes of the flight. Rain could damage the orbiter's tiles, and lightning could harm its computers and guidance systems. NASA rescheduled Discovery's launch for between 7:57 and 8:11 a.m. EDT August 25. Among the factors necessitating that launch window were the position of the satellite planned for salvage and timing of deployment of three communications satellites. If an August 25 launch was impossible, there were launch opportunities the following three days. NASA had announced earlier that highlights of the eight-day mission included an attempt to repair and salvage the Leasat/Syncom IV-F3 satellite and deploy it for normal operation, and deployment of the ASC 7/PAM-D for the American Satellite Co., the AUSSAT //PAM-D satellite for the Australian government, and the Leasat IV-F4 satellite for the U.S. Navy. The physical vapor transport of organic solids (PVTOS) experiment sponsored by 3M Corp. would also fly on the mission. PVTOS was the second of some 70 experiments the 3M Corp. planned to conduct aboard the Space Shuttle over the next ten years. On the 51-1 mission, solid materials would vaporize into a gaseous state to form thick crystalline films on selected substrates of sublimable organics. Researchers at 3M would study crystals produced by PVTOS for their optical properties and other characteristics that might ultimately have important applications to 3M's businesses in electronics, imaging, and health care. The company's first experiment, flown in November 1984, dissolved materials that led to a solid crystalline product. (NASA Release 85-118; W Post, Aug 25/85, A3)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA announced that flight controllers for its International Cometary Explorer (ICE) performed the first and largest of four midcourse corrections to direct the spacecraft toward a September 11 intercept of Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Conducted from ICE mission control at Goddard Space Flight Center, these corrections used two thousand pulses of the spacecraft's two-lb. hydrazine thrusters to change its heading so it would fly through the comet's tail 16,200 miles from the comet's nucleus. The thruster burns lasted four-and-a-half hours. In 1982, NASA redirected the International Sun-Earth Explorer, which was launched in 1978, toward the comet for what would be the first satellite/ comet encounter in history. This encounter would provide scientists with their first look at the makeup and dynamics of a comet's tail. The ICE trajectory adjustment would place the satellite/comet encounter within the coverage window of the world's largest single dish radio astronomy telescope located at the Arecibo Observatory, Puerto Rico. The 300-m dish, managed by the National Science Foundation, would supplement coverage by three NASA deep space network stations at Goldstone, California; Madrid, Spain; Canberra, Australia; and the recently completed 64-m antenna of the Japanese Space Agency at Usuda, Japan. NASA based ICE's course adjustment on telescopic observations of Giacobini-Zinner as the comet emerged in April from behind the sun, the first observation since July 1984. The comet was approximately 149 million miles from the sun on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. NASA would direct three smaller orbit maneuvers as ICE approached the comet, the last scheduled for three days prior to encounter. Course corrections were necessary because material spontaneously outgassed from the comet's core, acting as jet thrusters on the comet's body, slightly altered the its orbital path. Astronomers in 1900 discovered Giacobini-Zinner, which returned to earth's neighborhood every six-and-one-half years. It would not be visible to the naked eye, but amateur astronomers with small telescopes would be able to see it. (NASA Release 85-86)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
Researchers would install actual Space Shuttle tiles on the leading edge of a flight test fixture mounted below the F-104's fuselage. Some tiles were unused; others had flown in space on the orbiter Columbia. During initial flights in the 16-to-18 flight test program, the F-104 would fly at subsonic speeds behind a KC-135 tanker aircraft, which would emit a water spray to create artificial rain. Tanker personnel could control the flow rate, nozzle pressures, and size of the artificial raindrops. Pilots would fly additional flights at subsonic speeds near Vandenberg Air Force Base, a future Space Shuttle launch site, to observe and measure the effects of mist and low stratus clouds. Pilots later would fly at transonic and supersonic speeds flights at high altitude through ice particles in clouds. A particle-measurement probe located on the F-104's wing pylon would record moisture particle size, while high-frequency load sensors would measure impact forces. A noseboom on the flight test fixture would record velocity, and test fixture pressure orifices would measure pressure distribution. Video cameras, one pylon-mounted and one mounted on the F-104's lower fuselage looking back at the flight test fixture, would also record data. (NASA Release 85-135)
The U.S. Air Force couldn't decide whether the next test of the miniature homing vehicle antisatellite (ASAT) system should be against a target in space, Aerospace Daily reported. The Air Force was evaluating data from its November 13 ASAT test, in which the miniature homing vehicle MHV infrared sensor tracked a star, but had said that its next ASAT test would be flown against an instrumented target vehicle. Congressional limitations barred such a test until March 1 and until President Reagan had certified to Congress that the test was needed and wouldn't undercut the potential for negotiations with the USSR. The previous day the magazine had discussed a House Republican research report recommending raising the limit of three U.S. ASAT tests against objects in space during that fiscal year. (A/D, Jan 16/85, 84; Jan 15/85, 73) May 24: The U.S. Senate voted today, 74 to 9, to approve a proposal by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) to allow three final-stage antisatellite tests next year as long as President Reagan told Congress the test would not disrupt negotiations aimed at banning antisatellite weapons, the Washington Post reported. The Senate previously rejected, 51 to 35, a testing ban proposed by Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.). The U.S. antisatellite (ASAT) weapon was a small warhead atop a rocket carried by an F—15 jet to the edge of space, where it was released to pursue its target. Although the U.S. had tested the weapon in stages, the U.S. had not fired the weapon against a target in space. The Pentagon had scheduled that final round of testing to begin within several months. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	m 9UX |[0 INTENTIONALLY BLANK During the Geneva negotiations on weapons reductions, the USSR sought a halt to ASAT tests, while the Reagan Administration said it was open to such a proposal but had refused to halt ASAT testing as a condition to talks. In 1984 Congress banned tests of the U.S. system in hopes the pause might help negotiations, which had not then started. The Washington Post earlier had reported that electronic problems would raise the cost of the antisatellite system and stretched out its testing program. The Air Force planned a test, originally scheduled for fall 1984, for late July in which the target would be two metallic balloons attached to an orbiting satellite. However, the Air Force was cautious about the first test against a target in space, fearing that a well-publicized failure would hurt the space defense program. Sources told the Post that it might be impossible for the Air Force to carry out a second test of the weapon against the balloon target in space during the current fiscal year. Originally the Air Force had planned for three tests in 1985. (WPost, May 25/85, A4; May 16/85, A27)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) service and contractor personnel completed within 90 days installation of a launch environment instrumentation system (LEIS) for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Spaceport News reported. The LEIS, a 400-channel instrumented system, was designed to acquire data on the environment in the vicinity of the launch pad and support facilities during launch. The system's transducers measured in the launch pad vicinity pressure, acoustics, strain, vibration, and temperature for use in determining baseline data, sources of problems, and possible solutions. Such equipment at KSC, for example, pinpointed engine gas leaks during the first mission of the orbiter Challenger and provided design measurements of the overpressure problem that occurred during the first Space Shuttle launch. The KSC engineering development directorate, with the assistance of Planning Research Corp., completed design, management, and integration of the system, which Fairchild Weston Systems Inc. built under the direction of KSC for the Air Force. Fairchild began work on the system in March 1984 under a $4,549,256 contract. (Spaceport News, Aug 2/85, 7)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) issued a Request for Proposal (RFP) to industry to develop a space platform providing five years of on-orbit services to NASA payloads while allowing the developer to market it to commercial users, an innovative approach considered a first step toward creating a closer partnership between government and industry in space. Industry would finance, develop, own, and operate the platform with first use planned in late 1988 and would be free to market the platform (totally separate from NASA's plans for a government-developed, permanently manned space station) for materials processing or other manufacturing activities. NASA stipulated that the platform be capable of providing services for four future projects: the extreme ultraviolet explorer (EUVE), the x-ray timing explorer (XTE), a zero-gravity payload, and an as yet unidentified project. The Space Shuttle or other launch vehicle would place the commercial platform in orbit. Commercial payloads would reimburse the government for use of the orbiter and facilities. (NASA Release 85-7) Johnson Space Center
A Northrop F-20 Tigershark crashed today while practicing its routine for the Paris Air Show during a stopover at Goose Bay, Labrador, Aerospace Daily reported. The pilot, whose name was withheld pending notification of next of kin, was fatally injured. A Northrup spokesman said an investigation was underway to determine the cause of the crash and that the company "would expect the cooperation of the Air Force in the investigation since they are the executive agency for the F-20." The only other F-20 was at Edwards Air Force Base, California, and would remain there to continue the flight demonstration program "because of the high interest in the F-20 program in this country," the spokesman continued. The first F-20 had crashed the previous October during a demonstration flight at Suwon Air Base near Seoul, South Korea, killing Northrop chief test pilot Darrell Cornell. Northrop reported at the time that the crash was "pilot induced" and the "the aircraft and all its systems functioned properly." The fourth Tigershark was on the assembly line. An attempt earlier in the month to provide funding for the Northrop F-20 failed, Defense Daily reported, when an amendment by Rep. James Courter (R-N.J.) to substitute 30 Northrop F-20s for 24 General Dynamics F-16s in FY 86, brought up in a closed door markup by the House Armed Services procurement and military nuclear systems subcommittee, failed by a note of 8-4. An amendment by the panel's chairman, Rep. Samuel Stratton (D-NY), calling for competition between the F-20 and the F-16 in the FY 87 budget, prevailed. The Stratton amendment specified that the Secretary of the Air Force, in the development of the tactical aircraft fighter program for the Five-Year Defense Plan beginning in FY 87, "shall establish a competition for procurement of tactical fighter aircraft to meet the requirements of the Air Force above a minimum number of F-16 and F-20 aircraft that the Secretary determines appropriate for meeting the requirements of the active and reserve components. Such competition shall be among all suitable aircraft, including the F-16 and F-20 aircraft." A report drafted for the subcommittee stated that the F-16 and F-20 "are both roughly comparable aircraft. Both have new and modern radar and avionics systems, both have excellent performance as air-to-air combat fighters, and both have highly accurate air-to-ground bombing systems." The report did note that the F-16 had the advantage in range and payload capabilities, while the F-20 has "a significant advantage" in reliability and maintainability factors that affect the combat readiness and operating costs." (A/D, May 15/85, 1; D/D, May 2/85, 9)
A fare war had broken out in space, Fortune reported, and Arianespace, a consortium of European governments and private companies that operated the European-built Ariane rocket, was grabbing communications satellite launches away from the U.S. Space Shuttle by aggressively underpricing it. Although NASA had launched 30 satellites, nine aboard the Space Shuttle, over the previous four years and the Ariane less than 12, the Europeans would become major competitors, Fortune predicted. A Space Shuttle launch cost $25 million; Arianespace charged $24 million. And Arianespace had cut that price by as much as $3 million to lure some U.S. customers. Arianespace officials said its throwaway rockets were more efficient at the single task of launching satellites than was the complex Space Shuttle, which NASA had designed to perform a range of scientific and military missions. "Using the shuttle for launching satellites," Charles Bigot, director of Arianespace, said, "is like flying a supersonic Mirage jet fighter when all you need is a puddle jumper." American entrepreneurs who wanted to get into the satellite-launching business complained that prices charged by both Arianespace and NASA were ridiculously low as a result of government subsidies. Transpace Carriers Inc., for example, held the rights to buy the Delta rocket from its manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., but couldn't launch a satellite for less than $45 million. The U.S. Department of Transportation, which wanted to encourage private companies like Transpace Carriers, was encouraging President Reagan to set Space Shuttle launch rates high enough to make the commercial launches profitable. So the future of the launch business, Fortune said, would rest with President Reagan's decision on Space Shuttle pricing—and on Arianespace's reaction. If Reagan boosted Space Shuttle launch fees, it would please entrepreneurs anxious to get into the space business. But that would also give the Europeans a bigger opening into the space business than they've had so far. (Fortune, May 27/85, 138)
NASA announced that Gerald Griffin, director of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), would leave the agency January 14, 1986, to become president of the Houston Chamber of Commerce. Robert Goetz, deputy director of JSC, would become acting director upon Griffin's departure. Griffin had been JSC's director since August 1982 and had served with NASA for more than 20 years in a number of key positions at three NASA centers and in Washington, D.C. Griffin served in the U.S. Air Force and worked in the aerospace industry before joining NASA in 1964. "It was a tough decision to leave NASA," Griffin said, but "I'll depart with the comfort that the NASA team of government, industry, and university people will continue their outstanding job in space activities for this country." William Graham, acting NASA administrator, said, "As one of NASA's key senior executives, Gerry has had a long distinguished career. He has received many honors and awards in recognition of the contributions he has made both to aeronautics and space. We shall all miss him very much and wish him great success as he moves on to new accomplishments." (NASA Release 85-172) Kennedy Space Center
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded ASEA Robotics Inc. a $1,143,622 contract to build a robotic development prototype system to be installed in the Robotic Applications Development Laboratory (RADL) and serve as KSC's control center for robotics, Spaceport News reported. KSC currently had two labs for robotics research: Lab A was a test facility for training devices, sensor and end-effector development, and small robotic projects; Lab B functioned as a control center made up of complex work cells and "smart systems" (independent control systems integrated into one coordinated system) for large robotic applications. The objective of the new system was to permit engineers to combine existing and new technology to create advanced independent and semiindependent machines and machines with independent decision-making capabilities or a "computer brain," which could accomplish more on their own without step-by-step instructions from human supervisors. The initial thrust of the new system would be to develop the technology and techniques needed to automatically load and unload hazardous fuels aboard space vehicles and payloads during prelaunch ground operations. Future challenges included application of these refueling techniques to other fuels such as cryogenic propellants. RADL would have an electrically driven articulated robot composed of a six-axes arm and interchangeable end-effectors or "hands," a computer with user-friendly software, and a vision tracking system. The facility would serve as the focal point for combining robotics hardware, algorithms, software, sensors, and control systems. Leon Davis, a development engineer and electrical lead for the Robotic Control Systems, said of the new system, "This is not a manipulator that is teleoperated by a man, but a robot with a computer brain capable of memorizing the contours and panels of its intended subject and carrying out its functions autonomously." Because NASA would be asking KSC to design processing facilities for new-generation launch vehicles such as the second generation Space Shuttle and the heavy lift launch vehicles, KSC would need these state-of-the-art robotics to provide the most efficient and effective processing methods. Hazardous, time critical, and repetitive Space Shuttle and payload operations all had potential uses for robotics. A special feature of the system was a "real time" tracking system using "closed-loop" responsive adaptive control commands, feedback, and error signals. "Adaptive control" meant that the robot altered its path automatically in response to sensory feedback from its environment. The KSC robot's servo-controls and software utilities would allow its arm to operate adaptively to control positions and orientation of all six axes, not only the end-effector as found in standard applications. An electrically driven, servo-controlled robot had several advantages over hydraulic robots, the major one being that smooth motion, speed, and trajectory controls were possible when the robot handled loads up to 200 lb. As Davis said, "We really don't have applications for hydraulic robots. Hydraulic robots can leak, proving a potential hazard to the tile and other sensitive areas of the orbiter." KSC's robotics research would progress in four phases: phase one was the development of the robotic arm in static work cells; phase two proposed advancing the robotic capabilities to operate in dynamic work cells; phase three would include off-line programming using 3-D graphics and simulated work cells; and phase four entertained the possibility of employing artificial intelligence. Possible future capabilities of robots were three-dimensional scanning; higher order processing; artificial intelligence; sonic, laser, and other ranging systems; and "touch" and mobility systems. (Spaceport News, Nov 7/85, 6) Langley Research Center
NASA announced it selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. and Rockwell Internatl.'s Space Station Systems Division for fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of the structural framework and other elements of a permanently manned Space Station. Johnson Space Center (JSC) would manage the 21-month contracts, which had an estimated value of $27 million each. NASA previously announced other industry teams selected for negotiations for definition and preliminary design of other Space Station elements [see March 14]. In addition to work on the Space Station structural framework, the JSC contracts would cover interface between the Space Station and Space Shuttle; mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems; attitude and thermal control; communications and data management systems; plans for equipping a module with sleeping quarters, wardroom, and galley; and plans for extravehicular activity. (NASA Release 85-56)
The Department of Defense (DOD) placed a satellite on the Space Shuttle Discovery [see STS/Military Applications, Jan. 24], which put it in a radically different orbit from many spy satellites, the NY Times reported. According to figures made public by the Air Force, DOD put the satellite in a highly elliptical orbit at a low angle above the equator; the majority of U.S. spy satellites were in roughly circular orbits that passed across polar regions so that satellites would spend as much time as possible over the USSR. The satellite's, whose United Nations designation was 1985-10B, highest altitude was 34,670 km (21,543 miles); its low point was 341 km (212 miles). This elliptical path was inclined 28.4° to the equator, and the satellite took 10 hours to complete one revolution. In addition to its elliptical orbits, the satellite could maneuver from its initial orbit into another, perhaps more usual, orbit. By international treaty, DOD was required to release to the United Nations a technical description of all its satellites' initial orbits. This recording process, which passed through the State Department and included filing the information with the Library of Congress, often took several months after an object was launched. The DOD released the data in early April to the State Department; the NY Times then requested and received the information. (NYT, Apr 26/85, A19)
American University professor Jeffrey Richelson, testifying at the espionage trial of former Navy intelligence analyst Samuel Morison, said publication in 1984 of three secret KH-11 spy satellite photos in Jane's Defense Weekly told the Soviets nothing important that they did not already know, the Washington Post reported. Morison, who worked at the Naval Intelligence Support center in Suitland, Maryland, had official approval for his part-time job as U.S. editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and in 1984 sent the weekly the three photos in hopes of securing a full-time job there. He was also indicted on charges of keeping in his apartment two classified documents about a May 1984 fire at a Soviet naval ammunition depot. In his testimony, Richelson said the Soviets already had the KH-11 manual, which they had bought from a CIA officer, as well as earlier published satellite photos to show them how the system worked. Government witnesses earlier testified that the photos sent to Jane's were potentially valuable to the Soviets in confirming the KH-11's sophisticated workings and in disclosing U.S. targeting interests. Similarly, a Navy intelligence expert testified that the details about the ammunition depot fires, also gleaned from satellite photos, were so precise that it would have been "very damaging" to the U.S. if the documents had been leaked. Richelson, however, said public sources had provided much detail about the KH-11 and other satellite programs, such as their flight paths over the Soviet Union, their altitude (75 to 155 miles), and the fact that a Titan 3D rocket launched them and another so-called Keyhole satellite, the KH-9. He said it was well known that the KH-11 sent its pictures back to Washington in a matter of seconds via another satellite and that it passed over targets quite frequently. Another defense witness, John Pike, associate director for space policy at the Federation of American Scientists, testified on what was publicly available about the KH-11, saying DOD would soon replace it with a longer-lasting KH-12. According to Pike, the KH-11 orbited the Soviet Union 11 times a day, had the capacity to take pictures continuously, and had a peripheral vision that could switch from extreme left to extreme right in an instant. The Washington Post six days later reported that Morison was found guilty of espionage and theft and could be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison and fined $10,000 on each of four counts. (W Post, Oct 12/85, A9, Oct 18/85, A1) Strategic Defense Initiative The UCS had also stated in its report that the neutral particle beam (to destroy Soviet missiles) would require orbiting a 40,000-ton accelerator, an impossible task. However, Jastrow noted the correct weight of the accelerator was 25 tons, quite reasonable for earth orbit, and the UCS had admitted the error. Also on the SDI program, Space World published the Council on Economic Priorities's (CEP) recommendations, in which CEP suggested the Department of Defense reduce emphasis on developing prototype systems until clarification of the technological uncertainties of deploying an effective overall space defense and Congress should significantly slow SDI's growth rate until demonstration of the plan's technical feasibility. (WSJ, Jan 17/85, 2-E; Space World, Jan 85, 3)
NASA announced today that an American journalist would fly on a Space Shuttle mission in late 1986 as the second in a series of communicators to be selected as part of the agency's Space Flight Participant Program. The first candidate selected under this program was Christa McAuliffe, a classroom teacher scheduled to fly in January 1986. In today's announcement NASA said it would select the journalist, like the teacher candidate, after a nationwide competition conducted by professionals representing a broad spectrum of individuals in the candidates' field. The competition would be limited to full-time working media representatives (U.S. citizens) with five or more years' experience covering or commenting on the news for U.S.-based audio, video, or print media. Demonstrated ability to communicate clearly and effectively to mass audiences in both broadcast and print media would be the basis for evaluation of applications, although it was not necessary for the candidate to have worked professionally in both. The selection process would first require identification of eight candidates from each of five regions in the U.S.; from the 40 regional nominees, a National Selection Panel would recommend five for final consideration by the NASA Space Flight Participant Evaluation Committee composed of seven senior NASA officials. The five semifinalists would undergo medical examinations and receive briefings on the spaceflight experience at the Johnson Space Center. Based on results of the physicals and subsequent interviews, the evaluation committee would recommend a primary and backup candidate to the NASA Administrator who would approve the final selection. The Association of Schools of Journalism and Mass Communication in cooperation with the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication and a Journalism Advisory Committee comprised of representatives from 16 professional journalism organizations including the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Radio Television News Directors Association, American Society of Newspaper Editors, National Association of Broadcasters, Society of Professional Journalists/Sigma Delta Chi, and the National Newspaper Association would administer the competition. (NASA Release 85-147)
NASA announced that the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) had that day named 114 elementary and secondary school teacher nominees in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. Selection followed the review of more than 10,000 applications [see Space Transportation System/ Civilian in Space Program, Feb. 21]. Dr. William Pierce, CCSSO executive director, said after announcing the names that "It is a great pleasure for the Council to be involved in this historic project. The calibre of the applications from teachers throughout the country has been truly impressive. If their applications are any indication, we can be proud of the quality of teaching that occurs in the classrooms of the elementary and secondary school teachers who applied for this unique educational opportunity." NASA would host the 114 nominees at a national workshop, June 22-27, in Washington, D.C., during which NASA would discuss current developments in the space program and provide information and training on NASA educational materials available for the classroom. At the workshop a national review panel would interview the applicants to determine the 10 semifinalists. (NASA Release 85-67)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA announced that an eight-member review team at Goddard Space Flight Center concluded that the failure of the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) to deploy from its canister during the April 1985 Space Shuttle 51-B mission was due to the failure of two switches designed to activate bolt cutters on the canister. On June 7 the team would issue a final report along with recommendations for a solution to the problem. The Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) along with GLOMR would be the first satellites successfully deployed from canisters aboard the Space Shuttle. The door of the GLOMR canister opened, indicating normal battery operation, but the bolt cutters would not activate. After a second deployment attempt, NASA decided to return GLOMR to earth for evaluation. (NASA Release 8585)
The U.S. Senate passed by voice vote H.R. 1714, the NASA Authorization Bill for FY 86, NASA's Legislative Activities Report noted. As passed, the bill embraced the concept of a budget freeze at the FY 85 level of $7,510 billion; however, it also provided for three specific augmentations that totalled $142 million, accounting for a FY 86 growth of 1.9%. Among the authorizations for research and development were $200,000,000 for the space station, $477,200,000 for space transportation capability development, and $608,400,000 for physics and astronomy. Spaceflight, control, and data communications authorizations included $941,500,000 for Space Shuttle production and operational capability; $1,700,100,000 for space transportation operations; and $745,300,000 for space and ground network, communications, and data systems. Among the authorizations for space transportation facilities were $14,000,000 for construction of an orbiter modification and refurbishment facility at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), $3,600,000 for construction of a thermal protection system facility at KSC, and $6,500,000 for modification of enhanced life support systems testing at Marshall Space Flight Center. (NASA Legislative Activities Report, June 27/85, 1)
NASA announced selection of Boeing Service Internatl., Inc. and United Technologies Corp. for negotiations leading to award of a single contract for flight equipment processing at the Johnson Space Center (JSC). The contract, covering a basic period of three years plus a single priced option for an additional two years, would be for services expected to begin in January 1986. Follow-on awards could ultimately result in a total contract period of 15 years. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract arrangement that would include incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. The contractor selected after final negotiations would be responsible for receipt, launch preparation, and postlaunch activities related to the overall processing of crew-related flight equipment required to support the Space Transportation System program. The contractor would process/resupply individual equipment items in preparation for launch and would operate and maintain assigned facilities and support equipment required for successful equipment processing. Equipment covered under the contract included extravehicular mobility units (spacesuits), food and medical systems, communications equipment, display and control equipment, and other miscellaneous items. The competitive procurement consolidated under one contract work previously performed by 16 firms under 19 contracts. (NASA Release 85-149)
The National Society of Professional Engineers had recognized Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) role in the first Spacelab mission as one of the nation's 10 outstanding engineering achievements for 1984, the center announced. Because the 10-day mission occurred so late in 1983, the society had placed it in the 1984 competition. The society also cited MSFC for its management of NASA's role in Spacelab development, which had included the transfer tunnel connecting the Space Shuttle orbiter cabin to the module and other components necessary for successful laboratory operation, for its technical and programmatic monitoring of Spacelab's European design and development activities, and for lending technical expertise and support to the European Space Agency (ESA) in the project. MSFC's deputy director Thomas Lee had accepted the award on behalf of center employees at the society's winter meeting in Albuquerque, New Mexico. (MSFC Release 85-5) February /. The U.S. Navy awarded Dr. Robert Stevenson, an oceanographer with the Office of Naval Research (ONR), its Meritorious Civilian Service Award for his role in the application of space technology to the solution of oceanographic problems, the U.S. Navy announced. The award cited Stevenson as the "father" of space oceanography in the western world, recognizing him as one of the first American scientists to suggest that remote sensing instruments in space could accurately record oceanographic measurements. As an advisor on space-related programs, Stevenson had worked with the National Council for Marine Resources and Engineering Development, the National Academy of Science, North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), and NASA. Stevenson was a Fellow of the Geological Society of America and author of numerous scientific articles on ocean surface-layers' research, particularly as observed from earth-orbiting satellites. (Dept, of the Navy Release 1-85)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division successfully flight-tested a low-cost, state-of-the-art autopilot on an unmanned research vehicle, the Air Force Systems Command's Newsreview reported. The division adapted commercially available microprocessor chips in the $50,000, in-house autopilot program to develop flight control-systems technology that would lead to cost reductions in tactical missiles. Researchers made five flight tests of the autopilot since October 1983 on an XBQM-106 unmanned vehicle during which the autopilot provided control augmentation, translating user inputs into vehicle actions. Current guidance and stabilization packages in missiles and other aerospace systems were costly because they used expensive data processing microchips that had excessive amounts of computational processing capability but no built-in control functions, thus requiring additional electronic interface components to perform the "control" function tasks. The microprocessor chip, in contrast, had sufficient built-in computational and control functions to permit 60% fewer interfacing components and should be appropriate to numerous tactical weapons systems, both surface and air-launched. The next step in the program would require replacing the wire-wrapped or brassboard model of the autopilot with a refined system on a printed circuit board, which would undergo at least 2 additional flights before the end of FY 85. (AFSC Newsreview, Jan 23/85, 8)
A Federal grand jury in St. Louis subpoenaed 11 McDonnell Douglas employees and certain company records as part of its investigation of alleged overcharges on F—15 contracts with the Air Force, Defense Daily reported. The Defense Contract Audit Agency alleged that the company furnished inaccurate cost and pricing data to justify $28 million in probable inflation in the cost of manufacturing major pieces of the F-15's equipment. McDonnell spokesman Gerald Meyer said the subpoenas apparently related to an investigation of pricing elements in FY 80 and 81 F—15 contracts, although McDonnell did not know the full scope of the investigation. Meyer said McDonnell had "no reason to believe there was any unlawful conduct" on its part and that it would cooperate with the Justice Department and other government agencies participating in the investigation. He added that McDonnell felt the serving of the subpoenas "was inappropriate and unnecessary because it was not preceded by more ordinary channels of communications. All they had to do was ask." (D/D, Sept 26/85, 130) NASA and U.S. Air Force
The deputy for tactical systems at the Air Force Aeronautical Systems Division (ASD) issued a request for proposals for demonstration and validation of the Air Force's planned Advanced Tactical Fighter (ATF), Defense Daily reported. ASD planned to award up to four fixed-price contracts running approximately 33 months. Seven ATF concept formulation contractors would compete for the contracts. The companies were Boeing Military Airplane, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas, Northrop, and Rockwell Internatl. ASD said the demonstration/validation contractors would develop detailed concepts and designs of the ATF to meet operational needs, conduct testing to validate and assess proposed concepts, and identify and reduce overall program risks prior to start of full-scale development. General Electric and Pratt & Whitney were competitively developing the joint advanced fighter engine for the ATF. ASD was planning a FY 89 decision on full-scale development of the ATF, with initial operational capability set for 1995. The Air Force estimated the cost of developing and building 12 research and development ATF aircraft at $15.3 billion and believed it could build the ATF at a total unit cost only 20% higher than that of the F—15. A top Air Force official had noted in 1984 that the ATF would have a basic Mach 1.5 speed and that it could employ technologies being demonstrated by the Grumman X-29 forward swept wing aircraft. (D/D, Aug. 14/85, 1)
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC) announced that the world's fastest and most powerful supercomputer, the Cray-2, arrived at ARC to assist researchers in taking major steps toward simulating actual aircraft flight and thus making possible important advances, both in cost savings and performance, in aircraft design. The Cray-2 could perform 250 million continuous calculations per second, which was more than three times faster than the previous generation of supercomputers. The Cray-2 was the first building block in the creation of NASA's Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) program, planned to provide the world's most powerful, large-scale high-speed processor system. In addition to its advantages for aircraft design, NAS represented an important national facility in such research areas as aerothermodynamics, computational chemistry, atmospheric modeling, and other computationally intensive scientific applications. NASA planned the NAS system as an ongoing project with continuous improvements in speed and memory. Its objectives were to establish and maintain a leading-edge national computation capability to ensure leadership in computational fluid dynamics and related disciplines, provide an integrated processing system capable of a sustained 250 million floatingpoint, operations-per-second processing rate in 1986 and a one billion rate in 1987, and act as a pathfinder in advanced, large-scale computer systems capability. The Cray-2 was four feet high and four feet in diameter; its small size was made possible by microminiaturization of the electronic circuits and extremely dense packing of the circuit boards. Since the speed of light was a fundamental limit on computer speed, super fast machines had to be smaller in order to reduce distances that information traveled. Computer scientists indicated they expected to get still more speed in future machines by further reducing size and adding more parallel processors. A main feature of the Cray-2 was its large random-access memory, which was 16 times larger than previous supercomputers' memories. The Cray-2's memory provided random access from any of the machine's four main processors and any of its high-speed data channels. This meant a user could use all or part of this memory quickly, rather than taking hours to access data for large calculations. Another main feature of the machine was that its tightly-packed, heat-producing electronic components were immersed for cooling in a colorless odorless, inert fluorocarbon liquid, the first such design in computer history. (ARC Release 85-38) Goddard Space Flight Center
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
Having served as NASA deputy administrator for only two weeks, Dr. William Graham was not known well by most NASA employees; but, as acting administrator replacing James Beggs, Graham had a clear opinion of NASA and his opportunity to lead it, the Washington Post reported. Graham, who had a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, said in an interview today that "NASA's a marvelous organization ... For a technologist, this is like dying and going to heaven." Thus, Graham characterized himself as a professional technologist, which his background would certainly indicate. He had worked as a project officer with the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico, was a founder and executive of R&D Associates in California, and had served on numerous advisory panels on nuclear weapons, strategic military policy, and undersea warfare. However, this emphasis in his career on weapons research and military policy aroused some unease at NASA, the Post commented. "He's from the other side of the river," one NASA official said, referring to Graham's long association with the Pentagon. But Graham had sought to assure Congressional committees recently that his appointment was not designed to lead to the "militarization of NASA." Graham's close ties to the Reagan Administration were seen as possibly beneficial to the space agency. And Graham commented that he would follow President Reagan's "very strong and clear space policy." Some associates noted that even as acting administrator they expected Graham to "take a strong hand" in agency affairs. Graham had already announced that he intended to meet soon with all the agency's top executives and then visit the research and operations center at Cape Canaveral, Houston, Pasadena, and elsewhere. "I'm a hands-on kind of person," he said. "I like to get out and walk the halls and talk to people." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A29)
NASA announced that H. William Wood, deputy associate administrator (Networks), Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems (OSTDS), was retiring effective early in January after more than 30 years of government service. Wood had served in his present post since April 1984. Before that he managed the Network Systems program as the division director since 1981. Wood was a research engineer at Langley Research Center when NASA was formed in 1958; and in 1959 he became the group leader with the Tracking and Ground Instrumentation unit for the Mercury Network. His other NASA assignments included associate director, Network Systems Division; NASA senior scientific representative in Australia; and associate director, Operations, in the Network Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center. Earlier, Wbod had served several years in the U.S. Air Force. Wbod received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, and he is a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society. In 1955 Wbod received a BSEE degree from North Carolina State University. (NASA anno., Dec 18/85) December23: NASA announced that Dr. Charles Kupperman was appointed effective immediately as executive assistant to the deputy administrator. Kupperman came to NASA after serving as executive director of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. From 1978 to 1981 he was the research associate and defense analyst for the Committee on the Present Danger, and he also served as a member of President Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign and defense transition team. Kupperman was a consultant to R&D Associates and taught at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California. Kupperman graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a B.A. degree in political science from Purdue University, received an M.A. degree in political science from the University of British Columbia, and a Ph.D. in international relations from the University of Southern California. He was the author of articles on defense, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), and national security policy for academic and public journals. (NASA Release anno., Dec 23/85)
The U.S. Air Force rolled out the C-5B today, the first B model of the free world's largest military cargo aircraft, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Although it looked like a C-5A, the new C-5B had many improved features including state-of-the-art materials and avionics. It also had the new wings, which would boost the service life of the aircraft to 30,000 flight hours, that the Air Force was retrofitting to the A model. The Air Force planned to buy 50 C-5Bs, nearly doubling its capability to airlift non-stop anywhere in the world large equipment such as the Army's 74-ton mobile scissors bridge, Abrams M-1 tanks, and helicopters. When the purchase of the C-5Bs was completed, the Air Force would be about 18 million-ton-miles per day short of its goal of 66-million-tons per day of out-sized airlift capability, the minimum capability recommended in a 1981 Congressionally mandated mobility study. The Air Force planned to make up the difference by acquiring the C-17. Four improved General Electric TF-39 engines, rated at 41,000 lb. of thrust each, powered the C-5B. The aircraft seated 75, and its seats were 30% lighter than the A model's, decreasing total aircraft weight by 725 lb and cutting fuel consumption by an estimated $13 million pver the life of the C-5B fleet. The C-5B's 24 main landing gear wheels had carbon brake assemblies with multiple discs. More than 400 lb. lighter per aircraft, the new brakes doubled the life of the A model's beryllium system and should bring about an estimated 20-year savings of $20 million. In October 1982 the Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division had awarded a $50-million preliminary C-5B production contract to Lockheed-Georgia. Plans called for early September flight testing of the first production aircraft at Dobbins AFB, Georgia. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs for $7,817 billion. (AFSC Newsreview, July 29/85, 1)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) director Dick Smith and Lockheed Space Operations Co. president Doug Sargent today hosted a dedication ceremony for KSC's launch pad B after six years of modification at a cost of $150 million, the Spaceport News reported. NASA would use pad B, the second of the two complex 39 launch pads to undergo modification from the Apollo configuration, to support Space Shuttle and Shuttle Centaur upper stage launches. First launch from the modified pad would be Space Shuttle mission 51-L, scheduled for January 22, 1986. NASA first used pad B in May 1969 for the Apollo 10, third manned Saturn V/Apollo launch. Its last use was for the launch of the Apollo/Soyuz mission in July 1975. Pad modifications included a new Centaur rolling beam, permanent orbiter weather protection system, TV camera floodlights and a TV camera system, boxcars, upgrading of the payload changeout room, a cost-saving lighting system, variable speed motors for loading liquid oxygen, and hydrogen flare stacks. Although there were currently minor differences between pads A and B, the work underway at pad A would eventually make the two functionally identical. (Spaceport News, Dec 20/85, 1; Kennedy Space Center Release 242-85) Launch Schedules
An air-launched antisatellite missile (ASAT) hit its target in the Air Force's first ASAT test against a target in space, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. An F—15 from Edwards Air Force Base launched the two-stage ASAT missile 35,000 to 40,000 feet above the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base, then two boosters carried the ASAT into space. When the ASAT's infrared sensors locked on to the target, which was about 350 miles over the Pacific, small rocket motors guided the weapon to its kill. The Air Force in 1979 launched the ASAT's target, an Air Force satellite known as P78-1, which gathered scientific data on the space environment but which had outlived its usefulness. In 1984 F—15s launched two live-fire tests but not at targets. The first was an ASAT launch to a point in space; the second tested the ASAT sensor's ability to home in on a star's infrared emissions. Air Force plans called for nine more target tests against specially instrumented balloons and satellites that had completed their missions. The Washington Post later reported that, according to Robert MacQueen, director of the high-altitude observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado, the Solwind satellite destroyed in the test was providing "very useful data" on solar activity until the moment it was hit. MacQueen said he was surprised and upset at seeing a fruitful experiment being used as a military target and said it was "deplorable" that the Pentagon "had taken a scientifically useful thing and sacrificed it in this way." The satellite carried seven experiments for the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other government agencies. One NRL experiment used a corona-graph that sent to earth during each of the satellite's orbits, or roughly 15 times a day, images of activity on the sun's surface. Several months previously, NRL scientists had to draft what one source said "they thought was a routine paper to justify continued operation of their coronagraph." Although the scientists acknowledged problems with the spacecraft system, the source said, they wrote that it should continue. NRL scientists were told in July that "the satellite would be turned off sometime after August 1, but they weren't told how," the source said. The Washington Post reported on September 6 that Solwind was the likely target for the ASAT test because the original target, an instrumented balloon, was plagued with technical problems. A Pentagon spokesman said the satellite was intended to operate for three years at most and that recent data from the satellite had "marginal value." The Washington Post reported that another Defense Department official said the Solwind research satellite was originally scheduled as a target in the weapon's seventh test, which probably would have come in 1987. The satellite's solar research program was expected to be ending by then, scientists associated with the program said. Although Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger described the satellite as "burned out," an Air Force spokesman said the fact that the satellite was still sending signals back to earth played a key role in its selection as a target. "We had to have an active telemetry system to verify it had been hit," the spokesman said. "A dead satellite would not have given us that." (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1; W Post, Sept 20/85, Al, Sept 21/85, A9)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced signing today with Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract for Space Transportation System operations (STSOC) [see Space Transportation System/Management, Sept. 12]. JSC estimated the first two years of the contract, starting January 1, 1986, to be valued at $378,536,000 and the followon two-year extension option from January 1, 1988 through December 31, 1989 at about $374,320,000 for a possible four-year total of $752,846,000. Rockwell's STSOC tasks would include project management; maintenance and operations of mission control center-Houston, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, and the central computing facility; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations and testing and support for Space Shuttle operations at JSC. The Rockwell team included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. (JSC Release 85-051)
In an internal memorandum Assistant Defense Secretary James Wade Jr. asked the Air Force why F—15 and F—16 fighter jets were getting more— rather than less—expensive to build as time went on, the Washington Times reported. The cost of an aircraft normally decreased over the years because the high initial costs of design, engineering, and getting an assembly line into operation were no longer charged. The memo said the price of the F—15—calculated in 1970 dollars—rose from $5.5 million to $7.4 million a plane in 1985. In current dollars, an F—15 cost 26.3 million. The price of an F-16, in 1975 dollars, rose from $3.9 million in 1980 to $4.8 million in 1984. In current dollars, the plane cost $14 million. McDonnell Douglas Corp. had been making F-15s since 1970; General Dynamics Corp. started building F-16s in 1975. A Pentagon spokesman said the Air Force was working on a response. However, Pentagon documents provided to Sen. Charles Grassley (R-lowa) showed construction hours for both aircraft were well above engineering predictions. A single F—15 was supposed to take 22,978 manhours to build; during the first quarter of 1984, McDonnell Douglas needed 37,193 manhours to complete a plane, the documents reported. An F-16 was supposed to take 837,300 manhours to build; in the first quarter of 1984, General Dynamics took 1.4 million manhours to build a plane. (W Times, July 8/85, IOC)
When launched August 12, 1978 from Cape Canaveral, ICE was known as the International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE-3). The 1054-lb. 16-sided spacecraft became the first spacecraft to orbit at the sun-earth libration point (that point in space where a satellite is suspended in a gravitational equilibrium between the sun and the earth-moon system) and the first to traverse the earth's distant geomagnetic tail. ISEE-3 also was the first spacecraft to make multiple swings by the moon and the first to use a lunar gravity-assist maneuver for targeting-escape trajectory. It made more gravity-assist maneuvers (five) than any other spacecraft. After the spacecraft completed most of the objectives of its original mission, it remained in good operational condition and had approximately 75% (150 lb.) of its total propellant reserves (200 lb.). Engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), under the leadership of Dr. Robert Farquhar, developed a plan that would divert ISEE-3 from its libration point orbit, take it past the moon five times, and propel it out toward Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although the spacecraft was not designed for cometary investigation (it had no cameras or dust detectors), GSFC scientists believed it was well-suited for measurements of a comet's plasma properties, a chief objective of cometary exploration. In addition, the trajectory developed by Farquhar and his colleagues brought the spacecraft within range of a March 1986 upstream intercept of Comet Halley. That 1986 upstream pass, following an October 31, 1985 distant pass, was important because ICE would provide data on the solar-wind state upstream from Halley and earth-based telescopes would then observe the effect of the solar wind on Halley's tail. The spacecraft would return in July 2012 to the vicinity of earth, where a lunar gravity-assist maneuver could place the spacecraft into an earth orbit from which it might be retrievable. (NASA Release 85-121)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division's 4950th Test Wing unveiled a generic testbed, the airborne digital avionics test system (ADATS), for flight testing newly developed aircraft avionics systems, the Air Force System Command's Newsreview reported. The wing's flight test engineering division developed the test pallet in a continuing effort to enhance its mission capabilities at reduced costs. Air Force personnel could easily load and unload the test pallet from C-141 and C-130 aircraft and would use it to flight test aircraft components that used a Mil-Std-1553B data bus (a format for transferring digitized information to and from various systems and sensors in an aircraft). The avionics test system pallet provided or simulated all electronic signals the test item received from the aircraft in which it was designed to fly. To accomplish this the pallet had navigation, air data, and time-measuring systems. A mission computer on the pallet controlled the test item and the ADATS's functions. Flight-test engineers instructed the ADATS through a computer console during each test. Before ADATS, test wing electronic technicians typically built a dedicated test pallet for each test item. With ADATS, only software needed changing. Future planned upgrades for ADATS included a global positioning system for better navigation accuracy, a radar altimeter, and Doppler velocity sensor. Other planned improvements should permit ADATS to satisfy most digital avionics flight-test requirements through the year 2005. (AFSC Newsreview, May 312/85, 4)
The Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) office said today that the Space Shuttle Discovery would participate in June in the first SDI experiment in orbit, carrying a mirror intended to intercept and reflect a laser beam fired from earth, the Washington Post reported. In some missile defense systems, a large orbiting mirror would receive a powerful beam from a ground-based laser and reflect it to destroy an enemy missile, but in the space shuttle experiment, the laser beam would be too weak to harm the spacecraft. A small mirror would reflect the beam back to the ground so engineers could verify their ability to keep the laser pointed at the orbiting mirror. The laser would travel from an Air Force Base on Maui, Hawaii, and bounce back by a special 8-in.-diameter "retroreflector" that astronauts would place in one of the Space Shuttle's middeck side windows while the spacecraft was over the Pacific. An SDI spokesman said the laser had successfully tracked during earlier tests an airplane carrying the mirror at an altitude of 30,000 feet. The Space Shuttle flew in orbit at 100 miles and more. The test, called the high precision tracking experiment, was the first in a series that the SDI office had booked aboard the Space Shuttle. Beginning in 1987,	the Pentagon would fly two major SDI experiments each year. (IV Post, May 24/85, A8) During May: Brigadier General Robert Rankine, Jr,, U.S. Air Force, writing in Aerospace about the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), said that, "In the long term, we have confidence that SDI will be a crucial means by which both the U.S. and the Soviet Union can safely agree to very deep reductions and eventually even the elimination of ballistic missiles and the nuclear weapons they carry. This does not represent a shift from the basic deterrent strategy of the U.S., but represents a new means for enhancing deterrence. ". . . A ballistic missile defense capability has the potential of increasing deterrence and adding to stability, by increasing substantially the uncertainties in the success of nuclear attack by an enemy, thoroughly confounding his targeting strategy, thus significantly reducing or eliminating the utility of preemptive attack. The system need not be perfect to accomplish this objective, but most meet three important criteria: —effective against the systems and countermeasures that exist or could be deployed, —sufficiently survivable that it would not encourage an attack on the system itself . . . —effective at lower cost than any proliferation or countermeasure attempts to overcome it. ". . . Some of the opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative," Rankine said, "have argued that the research and technology program currently under way is inconsistent with the ABM treaty and conflicts with arms control in general. Quite to the contrary, the initiative it totally consistent with current U.S. ABM treaty obligations. The initiative contemplates only research and experimentation on a broad range of defense technologies to provide the basis for a decision in the future whether or not to develop systems which would provide an effective ballistic missile defense capability." Rankine then described the technical scope of SDI and said the program was broken into five major program elements: surveillance, acquisition, tracking and kill, assessment; directed energy weapons; kinetic energy weapons; systems analysis and battle management; and an assortment of other high-priority technologies that did not warrant separate program elements. Rankine concluded that the goal for SDI had not changed since the President's March 1983 speech proposing the system, when he "challenged all of us in the scientific community to create a means for rendering ballistic missiles impotent and obsolete." (Aerospace, Spring 85, 2)
An accident at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) today damaged the Space Shuttle orbiter Discovery and injured a technician, forcing delay in the orbiter's next flight originally scheduled for March 29, the Washington Post reported. The accident occurred about 8 a.m. when the bucket of a "cherry picker" crane hovering over Discovery fell, hitting a Lockheed technician who was on a work platform and then striking Discovery, which was horizontal on the floor of the orbital processing facility. The 2,500-lb. bucket broke the technician's leg and injured his shoulder, then fell onto the closed left-hand cargo bay door, which was so thin and made of such light-weight material that it could not be opened on earth without elaborate supports to keep it in a fixed position. The bucket made two holes about three feet apart in the heat protection tiles insulating the door and damaged the door's structure. A NASA spokesman said an investigating board would determine the cause of the accident, extent of the damage, and impact on the flight schedule. Officials speculated that NASA would have to replace the 2,400-lb. door, which would require shipment of a new door from the manufacturer and as many as three or four days of work to complete installation. (W Post, Mar 9/ 85, A2)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center announced the launch at 6:01 a.m. DST today of a single-stage Orion sounding rocket from its Wallops Flight Facility to evaluate electrical fields and charged particles in earth's middle atmosphere. The Orion, about 16 feet long and 14 inches in diameter, carried the 90-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 52 statute miles, after which a Wallops Skyvan aircraft recovered the payload in mid-air. NASA launched the experiment from the Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR) in Alaska on April 12, 1985; however, snow cover hindered payload recovery. On August 26 a sheep hunting party found the payload and its parachute floating on Beaver Creek in the White Mountains, Alaska and returned it to the PFRR. Range officials on September 23 sent the payload to Wallops for refurbishment for today's launch. NASA tentatively scheduled for July 1986 another launch of the experiment in Sweden. (GSFC Release 85-29)
measure the dynamics of a vibrating beam in the zero-gravity environment (U.S. Air Force Academy);
NASA announced it had selected six industry teams for negotiations leading to 21-month fixed-price contracts for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements for a permanently manned space station. Four NASA centers previously did this work. The responsible centers and the industry teams selected for negotiations were: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) with Boeing Aerospace Co., Seattle, and Martin Marietta Aerospace, Denver; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) with RCA Astro Electronics, Princeton, New Jersey, and General Electric Co., Space Systems Division, Philadelphia; and Lewis Research Center (LeRC) with Rockwell Internatl., Rocketdyne Division, Canoga Park, California, and TRW Federal Systems Division, Redondo Beach, Calif. In addition, NASA would negotiate with Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., Sunnyvale, California; McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, California; and Rockwell Internatl., Space Station Systems Division, Downey California, the proposers for work to be performed under the management of Johnson Space Center (JSC). Negotiators would present a report to the NASA Administrator who would then award one or more contracts. Although negotiations would determine values of the contracts, the September 14, 1984, Request for Proposal (RFP) indicated that the approximate value of contracts could be $24 million at MSFC, $27 million at JSC, $10 million at GSFC, and $6 million at LeRC. In addition to Phase B work, NASA required the contractors to study how those elements of the space station would change depending on whether the station was man-tended rather than permanently manned and to pay particular attention to the recommendations of the NASA advanced technology advisory committee that was identifying automation and robotic technologies that could be used in the space station. Following completion of the contracts, NASA planned to move into final design and development (Phase C/D) of the space station. A major objective of the space station program was to involve international partners as builders, users, and operators of the space station. The European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan had indicated interest in participating. They would provide their own funding and award definition and preliminary design contracts in coordination with NASA activities. NASA, through JSC management, would retain responsibility for overall program definition and for systems engineering and integration throughout the program. (NASA Release 85-38)
Cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Viktor Savinykh, after completing a docking operation, boarded the Salyut 7 orbital station to discover cold and darkness, FBIS Moscow World Service in English reported. The electricity supply system had broken down, water was frozen, and a crust of ice covered the instrument panels. It took a week and a half of intensive work by the cosmonauts to eliminate the defects and restore electricity and life support systems. Mission planners sent an automatic cargo ferry that delivered instruments, fuel, water, and food supplies. After restoring the station, the crew continued with planned research. In a report on a Pravda article on the same topic, the Washington Post said the failure of two batteries had paralyzed the Salyut 7 station after the previous three-man crew mothballed the station in October 1984 following a record 238 days in orbit. A NY Times article noted Pravda mentioned the risky docking took 50 hours, during which the cosmonauts had to rely on visual clues instead of the automatic electronic radar pulses exchanged between the Salyut and their Soyuz T-13 spacecraft. "They've snatched it back from the brink of death," the NY Times quoted James Oberg, an American expert on the Soviet space program, saying. "It's a major coup." Later the cosmonauts made a five-hour space walk in which they replaced two of the ship's solar panels. The excursion gave them a chance to test new semirigid space suits, which were shown on Soviet TV. (FBIS Moscow World Service in English, Aug 5/85; W Post, Aug 6/85, A12; NYT, Aug 7/85, D19)
The U.S. Air Force awarded Martin Marietta Corp. an $87-million contract to begin production of the Low-Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared System for Night (LANTRIN), the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The award enabled Martin Marietta to buy specialized factory equipment to produce the first two of 700 navigation pods for LANTRIN, which consisted of navigation and targeting pods mounted on tactical aircraft and a head-up display in the cockpit. The Air Force scheduled production of the targeting pod for spring 1986. Production of the entire system, which would give tactical pilots a day/ night under weather navigation and weapon-delivery capability, would cost $3.16 billion for the 700 systems for use on F-15E, F-16, and A-10 aircraft. The remaining 698 systems would come under fiscal year options on the contract over the next eight years. The only system of its kind, LANTRIN had a terrain-following radar that scanned the horizon while keeping the pilot at a safe altitude, even in poor visibility. The navigation pod turned night into day by distinguishing the difference in temperature of the terrain below. The result was a daylight scene that appeared on the head-up display mounted in front of the pilot. The combination of infrared and radar allowed the pilot to fly safely at a few hundred feet above ground. The targeting pod also contained a laser designator for delivery of laser guided weapons and an automatic handoff capability to allow acquisition and delivery of Maverick missiles against tactical targets. (AFSC Newsreview, May 17/85, 7)
The first test of a U.S. antisatellite weapon against a physical target in space was delayed indefinitely because technical difficulties forced postponement of the target launching, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Air Force cancelled the launching from Wallops Island, Virginia, and sent the targets back to the manufacturer, Avco Systems, for repair. Until the cause of the problem was found, Air Force officials said they could not estimate when the test might be rescheduled. The NY Times reported John Pike, associate director of the Federation of American Scientists, as saying he was told by "usually reliable sources" that the technical problems centered on the radio that would signal the results of the target practice back to earth. The Air Force had conducted two of the test flights planned for the antisatellite weapon, but aimed at a point in space rather than a physical target. The Air Force had already for apparently technical reasons rescheduled several times in 1985 the latest test, in which the weapon would be fired at one of two six-foot-diameter target balloons in orbit. The antisatellite weapon was a two-stage rocket with a 13-inch, heat-sensing homing vehicle in its nose. Launched from beneath an F15 fighter, the rocket would intercept and destroy its target on impact. The U.S. House the previous week approved an amendment to the military programs bill banning tests of antisatellite weapons against targets in space as long as the USSR refrained from similar tests. The Senate voted to permit the testing as long as President Reagan certified that he was trying to negotiate a treaty prohibiting antisatellite weapons. A House-Senate conference committee was scheduled to begin reconciling differences on the military bill the following week. (WPost, July 4/85, A4; NYT, July 4/85, A9)
NASA announced it was discussing with representatives of the Chilean Government possible arrangements for landing support for the Space Shuttle in the event of an emergency during launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The discussions were consistent with arrangements made with other countries since 1981 supporting launches from Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning provided for emergency landing options for all phases of the flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. Since the first launch of the Space Shuttle from KSC, NASA had plans for each mission for trans-Atlantic landing sites (TAL) and contingency landing sites (CLS) in addition to the primary landing sites. This was consistent with relevant international agreements relating to the rescue and recovery of astronauts in distress and return of the space vehicle. Space Shuttle launches, scheduled to begin from Vandenberg in early 1986, required one or more trans-Pacific landing (TPL) and CLS sites in the Pacific Basin. NASA had determined that Mataveri Airfield on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) could serve as a Space Shuttle TPL/CLS in the event of an emergency. A Chilean contractor was working on preliminary designs for minor improvements at the airfield, which would be necessary in the event an agreement was reached. Improvements would be in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island. Any actual improvements were contingent on final agreement with the Government of Chile. (NASA Release 85-74)
NASA announced that, following launch of Atlas/Centaur 62 carrying the seventh Intelsat V payload, a significant leak occurred in the Centaur liquid oxygen (L02) tank during Atlas and Centaur separation, resulting in loss of L02 and precipitation of a series of anomalous events that compromised vehicle performance and caused loss of the mission. Centaur main engine start and steady-state operation began for the first burn sequence; however, the engines burned fuel rich as a result of an attempted correction of the L02 loss. Also, Centaur's first main engine cutoff had occurred approximately 11 seconds early, as a result of L02 mass loss (approximately 1483 lb.) through the tank opening. After first main engine cutoff, the leading L02 ullage gasses (HE and G02) created a disturbing force on the vehicle, causing it to tumble out of control during the ensuing coast period. During the coast period, the L02 tank pressure vented down to less than the hydrogen tank pressure at 1040 seconds, causing reversal and rupture of the intermediate bulkhead so that the two tank pressures were essentially the same throughout the remainder of the flight. Although 2nd Centaur engine start was achieved, the engines shut down after less than seven seconds of operation because of inadequate tank pressurization and subsequent engine cavitation. This made it impossible to achieve proper orbit, and NASA terminated the mission. Following the failure, NASA Headquarters initiated a Flight Review Board composed of representatives from the NASA centers, U.S. Air Force, and INTELSAT. During the investigation, NASA obtained special assistance from Physics International for analytical shock analysis of various blast-shield and tank-pressure configurations, General Dynamics/Ft. Worth Division for shaped charge firing tests and consultations, and Pratt & Whitney Aircraft for special engine testing to resolve L02 back flow anomaly and special postflight reconstructions. The investigation teams' findings indicated that the most probable cause of the failure was due to shock induced loads on the L02 tank at high tank pressures causing tank failure. Corrective actions taken to clear AC-63 for flight would include reduced tank pressures to prior levels, increase in the interstage adaptor to blast-shield gap, and a check for ambient flight pressure and leaks on each tank. (NASA MOR M-491-203-84-07 [postlaunch] Mar 8/85)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) selected Boeing Aerospace Operations, General Electric Co., Grumman Technical Service Inc., Hughes Aircraft Co., Messerschmidt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB)/Erno (the West German firm that produced Spacelab), and McDonnell Douglas Technical Services to serve as prime assessment teams to observe payload processing activities, the Spaceport News reported. KSC made the selection in connection with the initiation of a competitive procurement for a single payload ground operations contract (PCOC) during the Space Transportation System's operational period. NASA expected to request proposals from the companies near the end of 1985 or the beginning of 1986 and would award a contract during fall 1986. This contract along with those for shuttle processing and base operations were the last major contracts to streamline operations as the Space Transportation System matured. The PCOC contract would consolidate operations, minimize interfaces, and focus clear responsibility on a single payload contractor at KSC. Under the new arrangement, NASA would consolidate work then performed by four KSC contractors into a single contractor with prime responsibility for processing of payloads at KSC, primarily for the Space Shuttle. Other contract duties would include sustaining engineering, communications, instrumentation, and telemetry operations, and miscellaneous support. (Spaceport News, Sept 13/85, 1)
A C-5A aircraft carrying the German Spacelab D-1, the first payload in the history of U.S. manned spaceflight to be controlled from another country, landed May 1 at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) Space Shuttle runway, Spaceport News reported. The Federal German Aerospace Research Establishment's (DFVLR) German Space Operations Center in Oberpfaf-fenhofen near Munich would have responsibility for the 80 Spacelab D-1 (D for Deutschland) experiments. During the welcoming ceremony, (KSC) Director Dick Smith said, "We are looking forward to giving your payload 'tender loving care' and seeing it launched aboard the shuttle and getting it safely returned to you after the mission." Germany's Parliamentary State Secretary Albert Probst responded, "We are pleased to take part in this event and consider the joint ventures between the Federal Republic of Germany, Europe, and the U.S. in manned space flight to be a good example of international cooperation." Spacelab D-1, scheduled to fly on the seven-day Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia mission 61-A no earlier than October 16, consisted of a long Spacelab module containing the space sled and a unique support structure. Half of the D-1 experiments were from Germany, the remainder from the U.S. and European countries. Investigations included the vestibular sled, a device driven by an electromotor and traction rope, positioned in the center aisle of the Spacelab module, in which astronauts would serve as test subjects to collect information on human reactions to the equilibrium sensing system; the Biorack for botanical and medical/physiological experiments; the navigation experiment (NAVEX) to test systems performance of clock synchronization and one-way distance measurement; the materials experiment assembly (MEA) that would use Marshall Space Flight Center furnaces and alloy, fluid physics, and crystal growth investigations. The DFVLR, the result of a merger of three organizations and employing about 3,500 people in five research centers, would also participate in the European Retrieval Carrier (EURECA), a free-flying apparatus of experiments, and project "Columbus," internationally manned space station modules. (Spaceport News, May 10/85, 5)
NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft's (SCA) functional check flight was successfully flown today following engine repairs made in accordance with specifications. The SCA would fly the Atlantis orbiter to Kennedy Space Center on April 12, with one refueling stop. (NASA Daily Activities Report, Apr 11/85)
Observations by the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) revealed what appeared to be a variable gas cloud surrounding the star Beta Pictoris. This was the first evidence of gas around the star as well as the large dust particles previously observed from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) and ground-based telescopes, the JSC Roundup reported. Many astronomers considered Beta Pictoris, in the constellation Pictor in the southern hemisphere, a leading candidate for another planetary system. Dr. Yoji Kondo, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) IUE project scientist, and Dr. F.C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University jointly made the observations in December and said the coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation. "Many stars like Beta Pictoris show evidence of being surrounded by clouds of gas at ultraviolet wavelengths," said Kondo. "If such data imply that these stars also are surrounded by a protoplanetary gaseous cloud with a disk of dust particles, then many nearby stars may have evolving planetary systems. That's exciting," he concluded, "because these stars would offer a unique opportunity to see the way a solar system might appear in formation." Theories of planet formation had generally predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies, a theory strengthened by the IUE observations. (JSC Roundup, Jan 18/85, 3)
measure the response of the GAS Bridge to the Space Shuttle environment during liftoff, orbit, and landing (GSFC). RCA developed the IR-IE infrared camera, and during the mission payload specialist Rober Cenker would supervise its operation to acquire radiometric information that appeared within the field of view of the self-contained optical system. RCA hoped it might photograph storms, volcanic activity, or other natural occurrences. Middeck payloads would include the Comet Halley Active Monitoring Program (CHAMP) [see Astronomy, Dec. 17], Initial Blood Storage Experiment (IBSE), Protein Crystal Growth (PC 6), and three student experiments. IBSE, funded by Johnson Space Center and led by the Center for Blood Research, would study blood storage and sedimentation characteristics in microgravity. Rep. Bill Nelson would assist with an experiment sponsored by the University of Alabama, Marshall Space Flight Center, and the Comprehensive Cancer Center to try to grow crystal proteins in space for cancer research. There would be three Shuttle Student Involvement Project (SSIP) experiments on board Columbia. In the Measurement of Auxin Level and Starch Grains in Plant Roots experiment, bean plants would be grown and frozen in space. Researchers would analyze the plant roots after the flight for auxin location and concentration and correlation with statolith in the cells. The Air Injection as an Alternative To Honeycombing experiment would investigate the feasibility of producing a high stiffness, density ratio, low-weight casting with an internal framework. And the Study of Paper Fiber Formation in Microgravity experiment would further increase basic papermaking knowledge through a drainage study of paper fiber formation in microgravity and later comparison to this same formation on earth. NASA scheduled Columbia to land on the sixth day of the flight at KSC, the first landing there since mission 51-D on April 19, 1985. (NASA Release 85107; NASA FOR M-989-61-C [prelaunch] Dec 16/85; Spaceport News, Dec 6/85, 4; Goddard News, Dec 85, 1) Shuttle Orbiter
The Soyuz T-14 spacecraft carrying three Soviet cosmonauts made an unscheduled return to earth today because its commander, Vladimir Vasyutin, was ill and needed hospital treatment, the Washington Post quoted the official news agency Tass as saying. The illness forced the crew to leave the Salyut 7 orbiting laboratory, the first time in either the Soviet or U.S. programs that a spaceflight was curtailed because a crew member became sick in orbit, the Washington Times said. Vasyutin, who was making his first flight, landed after spending 65 days in space. He, Viktor Savinykh, and Alexander Volkov, who were both reported feeling well, had been conducting scientific experiments aboard Salyut 7. Tass gave no details of Vasyutin's illness, but western space experts said it was unlikely he was suffering from a simple case of space sickness—the inability to acclimatize properly to conditions in space. The Tass report quoted doctors who performed a preliminary examination on Vasyutin as saying his condition was satisfactory. The unscheduled return of the cosmonauts left the Salyut 7, which had been in orbit since April 1982, unmanned for the first time since June. Almost a week later, the Post reported that officials at Johnson Space Center said that cosmonauts who stayed in touch with U.S. astronauts had said Vasyutin caught a cold that grew worse and spread to his sinus cavity and lungs. The sources said Vasyutin had a fever that refused to break and may have come down with viral pneumonia, which was untreatable with the antibiotics the cosmonauts carried. (IV Post, Nov 22/85, A26, 27/85, A3; W Times, Nov 22/85, 2A)
The Space Shuttle Enterprise arrived the afternoon of November 18 at Washington Dulles International Airport after a two-hour delay due to inclement weather, the Washington Post reported. NASA had announced earlier that it would transfer title to Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum [see Smithsonian Institution, Nov. 8], NASA delayed Enterprise's takeoff from Kennedy Space Center until an early morning fog burned off so more people along the route could see the craft. Enterprise, atop a Boeing 747, was visible to onlookers in Annapolis and Baltimore before it began a counterclockwise circuit over Washington's Capital Beltway. Officials at Dulles would store the spacecraft in a temporary shed about two miles from the airport terminal until a permanent facility was constructed. (IVPost, Nov 19/85, Bl) SPACE SCIENCE AND APPLICATIONS
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
The 16th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 11-16 at Johnson Space Center (JSC), would highlight exploration programs planned by the U.S. and the USSR, including a discussion of major trends in space science and the possible role of the space station in planetary exploration, JSC announced. Speakers at the special session would include Dr. Geoffrey Briggs, director of the Solar System Exploration Division, NASA Headquarters; Dr. V. L. Barsukov, Vernadsky Institute of Sciences; Dr. Eugene Levey, chairman of the Planetary Sciences Department, University of Arizona; and Dr. Ronald Greely, a planetary scientist from Arizona State University. Other sessions of major significance would be the Florensky Memorial Symposium on Venus, possibly including results from the Soviet Venusian probes, and the Shergotty Consortium, focusing on the debate concerning meteorites that may have originated from Mars's surface. Planners had scheduled 27 regular session with 315 oral presentations taken from 497 abstracts published in the official conference proceedings. (JSC Release 85-11)
Society Expeditions, which specialized in offering exotic vacations, announced at an October 29 press conference that on November 15 it would begin taking reservations for regularly scheduled spaceflights, the Washington Times reported. Society Expeditions scheduled its first flight for October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's discovery of the new world. A flight would cost $50,000, and there would be a $2000 charge for a three-day orientation. T.C. Swartz, president of Society Expeditions, said more than 3,500	people had already expressed interest in traveling in space and 350 had signed letters of intent and deposited $5,000 to confirm space on the rocket. He explained that his company signed a five-year $280 million contract to charter the first two commercial reusable spaceships built by Pacific American Launch Systems. Pacific American's president Gary Hudson said it would cost more than $200 million to develop and build a 57-foot long rocket and that each launch should cost about $1 million. A flight on Pacific American's PHOENIX E, a rocket powered launch and landing vehicle, would begin somewhere in northern California, circle the earth five to eight times, and return to the launch area. Before certification for commercial use, PHOENIX E would undergo at least 50 test flights and face vigorous examination by the Department of Transportation, Hudson said. Asked if he would be on one of the test flights, Hudson said, "We think it's the ethical responsibility of the designers to go up before the public. But we won't be on the first flight. That's why there's test pilots." (W Times, Oct 30/85, 1B)
During a news conference today at Johnson Space Center, Space Shuttle mission 51—F commander Gordon Fullerton said the Challenger's crew members could not endorse either the Coca-Cola or Fepsi-Cola they carried into space for the first time, the Washington Post reported. Both drinks were warm, fizzy, and full of froth whenever the crew tried to drink them. "They both failed miserably, mainly because we had no refrigerator. Warm cola is not on anybody's favorite list of things . . . They just weren't at the right temperature and we had no desire to drain the cans the two drinks came in," Fullerton said. He added that, although the crew suffered no gastric distress from drinking the two colas, "I just can't extrapolate to any great desire to want them." When reporters asked the seven crew members if they would forsake the fruit juices they usually drank for the colas if the colas were refrigerated, they all shook their heads. "The drinks we have on board now are quite attractive," said astronaut Anthony England. (W Times, Aug 15/85, A8)
NASA Administrator James Beggs criticized the Air Force and NOAA for plans to launch some satellites aboard surplus Titan II missiles rather than using the Space Shuttle, saying it would cost NASA $500 million, the Washington Post reported. "You know the old syndrome," he said, "if it wasn't invented here [at the Air Force] it can't be all that good ... I don't like it. It is not good for our short-term future and makes it that much more difficult for us to get on an even footing in the next five years." The controversy had begun with an Air Force decision to refurbish and redevelop obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch up to 12 Air Force satellites that NASA had assumed would be flying on the Space Shuttle. When NOAA heard of the Air Force decision, its acting administrator, Anthony Calio (a former NASA official), had contacted the Air Force about launching over the next seven years three advanced weather satellites, called Metsats, into polar orbit. When questioned, Calio had said the Air Force offered a deal that would save NOAA $90 million—it would cost $100 million to redesign the Metsats to fly on the Space Shuttle and $105 million in launch fees versus an Air Force charge of $115 million for the three Titan II launches, resulting in a net saving of $90 million. "This agency has a budget of $1 billion a year so we're talking about 10% of our annual budget. This is strictly a business deal," Calio concluded. Beggs responded that he always assumed the Air Force and NOAA would use the Space Shuttle, although they had not signed a formal agreement. He said he did not believe NOAA would save that much and that the Air Force would bear the refurbishment cost to redevelop the Titan II, estimated by Beggs at $100 million. "I believe what we're talking here is a savings to NOAA and a net loss to the U.S. Treasury," Beggs said. "I think this whole scheme should be looked at very carefully by the administration and by Congress." And he mentioned his concern that the Air Force plan could set a dangerous precedent. (W Post, Feb 25/85, A1)
The U.S. Air Force's Electronic Systems Div. awarded Grumman Corp. a $657 million contract to build the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (JSTARS), an airborne radar system for spotting tanks, personnel carriers, or any other enemy vehicle moving or standing still, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. A C-18, a militarized version of Boeing's 707, would serve as the radar's airborne development platform. The JSTAR would include radar equipment and operations and control displays as well as communications links to ground terminals and weapons systems. Under the fixed-price incentive contract, a Grumman team including Boeing Military Airplane Co. and United Technologies Corp.'s Norden Systems Div. would design, build, and test two full-scale<levelopment airborne radar systems. The Air Force and Army would test the JSTARS ability to detect, locate, and track enemy ground vehicles and to help ground commanders plan attacks to destroy them. The Air Force expected field testing to begin in March 1990. Col. Harry Gillogly, JSTARS program manager, said the airborne systems would provide "an electronic high ground to observe maneuvering enemy forces," telling Air Force and Army commanders what forces to apply where and when in order to inflict the most damage at the least cost. "Both services will be able to attack key targets," Gillogly said, "the Air Force with direct-attack aircraft and missiles, and the Army with artillery, maneuver forces, and ground-launched missiles." (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 1/ 85, 1) National Space Commission
NASA announced an award of a $400,000 contract to North American Aircraft Operations of Rockwell Internatl. Corp. for preliminary design of a pivoting wing for a supersonic aircraft. The contract covered Phase B of a joint NASA/Navy program to design, develop, and flight test an aeroelastically tailored, pivoting-oblique wing for transonic and supersonic flight evaluation. It was part of a four-phase procurement program to modify the NASA Ames-Dryden F-8 fly-by-wire research aircraft to a supersonic oblique-wing configuration. For takeoff and landing, the pivoting wing was set in the conventional aircraft flight position. For faster flight speeds, the wing pivoted so that one side was swept forward and the other side swept aft, forming an oblique angle with the aircraft's fuselage. In the oblique wing configuration, an aircraft in high-speed flight encountered less air resistance. The contract covered preliminary design of the oblique wing, its pivot assembly, and flight control program for the F-8's computers. The company would also define the aircraft's flight envelope and assess the operational capabilities of oblique wings for potential naval applications. A follow-on contract phase would provide detailed design, fabrication, ground testing, and flight support for a 12-month flight test program of approximately 40 flights. (NASA Release 85-152)
NASA announced that, effective October 13, Carroll Dicus, Jr. was appointed chairman of the NASA Board of Contract Appeals and chairman of the Inventions and Contributions Board, succeeding Frederick Lees who retired in September. From 1968 to 1974 Dicus was an attorney in the chief counsel's office at Goddard Space Flight Center and from March 1974 to October 1980 an administrative judge on the NASA Board of Contract Appeals. He then went to the U.S. Postal Service where he was an associate judicial officer and vice chairman of the Board of Contract Appeals. Dicus is a graduate of Johns Hopkins University and the University of Baltimore Law School. (NASA anno., Oct 85)
The EC-18B advanced-range instrumentation aircraft (ARIA), the first of four former 707 commercial aircraft modified by Aeronautical Systems Division's (ASD) 4950th Test Wing, rolled out on January 4, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. To augment ARI Amission capabilities, ASD had purchased the Boeing 707-320 aircraft from American Airlines in 1982 as replacements for four of the seven Boeing EC-135s in the current ARIA fleet. The aircraft would provide worldwide missile- and space-testing support by serving as airborne tracking stations over land where geographical constraints limited ground-tracking stations and over broad ocean areas where no tracking stations existed. The EC-18B's ARIA fleet improvements included more room for mission equipment, increased fuel capacity, and more fuel-efficient engines. Modification of the 707s had offered major cost savings over purchase of new aircraft; program costs for the four aircraft were $25 million—$6 million for aircraft purchase and $19 million for ARIA conversion. At the time of purchase, Boeing officials had estimated new aircraft would cost $25 million each, not including ARIA-conversion costs. The most obvious external modification was the large bulbous nose—a 9 ft. radome housing the world's largest airborne-steerable antenna, a 7 ft. dish for telemetry reception. The nose also housed a smaller weather antenna. Other additions included a smaller radome for communications on the aircraft top and wingtip-probe antennas for high-frequency radio transmission and reception. ASD also outfitted the aircraft with a navigation station, mission-critical cockpit avionics, a modified electrical system, and an improved environmental-control system. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb 8/85, 6)
NASA announced its National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), through its Earth Resources Laboratory, signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Anthropology Department of the University of Colorado at Boulder to use satellite imaging and remote sensing technology to probe the tropical Andean jungles for archaelogical remains in Peru's Rio Abiseo National Park. Of particular interest in the park were the ancient site of Gran Patajen, the subtropical cloud forest, and the park's diverse ecology. Using sophisticated instrumentation that would allow researchers to "see" through the dense vegetation to locate evidence of past settlements in the now uninhabited region, researchers would combine data from the Landsat earth resources satellite with information gathered by a specially equipped aircraft from NSTL. The researchers might also observe and map interesting geographical features and variations in vegetation. Thomas Lennon, co-director of the university's Rio Abiseo National Park Research Project, said of the undertaking, "NASA's assistance will enable us to take a good look at the 1,060-sq-mile park from above—immensely easier than trekking through the jungle on foot. When cultural resources are identified through image analysis, we'll be able to check it out on the ground. This approach allows us to make the best use of the limited researchers as well as the time we'll have in the field." The university, NASA, and a remote sensing team at Peru's National Agrarian University in Lima would work together to extract information from various sensing devices. An early outcome of the project should be accurate up-to-date maps of the uncharted parkland. The project was one of three archaeological research investigations supported by NASA's remote sensing program administered by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. In another project with the University of Colorado, NASA was examining volcanic destruction of cities and vegetation in Costa Rica. In the third project, NASA was supporting Richard Leakey of the Leaky Foundation who was searching for evidence of human evolution in Kenya, Africa. NASA's work on the projects resulted from its interest in expanding the scientific applications of space technology, in these cases to archaeology and anthropology, which could benefit from advancements in remote sensing technology. (NASA Release 85-73)
The first test of a Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) component on June 19 ended in failure when crew members of the Space Shuttle Discovery found themselves 180° out of position to receive an Air Force signal beamed at them from Maui, Hawaii; another beam of laser light was sent on June 21 from the same spot, and it successfully bounced off a reflecting mirror on Discovery, which was flying at 17,500 miles per hour and 230 miles high, the Washington Post reported. It was not clear why Discovery was out of position for the first attempt or why the crew had not realized it in time to correct it. Flight directors at Johnson Space Center took the blame for what the newspaper called easily one of the worst navigating mistakes in more than 20 years of American manned space flight. After the successful attempt, the Air Force noted the test was not intended to solve any of the most difficult problems of setting up an SDI defense system, nor was it the first laser tracking test. Air Force Lt. Col. Thomas Meyer, manager of the laser test program, said the experiment was more a test to see how the atmosphere distorted the laser beam than a test of the beam's ability to track the Space Shuttle, as atmospheric distortion could limit the usefulness of ground-based lasers against targets in space. In the June 21 attempt, the laser beam "painted" a blue-green light on the nose of Discovery for at least two-and-one-half minutes, three times longer than the minimum time set by the Air Force. So tight and steady was the beam that it never wavered from the nose of orbiter, which measured 110 feet from nose to tail. "We were able to pulse the beam and change the size of the beam from a fine point a quarter of an inch across to a beam 30 feet across at the point where it tracked the shuttle," Meyer said. "We did everything we wanted to do." Discovery's crew observed from the port windows the beam shining on them, which they could do without danger to their eyes due to the low power output of the four-watt beacon. "We demonstrated today that we can track a fast-moving target with a laser on the ground," Meyer said. "Our next step is to perform the same kind of test with rockets fired to an altitude of 260 miles to see if ground-based lasers can stay with them all the way to altitude." A far more difficult and important goal than tracking objects with lasers was the Pentagon's plan to develop more powerful lasers as weapons. The Defense Department would test a 2-million-watt laser soon at White Sands Missile Range, and it was building a 5-million-watt laser. (W Post, June 20/85, A3, June 22/85, A3)
NASA announced that a cubic crystal art work, the first nonscientific payload to fly aboard a Space Shuttle, would go into space in the spring of 1986. "The Boundless Aperture," created by artist Lowry Burgess, was one in a series of seven works in a project entitled "Quiet Axis," intended to express through art the scientific observation of order and harmony in the universe. The De Cordova Museum, the New Works Program of the Massachusetts Council on the Arts and Humanities, and the Massachusetts Artists Foundation funded and would pay for launch of "The Boundless Aperture," which was a six-lb. five-inch sq. cube of bronze-tinted transparent glass. The cube contained such materials as water from 18 of the world's rivers and minute amounts, or an appropriate substitute, of each of the elements in the periodic table. After flying in a middeck locker of the Space Shuttle orbiter, the work would be placed inside a petrified sycamore tree obtained from the Grand Canyon; and both would hover in a permanent magnetic field inside a rock formation on the grounds of the De Cordova Museum. Burgess was a professor at the Massachusetts College of Art in Boston and was director of its graduate program in fine arts and design. He was also a fellow and senior consultant at the Center for Advanced Visual Studies of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA would determine the final cost of flying the work when it arrived at Kennedy Space Center. (NASA Release 85-175)
The Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A landed at 9:44 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported, before an estimated audience of 9,000. "The bird fspace flight, said at a post-landing news conference. "The brakes look like it's in good shape," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator good coming in and we are very, very pleased with the results of the nosewheel steering test." During the landing, Challenger commander Henry Hartsfield tested a new steering mechanism built to reduce tire and brake damage that had occurred during several Space Shuttle landings. An orbiter had not landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) since the previous April, when both main landing gears collapsed and one tire blew out. The test called for Hartsfield to engage the new steering mechanism seconds after the nosewheel touched down on the runway so he could steer Challenger 20 feet off course and then bring it back to the centerline. One more successful test later in the year would clear orbiters to resume landing in December at KSC. Officials in West Germany, which paid NASA $64 million to fly Spacelab D-1 on Challenger, called the mission "highly successful" and predicted that 90 to 95% of all the science studies would be completed. Earlier, a West German official at the science control center near Munich said only one study, a heat diffusion test on a sample of salt, would be unfinished by the time Challenger returned to earth. Crew members Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, Col. Guion Bluford Jr., Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid, Dr. Reinhard Furrer, and Dr. Wubbo Ockels did not attend a postflight press conference, the Washington Post reported, but traveled to Dryden Flight Research Center where researchers would run tests on them to determine how well they readapted to gravity after a week in weightlessness. Later the five would go to Kennedy Space Center for more elaborate tests. The European Space Agency (ESA) announced after the flight that it was particularly satisfied with results from Spacelab D-1, on which ESA had 38% of the payload in terms of critical resources (mass, energy, and crew time). All ESA facilities on Spacelab D-1—the Space Sled, for studies of man's behavior under microgravity conditions; the Biorack, a multi-purpose facility for biological investigations of microgravity and cosmic radiation effects on life forms; and the Fluid Physics Module, for studies of basic fluid phenomena in space—performed perfectly with no operational or technical failures. (NASA FOR M-989-61-A [postflight] Nov 8/85; NYT, Nov 7/85, A21; W Post, Nov 6/85, A4; ESA release Nov 11/85)
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers announced today the 10 finalists in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. The finalists would travel July 7 to Johnson Space Center for medical examinations and initial spaceflight suitability testing. The NASA Spaceflight Participant Committee would then interview the teachers in Washington, D.C., submitting results of the examinations and interviews to NASA Administrator James Beggs who would select the primary and backup candidate. NASA had tentatively scheduled the teacher for a January 1986 Space Shuttle flight. Finalists were Kathleen Beres, Kenwood High School, Baltimore, Maryland; Robert Foerster, Cumberland Elementary School, West Lafayette, Indiana; Judith Garcia, Thomas Jefferson School for Science and Technology, Alexandria, Virginia; Peggy Lathlaen, Westwood Elementary School, Friendswood, Texas; David Marquart, Boise High School, Boise, Idaho; Sharon Christa McAuliffe, Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire; Michael Metcalf, Hazen Union School, Hardwick, Vermont; Richard Methia, New Bedford High School, New Bedford, Massachusetts; Barbara Morgan, McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho; and Niki Wenger, Ven-dervender Junior High School, Parkersburg, West Virginia. (NASA Release 85-99)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)
NASA announced that John O'Brien, currently NASA deputy general counsel, was appointed effective August 4 NASA general counsel, succeeding S. Neil Hosenball who was retiring. O'Brien began his career in 1962 with NASA at the Launch Operations Center, later Kennedy Space Center (KSC), during the Mercury Program. He then served as chief counsel of the KSC and assistant general counsel for procurement matters at NASA Headquarters. He received an A.B. degree from Niagara University and his J.D. degree from Georgetown University. After joining NASA, O'Brien was designated a Princeton Fellow in Public Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, and in 1976 received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Release 85-108)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) engineers and technicians recently practiced the exact technique that would be used to fuel the Galileo spacecraft, simulating the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) environment where the spacecraft would actually be fueled, the JPL Universe reported. This was necessary because Galileo's propulsion system, designed and built by West Germany and unlike previous JPL spacecraft in which the propulsion system was a separate module, would be sandwiched in between the bus and the despun section of the spacecraft. This would require fueling when Galileo was fully assembled, and any resulting problems could jeopardize the sensitive cargo. "This four-day exercise is basically an 'undress rehearsal'," Hank Delgado, propulsion and pyro devices group leader, said. "We want to acquaint everyone with the procedures and equipment we plan to use to fuel Galileo." Instead of using the actual propellants—mono-methylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide—that Galileo would use, the team practiced with less hazardous fluids—isopropyl alcohol and freon—allowing them to work without special suits. When Galileo was fueled at KSC, technicians would wear 55-lb. SCAPE (self-contained atmospheric protective ensemble) suits to protect them from the highly toxic propellants. Although the suits had an air supply and thermal control system, the limited air supply allowed only about an hour of work, requiring technicians to work in shifts. JPL would send Galileo to KSC early in 1986 for final launch preparations. Technicians would then fuel the spacecraft, taking a day for each of its four tanks. For the following four months, the technicians would monitor the propellant closely for leaks or changes in temperature. (JPL Universe, Sept 6/ 85, 1)
A Titan 34-D booster carrying a classified payload, possibly a reconnaissance satellite, exploded August 28 minutes after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Because of the classified payload, the Air Force revealed little information about the launch. Booster rockets typically carried an internal destruct package that ground controllers could activate in the event of a malfunction. The explosion and subsequent crash of the booster started a 20-acre brush fire near the launch pad. An Air Force spokesman said it took firefighters more than five hours to extinguish the blaze. The Air Force was conducting an investigation to determine the cause of the booster failure. (NYT, Aug 31/85, A14)
Vice President George Bush announced that Sharon Christa McAuliffe would be the teacher to go into space in January 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. McAuliffe, a social studies teacher at Concord High School, Concord, New Hampshire, was the finalist in the NASA Teacher in Space Program that was announced by President Reagan in August 1984. Her backup was Barbara Morgan of McCall-Donnelly Elementary School, McCall, Idaho. McAuliffe proposed that, while in space, she would gather information for a personal journal, "just as the pioneer travelers of the Conestoga wagon days kept personal journals. My journal would be a trilogy. I would like to begin it at the point of selection through the training program. The second part would cover the actual flight. Part three would cover my thoughts and reactions after my return," McAuliffe said. Vice President Bush, in his announcement of the selection at a White House ceremony in the Roosevelt Room, where McAuliffe was accompanied by the other nine finalists selected from among 11,416 applicants, said, "We're here today to announce the first private citizen passenger in the history of spaceflight . . . We're honoring all [the teacher applicants] today, and we're doing something else because the finalists here with me and the more than a hundred semifinalists will all in the months ahead serve as a link between NASA and the nation's school system." McAuliffe, a teacher of 15 years and the mother of two children, would work a year for NASA. She and Morgan would report in September to Johnson Space Center for 114 hours of training over four months. The Washington Post reported that a top NASA official said McAuliffe was an early favorite of the 20-member selection panel. The official said "the judges thought McAuliffe appeared to be a good team player and—vital to her image-making duties—stood out as a good communicator," the Post reported. (NASA Release 85-107; Admin of Ronald Reagan, July 19/85, 913; W Post, July 22/85, A1)
NASA announced that the governments of Chile and the U.S. signed agreements concerning use of Mataveri Airport on Isla de Pascua (Easter Island) as an emergency landing site for the Space Shuttle. The intergovernmental agreements provided the basis for contingency planning for launches of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base beginning in March 1986. This planning was consistent with arrangements already in place to support launches from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Space Shuttle operational planning had to provide for emergency landing options for all phases of a flight to protect the lives of the crew and the integrity of the space vehicle. The Vandenberg launches would also have a requirement (analogous to those from KSC) for one or more trans-Pacific landing sites in the Pacific Basin. Although the probability of a contingency Space Shuttle landing was extremely remote, identification and preparation of suitable contingency landing sites was consistent with prudent operational planning. A Chilean contractor had prepared designs, in accordance with existing land use statutes and regulations on the island, for improvements at the air field that were necessary to support a Space Shuttle landing. These improvements included an extension of the existing runway and associated lighting system, construction of a storage building, and enhancement of certain permanent and temporary navigation equipment in the area. The modifications would not affect the historical treasures for which Isla de Pascua was known. As part of the agreement, the two countries would undertake enhancement of the existing program of scientific cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes, thereby building upon a long and successful relationship of technical cooperation in this arena. (NASA Release 85117)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that a December 1985 experiment, EASE or the experimental assembly of structures in EVA (extravehicular activity), aboard Space Shuttle flight 61-C would provide information about humans working in space. In the experiment, two crew members would move six aluminum beams, each 12 feet long and four inches in diameter, into space from the Space Shuttle payload bay and assemble them into a tetrahedron shape and then disassemble them. This experiment would demonstrate human ability to build strong, practical structures in space. During the experiment videotape and still photographs would record crew member movements to link beams by special connectors at the beam tips. This building approach was a technique in the Large Space Structures program called an "erectible" method, as opposed to a "deployable" method that would not be demonstrated until 1986 or 1987 when NASA would orbit a structural-assembly demonstration experiment. MSFC had conducted tests similar to EASE in its neutral buoyancy simulator, a million-gallon water tank that gave a sense of weightlessness to submerged people working in space suits. Researchers would compare assembly and disassembly times recorded in the space test with results found in the neutral buoyancy tank. However, MSFC's Ed Valentine, experiment manager, noted, "We'd like to be able to measure a human's productivity in space scientifically, and we're not really sure if time measurements are all that are needed to guage that, so we'll be examining other possible criteria to use in the future." A Langley Research Center structural assembly experiment would accompany the MSFC experiment. (MSFC Release 85-3) During April: NASA announced it awarded to Howard University's School of Engineering Large Space Structure Institute (LSSI), Washington, D.C., an ongoing grant expected to total $1.9 million to develop theoretical knowledge supporting the design and construction of very large space systems. NASA expected the knowledge to make a significant contribution to the establishment of large space stations and space settlements. The LSSI research project would help demonstrate the practical benefits of U.S. space capabilities, including construction of a solar power satellite that would convert the sun's energy into electricity for transmission back to earth and construction of large platforms that would allow scientists to observe the earth for improved understanding of the weather and the ground water table. The LSSI team would consist of Dr. Taft Broome, chief project investigator and chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, and other Howard University faculty members; and one faculty member each from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge University, and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Graduate students from the latter institutions would also participate. NASA was primarily interested in LSSI doing the concept development and the research and demonstration analysis. Once Broome and his team provided the agency with the needed data, NASA could turn the project over to private industry for implementation. (NASA Activities, Apr 85, 8) Launch Vehicles
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced a NASA source selection board was evaluating proposals from the industry teams of Boeing Aerospace Co. and Wornick Corp.; General Electric, Northrop, and Integrated Systems Analysts; and Hamilton Standard, ILC, and RCA for a single Flight Equipment Processing contract (FEPC) that would consolidate work being done by 15 firms. NASA planned by the end of October to award an initial three-year contract with a two-year priced option extension. The contract would be cost-plus-award-fee for the first six months; cost-plus-incentive-fee, plus an award fee, for the remainder of the term. Estimated contract value at the end of 15 years was $300 million. The contract would cover processing Space Shuttle flight crew equipment, including operation and maintenance of associated ground systems, primarily at JSC. The winning contractor would be responsible for space suit maintenance and testing before and after flights; failure analysis and repair of spaceship galleys; operation of the space food production facility; preparation and delivery of food for each mission; medications and equipment for medical kits; clothing, personal hygiene and flight kits; tools; radio and TV support; and all film and cameras. The award would be the second large consolidation contract let in 1985 at JSC; on September 12 Rockwell International won the Space Transportation System Operations Contract to consolidate JSC Space Shuttle operations. (JSC Release 85-038)
Christa McAuliffe, first teacher as well as private citizen to fly onboard the Space Shuttle, and backup Barbara Morgan arrived September 9 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) to begin their training program, the JSC Roundup reported. Reporters, photographers, and TV crews accompanied the two as they arrived at building 100 to receive their identification badges. Mission commander Francis "Dick" Scobee that afternoon welcomed McAuliffe and Morgan at a meeting with the crew of mission 51 -L, scheduled for launch in January 1986. Other 51 —L crew members were pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, and Judith Resnik. JSC personnel the next day measured them for flight suits, helmets, and G-suits. McAuliffe said she would be allowed to select either a jumpsuit or a standard flight suit to take home with her following her flight. After a food tasting and rating session, in which food lab manager Dr. Charles Bourland asked McAuliffe and Morgan to taste about 40 food and drink items and rate them on a scale of 1 to 9, both teachers commented on their surprise in finding space food so flavorful. They would have several more opportunities for taste tests before McAuliffe selected her flight menu. Other first-week activities included orientation briefings by management and training officials and familiarization tours of training facilities and mission control. Asked by a reporter how drastically her life had changed since her selection, McAuliffe said that other than having the opportunity to fly onboard the Space Shuttle and the accompanying publicity she didn't perceive that much difference. She pointed out that as a teacher for a long time she had to gather material and present information to students daily. "As I see it, I'm doing basically the same things, only my audience has changed." (JSC Roundup, Sept. 27/85, 7)
Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Spacelab Payload Project Office said today that the Spacelab 2 payload was declared "ready for installation" into the orbiter Challenger, the Marshall Star reported. Spacelab 2 would be the second of two Spacelab missions designed to demonstrate the performance of hardware received from the European Space Agency (ESA). The Spacelab 1 mission verified the majority of Spacelab systems including the habitable module, tunnel, scientific airlock, and pallets. For the second verification mission, Spacelab would not use a habitable module but only a pallet configuration. The crew would operate experiments from Challenger's aft flight deck. Spacelab 2 consisted of a pressurized igloo approximately the size of a five-gallon oil drum and three pallets, two of which joined to form the train needed to support several experiments. Also new on the mission was the instrument pointing system for pointing four of the onboard solar experiments. Spacelab would carry 13 experiments in 7 scientific disciplines. Primary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the performance of the igloo, the two-pallet train, and the instrument pointing system. John Thomas, manager of the MSFC Spacelab Program Office, said NASA had removed Spacelab 3 hardware from Challenger's cargo bay and was reconfiguring the bay for Spacelab 2. "We expect to begin installation of the Spacelab 2 payload on June 3," he noted. The last major test for the hardware before July 12 scheduled launch would be an end-to-end test planned for June 10, in which NASA would test all systems connecting Challenger, Spacelab 2, and the MSFC-operated payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center. Thomas said the other primary effort was to complete training of the payload team. (Marshall Star, May 29/85, 1)
NASA announced that effective January 24, Dr. Dale Compton became deputy director of Ames Research Center (ARC), where he had been director for engineering and computer systems since February 1983. Compton joined NASA in June 1957, serving as deputy director of astronautics, then chief of the space science division and manager of the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS). Recipient of the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal, Compton earned a B.S. degree in 1957 and an M.S. degree in 1958, both in aeronautical engineering, and a Ph.D. degree in aeronautical and astronautical engineering in 1969. (NASA Release 85-17; NASA anno., Feb 2/ 85) During February. Ames Research Center (ARC) announced it had formed the information sciences office to do basic and applied research in artificial intelligence (Al), automation sciences, and space-related computer science technology, with emphasis on applications to the NASA space station. NASA had designated ARC as the lead center in Al research, and the new office's research would cover Al programming languages, expert-systems development, knowledge representation and information understanding, machine vision and learning, sensor fusion, and optical processing. Space-related computer-science research would focus on symbolic-processing and data-flow architectures; network design, protocols, and simulation; and optical read/write information-storage technology. ARC would combine in-house studies, primarily on applied research and development of flight experiments to validate and demonstrate the technologies being developed, with the work of outside research organizations, such as SRI International, Symbolics Inc., Innovative Optics, Inc., Stanford University, University of California at Berkeley, MIT, University of Texas, and University of Michigan, on basic research issues to accomplish project objectives. ARC would orient research toward the user community, particularly other NASA centers, focusing on both technology development for user applications and help to users during implementation. Space station automation would be the primary application, and ARC had signed agreements with Johnson Space Center and Goddard Space Flight Center to work together on this implementation. ARC would also advise on space station automation through participation on NASA advisory groups such as the space station automation study team, space station automation and robotics panel, advanced-technology automation committee, and NASA headquarters space station data systems steering committee. (ARC Release 85-6)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced today that the Space Shuttle Atlantis would take off October 3 on its maiden voyage to carry a secret payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. On board Atlantis, the fourth and final Space Shuttle in NASA's fleet, would be commander Karol Bobko, pilot Ronald Grabe, mission specialists David Hilmers and Robert Stewart, and payload specialist Air Force Maj. William Pailes. Pailes, who has a master's degree in computer science and is an accomplished pilot, would be on board to tend the classified cargo. (WPost, Sept 6/ 85, A12)
A B-52 equipped with the Navstar global positioning system (GPS) flew a mission over the North Pole to prove the space-based radio navigation system's ability to navigate a polar mission, the Air Force System Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. The mission marked first time a preproduction Navstar GPS was used on a polar mission. The flight also tested the system's high-latitude navigation and compatibility with the aircraft's inertial navigation system (INS). Navstar GPS, when completed in the late 1980s, would use 18 GPS satellites in six orbital planes to give worldwide, three-dimensional position and velocity information to U.S. and allied land, sea, and airforces. To determine the position of an aircraft such as the 8-52, an onboard receiver would pick up signals from at least four satellites and measure the time it took each signal to travel from the satellite. The Navstar GPS on the B-52 aligned the inertial navigation system, giving the crew constant navigation during the 13-hour mission despite the GPS being available only three hours. The GPS and INS kept track of the aircraft's position at all times, even when crossing lines of longitude faster than the onboard screen could update them. Although testing of the Navstar GPS using the B-52 was almost complete, production integration was just beginning. The production phase of Navstar GPS required bringing the three segments—space, user, and control—to full operational capability. The Air Force expected two-dimensional capability in 1987, three-dimensional capability in 1988. (AFSC Newsreview, June 28/85,
Brig. Gen. Donald Kutyna, director of Air Force space systems and C\ told the Senate Armed Services Committee the previous week that two-thirds of the FY 86 space budget was earmarked for the military, Defense Daily reported. The Air Force would receive about 48% of the national space budget, NASA 33%, and other Defense Department activities (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency [DARPA], Navy, and Army) the remaining 18%. Kutyna added that Air Force space activities represented about three-quarters of the total Defense Department space program, with the Defense agencies, mainly DARPA, coming in second. He noted the Air Force budget for FY 86 was $10.95 billion, with "no change percentage-wise" from FY 85 and "very little change among the elements." Maj. Gen. Carl Beer, deputy chief of staff for plans for the Air Force Space Command, reported to the same committee approval of the Air Force space plan, which was divided into support and operational missions, including the launch, orbit transfer, and on-orbit control of spacecraft and payloads, and the operations necessary "to secure free passage in space and deny the enemy the use of space" when necessary. Beer confirmed that the requirement for a space-based radar system was established for the Air Force and Navy and the two would meet in the near future to get an R&D program underway. (D/D, Mar 25/85, 129)
NASA announced that researchers at its Langley Research Center (LaRC) were developing use of pyrotechnic-activated emergency exit systems that might save lives in an emergency situation aboard commercial transport aircraft. Although pyrotechnic components aboard commercial aircraft might seem dangerous, Laurence Bement, an aerospace technologist specializing in pyrotechnic-activated aircraft escape systems, pointed out that military aircraft had used such escape systems for more than 20 years and NASA had used them in their manned spaceflight programs as far back as Project Mercury in the 1960s. The emergency egress system he proposed would be more reliable and more effective in aiding the rapid evacuation of airplanes and more cost-effective than existing mechanical and electrical systems. "What we have done is take the best materials and applications from years of pyrotechnic usage and tried to assemble the best escape system, using our past experiences," Bement said. One U.S. Air Force system, the emergency life-saving instant exit, used pyrotechnic chargers to sever a panel inside the aircraft door. Another, the NASA general aviation egress opening system, created by an explosion an opening in the fuselage without modifying the airframe structure. The pyrotechnic-activated escape systems on U.S. armed forces planes had already saved approximately $10 million by avoiding component replacement costs. However, they added weight and complexity to the aircraft and do not increase the structural efficiency of the airframe. To improve existing systems, Bement studied the possibility of replacing fuselage skin sections with an explosively severed, composite material panel. Researchers had tested graphite/epoxy and fiberglass composite panels, demonstrating that the graphite/epoxy was the better material. Not only was the graph ite/epoxy easier to sever than the original fuselage material, but the composite panel was much lighter and more crashworthy. Once activated, the explosive material severed the panel from the fuselage and jettisoned the panel outward. No debris was projected inward and no sound or over-pressure hazard existed inside the aircraft. The composite system was more reliable than existing mechanical and electrical systems and would require less maintenance, since the system was expected to last at least 15 years. Bolts would hold the composite panel to the primary structure and it would be a load-carrying component, unlike existing emergency exits. Bement estimated that using composite panels with the pyrotechnic system could reduce the weight of existing emergency exits by 30 to 50%. If the airframes were designed to include the composite panels, the weight reductions would be far greater, because the light-weight composite panels were capable of carrying loads, meaning the fuselage would not require as much support structure around the emergency door frames. The explosive in the system was hexanitrostilbene (HVS), an organic compound insensitive to handling, impact, gunfire, and lightning and was unaffected by 50 hours of exposure to temperatures of 350° F. HNS would burn if exposed to a flame but would not explode. Another advantage of the compound was its explosive power; in a test of the Langley general aviation opening system, less than 0.4 ounce of the compound was sufficient to sever a panel about 30 square inches. (NASA Release 85-171)
NASA announced that space age technology was in use in the Republic of Gabon, Africa, where solar photovoltaic power systems installed in four rural villages would improve public health and education facilities and lighting and sanitary water supplies. NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the project, which was jointly funded by the U.S Department of Energy (DOE) and the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources of the Republic of Gabon; the Gabon government selected the villages to participate in the program. The project provided a photovoltaic power system, lights, air circulation fan, and a refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage to each village dispensary and a power system, lights, and a color TV and video cassette recorder/player to each village school. The villages' sanitary water systems had a newly drilled well, a photovoltaic system, a submersible well pump, a water storage tank, and a water distribution system that piped water to village fountains. Public lighting systems included a power system and sodium vapor lamps mounted on poles. All systems were instrumented to collect data for performance analyses. Total photovoltaic array capacity for all systems was 12.1 kw; output of the smallest array was 80 watts for street lights, the largest 3 kw for one water pump. Batteries for the solar arrays should last about 10 years before replacement; solar arrays had a life expectancy of at least 20 years. According to Tony Ratajczak, project manager at LeRC, "The goal of DOE and the Republic of Gabon, for this project, is to investigate and evaluate the economic, social and technical value of photovoltaic power systems in aiding progress and improving the quality of life in Gabon." (NASA Release 85-68) During November: NASA announced that three physicians from Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, Misssouri, met the previous month with NASA scientists from National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) to discuss using remote sensing techniques as an analytical tool for use in the field of body scanning known as nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR. Dr. Michael Vannier, radiologist and principal investigator for the project, said NMR was already used on a number of organ systems in the brain. However, interest had grown in how magnetic resonance imaging might fit into the scope of breast diagnostic techniques. So Drs. John Gohagan and Ed Spitzna-gel, also of Washington University, on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Breast Imaging Project joined Vannier at the discussions. The meeting resulted in a three-year collaborative effort among the Mal-linckrodt Institute of Radiology in St. Louis, NSTL, and the Kennedy Space Center. Vannier commented that the union with NASA was vital to maximize the potential of NMR scanning. "One of the characteristics of these magnetic resonance scanners is that they provide very specific anatomic information about the location and size of a tumor. However there are other ways to get the same information, one being the use of a mammogram, or breast X-ray." At NSTL, scientists Doug Rickman and Jim Anderson were responsible for applying the analytical capabilities to make NMR scans a notable advancement over other methods of X-ray and body scanning techniques. They had demonstrated the use of ELAS software to enhance NMR images, thus increasing disease detection accuracy. Vannier explained, "No one in medicine really has the kind of experience with classifying or analyzing these types of images this way. That's why we are using NASA expertise to help us." By incorporating the ELAS software used in processing satellite imagery into the system, NMR scans could provide not only information on the location and size of a tumor, but also its biological behavior. That is, physicians could determine the status of a mass of tumor directly from the NMR image without having to enter the body surgically. Close affiliation with pathologists while working on actual cases was important in determining whether there had been misclassification on the image processing machines, Gohagan said. "Our goal is to ultimately get the kind of discrimination necessary to distinguish different anamolous conditions," he explained. For example, blood clots would appear distinctly different from benign tumors, and a marked difference would be evident between benign and malignant tumors. Vannier concluded that, as a result of the collaboration, an improvement should evolve in the way NMR images are acquired. "I think it will have significant influence on what we do in the future," he said. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 7)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B landed at 1:33 p.m. Pacific time today on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base before 6,700 spectators, the NY Times reported. NASA selected the concrete runway because a week of rain had left scattered puddles on the usually dry lake bed runways. 'Atlantis looks beautiful," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said after the landing. Apart from "a few dings" around the ship's nose and landing gear, he added, there appeared to be "no unusual damage." It was the second mission for the Atlantis, the newest in NASA's fleet of four orbiters. The crew described all aspects of the flight as highly successful. (NYT, Dec 4/85, B6)
A controversy between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and NASA [see Space Transportation System/Reve-nues, Feb. 25] appeared over when NOAA agreed to launch meteorological satellites (Metsats) into orbit in return for which NASA would give NOAA a discount for carrying the satellites into orbit aboard the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. A deal between NOAA and the Air Force that would have saved NOAA $90 million in launch costs never went through, in large part because NASA and NOAA began working behind the scenes to bury the hatchet, the Post said. The previous week NASA Administrator James Beggs sent Anthony Calio, NOAA administrator, a letter outlining a deal governing three Metsat launches starting in 1989. NASA agreed to share with NOAA the $80 million cost of modifying the Metsat for a Space Shuttle launch, to put a Metsat on a Space Shuttle within three months after NOAA asked for it, and to shave $6.5 million off the $105 million in feed NASA ordinarily would charge NOAA for the three launches. "We gave them a good price," Beggs said. "They're on the shuttle at what essentially is our cost for launching them." (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
NASA announced that it had selected Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. for negotiations leading to award of the $685 million four-year space transportation system operations contract (STSOC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Follow-on awards could result in a total contract period of 15 years at a value of about $5.5 billion. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract that included incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. Other team members included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. Under the contract, Rockwell would have responsibility for six major STSOC functions: project management; maintenance and operations; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations, testing, and support. Work would be done for such facilities as the mission control center, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, central computing facility, and the mockup and integration laboratory. The selection represented NASA's consolidation into one contract of work previously performed by 16 firms under 22 contracts. Other firms submitting proposals were Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Space Information Systems Division, Grumman Space Operations Corp., and Lockheed Space Flight Co. (NASA Release 85-128)
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle launched the Air Force AF-16 satellite [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and U.S. Air Force, Nov. 20] at 9:35 p.m. EST today from the Wallops Flight Facility. The Scout launch vehicle, S-207C, performed satisfactorily and placed the spacecraft into an orbit with the following parameters: 418 km, apogee; 170 km, perigee; and 37.05°, inclination. The U.S. Air Force, in a brief statement released that same day, announced that NASA launched aboard a single booster from Wallops Island two instrument test vehicles, or ITVs, into low orbit, the Chicago Tribune reported. "The satellites will be checked out and maintained in orbit for an unspecified time as part of the U.S. antisatellite program," the Air Force said. An Air Force official commented later that it was "safe to assume there will be another [antisatellite] test during the first quarter of 1986." (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [postlaunch], Jan 10/85; Chi Trib, Dec 14/85, A4) U.S. Science and Technology
Goddard Space Flight Center announced that a team from its Wallops Flight Facility completed studies of the atmospheric ozone profile at Natal, Brazil. The team acquired data from 9 to 40 miles above the earth at an equatorial site using the improved "A" version ROCket OZonesonde (RO-COZ-A). The team took seven profiles during ozone-measuring satellite overpasses to compare the ROCOZ-A data with other satellite data for the same time and place. Although the primary mission was to support the SAGE II ozone measurements acquired by the ERBS/SAGE II satellite, the team would also compare the data with that from the solar backscatter ultraviolet spectrometer on the Solar Mesopheric Explorer (SME) satellite. Each ROCOZ-A launch included the supporting launch of a super-loki datasonde dart (a small meteorological rocket) to collect temperature data from 9 to 43 miles in the atmosphere and an electrochemical concentration cell (ECC) balloon-launched ozonesonde to collect lower-atmospheric (below 18 miles) ozone, temperature, and pressure data. The team would use the supporting data to define the atmosphere at the site for comparison with the appropriate satellite. The team provided ROCOZ-A coverage during five dual and two single satellite overpasses. There were at least two ROCOZ-A profiles for each satellite with four profiles for the NOAA-9. (GSFC Release 85-17)
NASA had scratched four squirrel monkeys scheduled to be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle Challenger in April because NASA found they had a form of herpes that could be transmitted to the astronaut crew, the Washington Post reported. The monkeys' herpes, called Herpes Samirii, was not the virus transmitted sexually by humans, but was unique to New World primates whose natural habitat was the rain forests of South America. Researchers suspected the virus of causing cancer in lower mammals such as rats and therefore classified it as potentially cancerous in humans. NASA replaced the monkeys with those from colonies bred to be virus-free. Four monkeys recruited from the National Institutes of Health and one from Harvard University had been in training since January for their flight on the second mission of Spacelab, scheduled for April 29 at the earliest. Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian, NASA's chief of space medicine, said they were looking for a sixth monkey even though only three might be flown. "One of the monkeys in training is too small and will have to be replaced, and it will be nice to have a backup when the time comes for them to go into orbit," he said. In space the monkeys' cages would have their own oxygen and food and water supplies in the Spacelab portion of the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, which was shut off from Challenger's cabin by an airlock. The upcoming flight was a shakedown cruise for the monkeys to ascertain that their cages functioned properly and to make sure the monkeys wouldn't get frightened or injured during launch or return to earth. (Washington Post, Mar 27/85, A20)
Soviet and French scientists would soon launch into orbit a space observatory, the Gamma 1 Project, that would carry a large gamma-ray telescope to help determine sources of cosmic rays, streams of highly charged particles that bombarded the earth from space, the NY Times reported the newspaper Izvestia as saying. Researchers hoped to obtain a detailed picture of the sky in gamma rays in order to understand the mysterious nature of gamma stars and their possible relationship with known astrophysical objects. Izvestia had gone on to say that testing was underway on the observatory but did not report a launch date. The Izvestia article said the two countries had cooperated in designing a special spacecraft, to be placed in an orbit 216 miles above earth, capable of carrying nearly two tons of scientific equipment for the Gamma 1 experiment, including main, small gamma-ray and X-ray telescopes. Franco-Soviet space cooperation dated back to an agreement signed in 1966; France was a major partner in the Vega missions the Soviets had launched in December to examine Venus and Halley's Comet and, in June 1982, the French cosmonaut Jean-Loup Chretien had been the first and was the only man from a country outside the Soviet block to go into space aboard a Soviet spacecraft, the Soyuz T-6. (NYT, Mar 12/85, C3) The IUE findings of coexisting dust and gas clouds were consistent with scientific theories of planetary system formation, noted Dr. Yoji Kondo, IUE project scientist at Goddard Space Flight Center. In general, theories predicted that planets evolved from large stellar clouds of dust and gas that gradually condensed into orbiting planetary bodies. Observations with the IRAS strengthened this theory by suggesting that planetary disks surrounded a number of nearby stars. Also, astrometric measurements of the movement of several stars indicated the possible presence about each star of a planetary body several times more massive than Jupiter. Kondo and his associate Dr. F. C. Bruhweiler of Catholic University, Washington, D.C., used the IUE telescope to obtain the ultraviolet spectra of Beta Pictoris to determine the manner in which ultraviolet light was absorbed by the gas cloud and the extinction of the light by the dust cloud. The ultraviolet spectra showed an absence of selective extinction of the light at shorter wavelengths, evidence that the star's light was being blocked evenly at all wavelengths by dust particles greater than one micron (millionth of a meter), as infrared data had reported. "The IUE observation," Kondo said, "indicates the gas is either clumpy or is varying under the pressure of the stellar wind and radiation. If so, this would tend to complement IRAS and ground-telescope observations that a substantial dust cloud of protoplanetary material exists around Beta Pictoris." Kondo cautioned that the lack of observed extinction could also be due to viewing the star just a little off-plane, so that the telescope's line-of-sight was not aligned directly through the disk of orbiting dusty matter. However, Bruh-weiler added, "that would be unlikely. All evidence seems to point to a belt too thick around Beta Pictoris for the line-of-sight to be missing the dust belt." (NASA Release 85-52)
NASA announced appointment effective October 7, of Richard Barnes to be director of the International Affairs Division. Barnes would replace Kenneth Pedersen, who had served in the job since November 1978 and would spend the following year on sabbatical as research professor at the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service. Barnes recently had completed four years as NASA European representative based at the American Embassy in Paris, where he was responsible for liaison with the European Space Agency and the national space agencies of Western Europe on cooperative projects and for identification of potential future joint space projects. In 1961 he joined the NASA Office of International Programs where he served in various capacities, including deputy director of international affairs, before his Paris assignment. Before joining NASA, Barnes was affiliated with the Atomic Industrial Forum, Inc. and served with the Atomic Energy Commission's Division of International Affairs and the Bureau of Ordinance of the Navy Department. Barnes received his B.A. degree from Dartmouth College and a master of public administration degree from Harvard University. He also graduated from the Industrial College of the Armed Forces and served on commissioned active duty with the U.S. Navy during the Korean War. (NASA Release 85132)
Ted Stevens (R-Aka.), chairman of the Senate defense appropriations subcommittee, told Air Force officials today that Congress would provide funds in FY 86 to buy a number of Northrop F-20 Tigershark fighters, possibly for the Guard or Reserve, despite what the Air Force decided about the plane, Defense Daily reported. "You're going to get some F-20s if you like it or not," he said, although he added if the Air Force could prove to Congress the F-20 could not do the job, that would be a different matter. He also said that no one in Congress was "shilling" for one company or another, but simply wanted to have competition, which would ensure the best product at the lowest price. Air Force Assistant Secretary Thomas Cooper said the Air Force was very interested in the F-20, but that the question had not been put to the Defense Resources Board and that the Defense Department had made no final decision to buy the F-20 in FY 87. When Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) asked about cutting the FY 86 F-16 buy from 180 to 161 aircraft and using the money freed to buy 32 F-20s, Cooper answered that the Air Force would not simply buy 32 F-20s without a follow-on commitment. Northrop had proposed to provide 396 F-20s to the Air Force over a four-year period at a fixed price of $15 million each. However, Cooper said General Dynamics had told the Air Force that it would provide a fixed-price proposal for the F-16 if the Air Force requested it. Sen. Warren Rudman (R-N.H.) pointed out the "supplier of the F-16 has not had the best record recently in defense contracting, ... in fact, is in mild disrepute with some sectors" of the Department of Defense and is "guilty of some misconduct." Therefore, he said, the government should not "continue to reward them" if there was a viable competitor who gave them a better price. (D/D, Apr 26/85, 321)
Under-Secretary of the U.S. Air Force E. C. Aldridge, Jr. announced in an internal information memorandum that the policy of the U.S. Air Force was to "ensure that the unique capabilities that can be derived from the presence of military man in space shall be utilized to the extent feasible and practical to enhance existing and future missions in the interest of national security objectives." The memorandum implied that U.S. Air Force would be committed to working with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in its most recent manned space undertaking to deploy in orbit a manned, permanent orbiting space station in the early 1990s. Memorandum for the Vice Chief of Staff, USAF from Under-Secretary E. C. Aldridge, Jr., August 1, 1985. August 2Ch Honeywell's Military Avionics Division would soon begin for the McDonnell Aircraft Co. full-scale development, costing about $500 million, of a tactical electronic warfare intermediate support system (TISS) for the F-15 Eagle aircraft program, Defense Daily reported. The award to Honeywell was part of a larger contract the U.S. Air Force recently awarded to McDonnell to upgrade the F—15 tactical warfare system (TEWS). The Honeywell TISS would test the F-15's electronic warfare system to minimize downtime, reduce maintenance costs, and improve overall missile effectiveness. Stanley Moeschi, Honeywell vice president, noted that, "This contract demonstrates the maturity of Honeywell's automatic test technology and a substantial advancement in state-of-the-art digital and radio frequency electronic warfare testing." (D/D, Aug 20/85, 1)
The Department of Defense (DOD) decided to drop the fee it planned to charge civilian users of the Navstar Global Positioning System, the Air Force System Command Newsreview reported. William Taft IV, deputy secretary of defense, said deleting the user fee was necessary to enhance worldwide aviation safety and to avoid charge difficulties. He said the standard positioning service signal, which would be the lower of two accuracy levels, would be broadcast in the clear and available to any properly equipped user. However, Congress could reinstate user fees. The precise positioning service signal, the higher-accuracy signal, would be encrypted and made available initially to the U.S. and some allied military users. DOD would permit limited civil use if it was shown to be in the national interest, adequate security protection was provided, and comparable accuracy could not be obtained from another source, DOD officials said. DOD scheduled the Navstar system, a continuous worldwide satellite-based radio navigation system, for operation in the late 1980s. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 11/85, 6)
NASA Administrator James Beggs stirred up a controversy when he reportedly told a Washington gathering of the American Stock Exchange that the Soviets had "turned us down, flat, with no explanation" on the proposal of a joint space mission, the Washington Times reported. Later NASA spokesman Miles Waggoner said the Soviets had not rejected the idea, but a joint manned space mission was not likely to happen within the next few years. President Reagan had offered the Soviets a chance to participate in a cooperative space venture about a year previously. The Soviets responded that they believed it was not the time to fly that kind of mission. "To us, that means the item is still open," Waggoner said. "This time, though, Mr. Beggs decided to look at it from the other perspective." Other NASA officials, indicating the agency hadn't received any new word from the Soviets about the proposal, speculated Beggs might have said what he did to provoke a reaction from them. Originally, NASA planners envisioned a joint practice rescue mission in which a U.S. astronaut would use a jet backpack called a manned maneuvering unit (MMU) to fly from a Space Shuttle to a Soviet Salyut space station. The astronaut might also use the MMU to push a cosmonaut back to the Space Shuttle for a brief time. (W Times, June 12/85, 4A)
The USSR today launched a secret rocket from its Tyuratam launch site that may have been an antisatellite weapons test or the first launch of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel instead of kerosene, the Washington Post reported. The rocket later broke into three pieces, the largest of which was three feet long, the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) said. One piece fell out of orbit June 24 and burned up in the atmosphere; the two other pieces came down June 28. The objects were in an orbit 121 miles high at the lowest point and 215 miles at the highest. The orbit was inclined at 64.4°, a course only slightly off the one the Soviets use to test new rockets and satellites, because it passed directly over a highly instrumented corridor in the Soviet Union. U.S. intelligence sources said they were baffled by the small size of the three pieces. One source suggested the launch may have been a test of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel that resulted in the launch vehicle exploding with most of the debris falling to earth out of radar contact. Another source speculated it might have been a test of a new antisatellite weapon that failed or was deliberately blown up. The June 21 mystery launch followed that same day the launches of Cosmos 1663 and Progress 24. The Soviets launched Cosmos 1664 June 26, resuming their numbered Cosmos series after skipping the June 21 "noname" launch. NORAD gave the secret launch the designation 1985-53-A. (The "53" stood for the 53rd object put into space that year; "A" meant NORAD classified it as a payload, not a rocket launcher. NORAD gave the suffix "B" to launch vehicles that went into orbit.) (IV Post, July 5/85, A2) Space Program
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
NASA announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding for its materials processing in space research program with Grumman Corp. to experiment with directional solidification of gallium arsenide and other semiconductor materials and various metals and alloys. The process would apply to production of semiconductor crystals and magnets for electrical motors, with initial emphasis on semiconductor materials. Directional solidification would use precisely controlled temperatures to melt and solidify a material, during which the material's crystalline structure would align in a fashion that should virtually eliminate any compound imperfections. Flawless semiconductor crystals would yield a greater quantity and quality of microcircuit chips, leading to higher-speed electronic devices that would consume less power and to greater miniaturization. The agreement called for an information exchange, with NASA and Grumman Corp. designating personnel for the program. NASA would put up no funds for the program; Grumman expected to spend $6 million in the first three years. (NASA Release 85-23; W Times, Feb 13/85, 8B) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION During October: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) announced that its university programs, primarily involving undergraduate students, combined futuristic space concepts with realistic engineering design challenges. The first program, cosponsored by NASA Headquarters and Ames Research Center (ARC) and Johnson Space Center (JSC), required students to design a spacesuit glove that would allow astronauts maximum flexibility at eight lb.-per-sq-in., the pressure planned for future extravehicular activity. Ten universities responded to a request for proposals, and a team from Kansas State University won the design competition. The second broader program, entering its second phase of a two-year pilot effort, required universities to adopt NASA advanced space design projects for senior design classes. Each university received a grant and was aligned with a NASA center that provided guidance, data, and lecturers during the academic year and 10-week summer work assignments for three students. The initial group of centers, schools, and projects were: ARC/University of Wisconsin/manned Mars habitat; ARC/University of Colorado/geosynchro-nous space station; Langley Research Center; (LaRC)/Virginia Polytechnic Institute/orbital servicing center; LaRC/Massachusetts Institute of Technology/ lunar base-manned Mars mission; Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)/ Georgia Institute of Technology/lunar site preparation; Lewis Research Center (LeRC)/University of Washington/space manufacturing facility; LeRC/Univer-sity of Michigan/lunar space transportation system; and JSC/University of Texas and Texas A & M/manned Mars mission. (NASA Activities, Oct 85, 10)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, in testimony before the Senate science, technology, and space subcommittee, said that projected cost overruns for the Centaur G and G Prime vehicles-development programs could run as high as $50 to $60 million, but that the agency did not think the problems would affect Galileo and Ulysses mission launches planned for the 2nd half of 1986, Aerospace Daily reported. Another NASA official testifying earlier had estimated the overrun at $30 to $40 million. The discrepancy in estimates apparently stemmed from an agreement between NASA and the Air Force calling for a 50-50 sharing of Centaur G program-design and -development costs. The Air Force, however, had set a $150 million ceiling on basic Centaur-development costs, which had not yet been reached. If the overrun surpassed the ceiling, NASA would have to absorb the costs. (A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
The Mutual Broadcasting System announced plans to use its excess satellite space to deliver messages at rates low enough to compete with the postal service, the Washington Post reported. The company estimated that telecommunications business from the new Mutual Satellite Services division would generate 50% of its revenue by 1990. Mutual's principal business was the Mutual Radio Network, which owned receiving dishes at more than 700 locations nationwide. Mutual planned starting in mid-1985 to send audio and data transmissions over a little-used portion of the FM radio spectrum to specially tuned radios in clients' offices. Cassette tape recorders attached to the radios would receive voice communications and send them to high-speed printers. Called MultiComm, the system would allow any organization to create its own private network for sending encrypted audio, data, printed material, or computer software to a number of locations simultaneously. Senders could relay a 300- to 450-word message to 500 receivers for 25 to 30 cents per recipient, compared to a first-class letter at 22 cents. Other electronic mail systems use a wire hookup between the company providing the satellite link and the preceding page blank not filmed PACT. % Ih ...INTENTION ALLY BLAKE message recipient; Mutual would provide the first system in which the signal was transmitted by radio. (W Post, Jan 25/85, D2) During January. A six-man Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) team at the South Pole on December 14, 1984, had taken turns talking to colleagues in Greenbelt, Maryland, using one of two unprecedented satellite communications links the group had installed over the previous month, the Goddard News reported. "The conversation was amazingly audible," said Tony Com-beriate, a GSFC communications expert and member of the South Pole satellite data-link project team. "The folks at Goddard sounded like they were just a few feet away." Although voice communications capabilities from the South Pole using Ham radio had existed for some time, the systems were weather dependent and usually very noisy. The GSFC group used the 17-year-old Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-3) to establish the two-way voice link. The key breakthrough was installation of the scientific data link, which enabled daily transmittal of information from the Pole, across Antarctica, and to the U.S. Before system installation, scientific data from the pole was stored during the region's winter months and shipped out by aircraft from November through February. The new system permitted transmission of high-quality scientific data by using three existing polar orbiting satellites (a 4th was scheduled soon). Each satellite passed the pole about 14 times daily and relayed data to McMurdo Sound, which retransmitted it to a geosynchronous satellite, which in turn transmitted it to the U.S. Since the Pole signals were too far below the horizon to be acquired by normal communications satellites, the relay route was necessary. Researchers had previously considered a communications link from the South Pole, but decided it was too costly and impractical, perhaps taking several years and costing an estimated $35 million. The GSFC approach had cost about $250,000 and taken nine months, because it used existing satellites, excess equipment, and had support from several organizations. Scientists could receive daily transmission of reliable data on global weather patterns, the magnetospheric cusp, upper atmosphere, and glacio-logical and seismic studies to name a few. The link also could evolve into a data collection network for many of the unmanned observatories (ground-based satellites) scattered throughout Antarctica. (Goddard News, Jan 85, 6)
NASA announced that its AST-3 communications satellite, located at 105° west longitude, was providing communications support through its control center at Malabar, Florida, to American Red Cross and Pan American World Health Organization rescue and relief efforts following Mexico City's earthquake. The voice communications link with the outside world was crucial, since the earthquake disrupted all other forms of communications in the city. George Manno, director of media relations for the Red Cross, said "the ATS-3 is providing us with the most critical communications link. Although ham radio operators have been doing a swell job, they are serving as our backup communications system, while we rely primarily on the ATS as our main communications vehicle." Immediately after the earthquake occurred, NASA implemented the ATS emergency preemption plan; within 24 hours ATS-3 was on the air, giving priority to satellite communications traffic for the emergency rescue operations. (NASA Release 85-133)
The C-5's new B model made its first flight today from Dobbins Air Force Base, Georgia, climbing to 15,000 feet and cruising at 300 knots—an appropriate altitude and speed to determine airworthiness, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Airborne for slightly more than three hours, the Galaxy began 55 hrs of production flight testing designed to evaluate its improved features. Evaluation would be shorter than usual for a newly designed aircraft because the C-5B only carried state-of-the-art features added to the already proven C-5A. Col. Thomas Stover, acting C-5B director in Aeronautical System's Division (ASD) Deputy for Airlift and Trainer Systems, called the first flight a "key event . . . ushering in a significant improvement to our strategic airlift capability." The nine-member crew alternately shut down and restarted each of the airlifter's four General Electric TF39-1C engines, which restarted without a hitch. Production flight evaluation would include airborne testing of an improved onboard computer called MASAR II, the malfunction detection analysis and recording computer. Pilots would also evaluate the improved automatic flight control and landing gear actuation systems. In October 1982 ASD awarded Lockheed Georgia a $50-million preliminary contract to begin C-5B production, and the first aircraft rolled out July 12, 1985. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs, at total cost of $7,817 billion. Military Airlift Command expected to receive its first B model by December, with delivery of the 50th expected near mid-1989. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), said in testimony delivered in late March before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee research and development subcommittee that a space plane capable of flying to anywhere on the earth within half an hour to intercept enemy bombers or perform space spy missions might be possible within the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. The U.S. Space Shuttle, which had limited ability to maneuver in space, was put in orbit only after a lengthy and complicated rocket launch. So the U.S. Air Force wanted a "transatmospheric vehicle" that would be able to quickly reach and return from space like an ordinary aircraft. Cooper said a recent breakthrough in so-called ramjet technology might make possible an aircraft capable of taking off from a runway and reaching speeds of Mach 25 (times the speed of sound), the velocity necessary to escape earth's gravity. Cooper noted the plane would weigh about 100,000 lb., take off from and land on a 10,000-foot runway, and probably use hydrogen as a fuel. Only a small amount of rocket power would be required to "deorbit" the plane, he said. DARPA proposed to build two full-scale model ramjet engines for testing on the ground. "There are a number of very interesting technical problems here . . . none of them insurmountable. They're all within our grasp," Cooper said. Cooper explained that the ramjet combustion providing the extra boost took place only when the air flowing through the jet engine chamber was at supersonic speeds. Ordinarily, to get air flowing at this speed through the entire length of the chamber, the aircraft itself had to be moving at Mach 6. However, "a way has been found/' he said, "to use a subsidiary scheme for driving the air through the engine up to supersonic speeds, even though the vehicle on which the engine is attached is sitting on the runway." By slightly varying the geometry of the engine, it might be possible to fly the aircraft from takeoff to Mach 6, and "with slight variations" fly from Mach 6 to 14 and then to Mach 25, Cooper said. The Air Force and Navy were interested in the engine, development of which marked a resurgence in hypersonic speed research that had been "put on a back burner" in the late 1960s, Cooper commented. (W Times, Apr 2/ 85, 3A)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
The Teal Ruby experimental space-based aircraft detection system, which had encountered technical problems, would fly on the Space Shuttle around March 1986, Defense Daily reported. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Director Dr. Robert Cooper said DARPA had run into expected problems with the Teal Ruby flight sensor caused by heat leaks in the cryogenic system. The leaks posed two problems: they prevented the temperature of the instrument from getting low enough to provide necessary high sensitivity and threatened the one-year nominal life of the system. Cooper said the DARPA had found all leaks except one. Teal Ruby was the first large-scale demonstration of a two-dimensional, staring mosaic infrared detector array and lightweight telescope optics. Its goal was to establish the technology base for future space-based infrared surveillance systems capable of detecting aircraft and other low threshold targets against the earth's clutter background; it would develop a comprehensive radiometric background database and space qualify the advanced technologies embodied in its design. Teal Ruby would be the primary payload of the Air Force space test program satellite P80-1. (D/D, Mar 29/85, 167)
NASA postponed for 24 hours the first classified Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch the afternoon of January 23, as freezing temperatures threatened to cause severe icing on the external fuel tank, the Washington Post reported. Officials said ice chunks could drop off, damaging the Space Shuttle, and also that NASA staff was conducting inspection of fuel and water pipes to determine if they had frozen shut. The Department of Defense (DOD) had classified nearly all aspects of the mission. The crew consisting of Navy Capt. Thomas Mattingly, AF Lt. Col. Loren Shriver, Marine Lt. Col. James Buchli, AF Maj. Ellison Onizuka, and AF Maj. Gary Payton would not conduct the traditional prelaunch news conference nor hold one after landing. The U.S. Air Force would not disclose how long the crew would stay in orbit or what flight path they would take on the premise it might help the USSR determine mission purpose or interfere with the mission. Previously the Washington Post had reported that Challenger would carry into orbit a sigint (signals intelligence) satellite that could intercept telemetry from Soviet missile tests. The Associated Press later had reported that the satellite could pick up radio, ground-to-space communications, and longdistance telephone calls made by microwave relay. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would not comment on the reports' accuracy. The USAF had not filed a flight-path plan with the United Nations, and the location of two ships that would recover the solid-fuel rocket boosters was also secret. There would be no public air-to-ground communications during the flight. (W Pbst, Jan 23/85, A3)
Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) qualification tests had shown the Star 30C apogee kick motor, designed to place satellites in orbits around the earth and manufactured by Morton-Thiokol Inc., was ready for production, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sverdrup Technology Inc., operating contractor of AEDC's propulsion test facilities, had conducted qualification checks in one of AEDC's high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated altitude of about 100,000 feet. Test objectives were to demonstrate component structural integrity and to determine ballistic performance. Sverdrup temperature conditioned the motors and then test fired them while they spun about their axial centerline to simulate spin stabilization during firing in space. The Star 30C, designed to be carried by the Space Shuttle, was the propulsion system for the RCA C-STAR satellite. Once in space, it would ignite and carry the satellite to its designated orbit. (AFSC Newsreview,. Mar 29/85, 6)
NASA announced that it signed a 21-month agreement with Scott Science and Technology, Inc. (SST) to provide technical expertise to SST in the development of a commercial liquid-fuel upper stage for boosting Space Shuttle-deployed satellites to geosynchrous orbit. SST, whose president was former astronaut David Scott, had worked for two years on developing the upper stage, called the Satellite Transfer Vehicle, which would be able to boost satellites ranging from 2,000 to 19,000 lb. On some missions, the stage would be recoverable. Engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center would monitor the stage's development and consult with SST staff on technical problems. SST would reimburse NASA for the use of any test facilities and the salaries and travel of JSC personnel working on the project. (NASA Release 85-143)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced award of $5 million 26-month contracts to Boeing Aerospace Co., General Dynamics, Martin Marietta, and Rockwell Internatl. to perform studies on space transportation architecture—the total transportation system of flight elements, ground and orbital support systems, and their operational interactions. NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded and would manage the General Dynamics and Martin Marietta contracts; the Air Force Space Division in Los Angeles, the Boeing and Rockwell contracts. The two agencies and four companies would maintain close coordination throughout the award period. Broad objectives of the studies were to determine the nation's overall space transportation system architectures, including transportation and support systems needed to simultaneously meet mission and operational requirements, while substantially reducing total life-cycle cost; to identify the technologies required for the architectures; and to refine the resulting transportation and support system concept(s) for the mid-1990s if firm requirements were identified. After the agencies first analyzed and provided projected mission/payload/ operational requirements for the mid-1990s to 2010, the companies would analyze mission requirements, develop and analyze architecture approaches, define future transportation system concepts, and identify technologies applicable to transportation system options. Transportation system architectures and concepts would include launch and upper-stage flight systems, mission control concepts, ground support systems, logistics support systems, and on-orbit operations for both manned and unmanned systems. The resulting transportation architecture and vehicle concepts should outline and define the most promising concepts for improved cost-effectiveness and mission need accommodation for the specified period. (NASA Release 85-126)
NASA announced it had rescheduled for July 29 launch of Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger and delayed by as much as two weeks the previously scheduled September 19 maiden voyage of the orbiter Atlantis that was to carry a secret Pentagon payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. The July 12 Challenger launch abort forced NASA to design a new schedule that maintained a Discovery blastoff for August 24, delayed another Challenger mission from October 3 to early November, and kept a November 27 Atlantis flight and a December 20 Columbia mission. Kennedy Space Center (KSC) work crews had removed three parts from Challenger's No. 2 engine that engineers suspected could have triggered computers into ordering all three engines to shut down on the launch pad. One was a valve that failed to close when it should have, a second was a hydraulic actuator that ordered the valve to close, and the third was a controller that sent commands to the actuator. "We still suspect the actuator, and nothing we've found suggests anything else," KSC spokesman Hugh Harris said. "We are replacing all three parts and continue to analyze and test the parts we remove." NASA would test fresh parts on the pad, leading to a July 23 flight readiness review. This included electronics and leak checks of parts like pumps, turbines, and valves, not a test-firing of the engines. The delay meant a July 30 flight readiness firing test for Atlantis would take place September 12, which would delay Atlantis's maiden flight from September 19 to late September at the earliest. (WPost, July 16/85, A4)
NASA officials confirmed a schedule calling for the next Space Shuttle orbiter to land at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Aviation Week reported, as a result of the successful hard-surface runway landing December 3 at Edwards Air Force Base by the orbiter Atlantis on mission 61-B. The landing was the first on a concrete surface since the orbiter Discovery damaged its brakes and tires while landing April 19 at KSC. NASA scheduled the orbiter Columbia on mission 61-C to land at KSC following its planned December 18 launch. Columbia was equipped with the necessary nosewheel steering system upgrades and would use steering instead of brakes as a primary control method for the KSC landing. During the December 3 landing, control inputs by mission commander Lt. Col. Brewster Shaw, Jr. appeared to cause Atlantis to float slightly just before landing on the 15,000 ft. runway. The orbiter's wheels touched down approximately 2400 feet from the runway threshold, and Shaw applied only light braking during a 17,759-ft. landing roll. NASA slightly altered the Space Shuttle post-landing processing in an effort to remove Atlantis from the runway as soon as possible to allow the Air Force to reopen it for aircraft use. Normally personnel removed the orbiter's brakes in parallel with other close-out tasks before towing the vehicle back to NASA's Ames-Dryden Space Shuttle processing area at Edwards. They left on the brakes so that Atlantis could be moved to an apron area at the end and off to the side of the runway. H.W. Widick, chief of the Space Shuttle Integration Div., said a preliminary inspection of the brakes did not reveal any damage and that overall condition of the orbiter was good. (AvWk, Dec 9/85, 23)
Department of Defense scientists the previous week sent concentrated laser beams adjusted for atmospheric distortion from an Air Force facility on Maui, Hawaii, to a retroreflector on a Terrier-Malemute sounding rocket launched from the Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility in Hawaii, the Los Angeles Times reported. The test demonstrated for the first time that the U.S. could fire such a beam through the atmosphere and prevent air molecules from distorting and weakening it. The test appeared to be a significant technical achievement because distortion, or “blooming," of a laser as it passed through air could totally block the beam. To correct beam distortion, engineers developed a flexible mirror that, taking orders from computers, distorted the beam at the start of its journey to compensate, or correct, in advance the dispersing effects of the air molecules. The sounding rocket reached an altitude of over 350 nautical miles with a flight time of 10 minutes, Defense Daily reported. Return of telemetry data from the diagnostic array aboard the rocket confirmed test success. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger announced the test during a speech at a Philadelphia World Affairs Council luncheon for what appeared to be the start of a Reagan Administration campaign to justify continuing its $26-billion Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research effort in the face of intensified USSR protests over the program. (M Times, Oct 4/85, A5; D/D, Oct 18/85, 251)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 51-1 took time August 29 to observe Hurricane Elena, the Washington Post reported. Commander Joe Engle took photos of the storm, a dense white circular mass that stretched across almost half of the Gulf of Mexico, and noted a second storm in the western part of Gulf. Among the contingencies NASA faced was the possibility that the storm could strike the Houston area and knock out communications with the Johnson Space Center. A NASA spokesman said they could quickly switch operation to the Goddard Space Flight Center. The crew also that day launched the Syncom IV-4 satellite, which was almost identical to the satellite the crew would attempt August 30 to salvage. (IV Post, Aug 30/85, A3)
NASA's newest Space Shuttle orbiter, Atlantis, arrived about 5:00 p.m. April 14 at KSC after a two-day flight from California, the Marshall Star reported. KSC workers removed the Atlantis from the 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) and towed it to the processing hangar, where others would reconfigure it for its maiden flight, mission 51—J, scheduled for September. The SCA made a brief stop at Ellington Air Force Base, Texas, during the journey to KSC. (Marshall Star, Apr 17/85, 2)
NASA and United Technologies's United Space Boosters Inc.'s Booster Production Co. officials would break ground January 30 for Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) assembly and refurbishment facility at KSC, the Marshall Star reported. The company had designed and would build the 238,000-sq.-ft. facility, scheduled for completion in 1986, that would employ about 700 people to perform most of the Space Shuttle's SRB refurbishment previously done by the company at various locations at the center and adjacent Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Refurbishment, performed under an MSFC contract, would include replacement of insulation on booster components, addition of electronic and guidance systems, and reinstallation of parachutes and ordnance. The refurbished booster components, including forward and aft skirts and frustum, would then undergo computerized checkout in the facility before delivery to NASA for booster stacking. The new facility would process up to 24 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters yearly and would offer maximum efficiency with extensive use of robotics and computer-controlled production techniques developed in MSFC's Productivity Enhancement Center. (Marshall Star, Jan 30/85, 1)
Arnold Engineering Development Center completed the fourth and final qualification test firing of the Payload Assist Module-D (PAM-D) II rocket motor, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The PAM-D II featured increased propellant capacity (7200 lb.) over its predecessor, the PAM-D (4400 lb.), and could boost both military and commercial communications satellites into geosynchronous orbit about 22,300 miles above earth. A Space Shuttle would deliver the motor and its payload into space at an altitude of 160 to 180 miles, where the PAM-D II satellite package, spinning at 30 to 85 rpm, would spring-eject from the orbiter's open bay doors. At a safe distance from the orbiter, the PAM-D II, which served as a perigee kick motor, would ignite and propel its payload more than 22,000 miles higher. PAM-D II would then separate from the payload, which was positioned by its own apogee motors activited by signals from earth. AEDC test-fired the motor in one of its high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated pressure altitude of approximately 100,000 feet while spinning it about its thrust axis at 70 rpm. Test objectives were to determine ballistic performance and to take plume (exhaust) radiation measurements, which were important in determining if the exhaust radiation would damage the motor case or satellite. With the fourth test completed, the Air Force considered the motor ready for production and flight. Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division was the rocket's manufacturer. NASA had tentatively scheduled PAM-D ll's first flight for November 1985 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger to place the RCA SATCOM satellite into orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, July 12/85, 7)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
NASA announced that it had scheduled for March 27 the first government flight in the joint Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)/U.S. and the Air Force/NASA X-29 flight research program. The X-29 was a high-performance research aircraft incorporating a wide variety of advanced technologies, each aimed at producing a better fighter-type aircraft. As a technology demonstrator, the X-29 was intended to provide engineering data for future design rather than to serve as a prototype for production. The flight research program followed four recently completed contractor demonstration flights flown by Grumman Aerospace Corp., builder of the experimental craft for DARPA. All flights were at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). NASA, Air Force, and Grumman pilots would fly the first phase or initial concept evaluation of the government flight research program and then would gradually increase the performance of the forward-swept wing aircraft to speeds of about Mach 0.6 (almost 400 mph) at altitudes of about 30,000 ft. That phase would include as many as 30 flights and would conclude during the summer. The first three flights would concentrate on handling qualities and stability and control aspects of the aircraft in its backup flight control mode, one of three different modes of the X-29's computer-controlled flight. These flights would also provide pilot familiarization and allow smooth program team transition from the contractor to the government. NASA test pilot Stephen Ishmael would pilot the first flight. Following the three flights, NASA would reconfigure the DFRC control room from its functional flight monitoring mode to a research mode that would allow the team to expand the aircraft's flight envelope for the second flight research phase scheduled for early fall 1985. Prior to start of the second phase or full envelope concept evaluation, the contractor would modify the aircraft's flight control system to incorporate full envelope flight control system capabilities. The second phase, lasting through October 1986, called for as many as 100 research flights by NASA and Air Force pilots and should extend the X-29's flight envelope to Mach 1.5, about 1,000 mph, and to 50,000 ft. in altitude. (NASA Release 85-40) During May: Dr. George Keyworth, II, the President's science advisor, released a report of the Aeronautical Policy Review Committee that proposed national goals for research and development in aeronautics, NASA reported. The report stressed that, in the face of strong and growing challenges from foreign interests, the U.S. would maintain lasting aeronautical leadership only by vigorous application of the country's traditional strength—innovative technology. The report also pointed out that there were aeronautical opportunities that could make virtually all of that day's operational military and civil aircraft obsolete before the end of the century. The report reaffirmed the government's role in supporting research and technology in aeronautics. "From our viewpoint, aeronautical research and technology remain an important investment. Our national interests, in particular our national security interests, dictate continued federal support." The first goal outlined in the report addressed advancement of technologies applicable to a variety of subsonic aircraft including short-, medium-, and long-range transports; rotorcraft; high-speed turboprop engines; all-composite primary structures; high-lift aerodynamics systems, as well as new flight control and guidance improvements. The second goal concerned higher-speed regimes of supersonic transports. The report noted that the Reagan Administration had made no commitment to supersonic transports, but was laying the groundwork, both in NASA and the Department of Defense, in the fundamental technologies essential for any future efforts in supersonic flight. The third goal called for capturing the potential payoffs available from super high-speed flight—hypersonic speeds and transatmospheric vehicles. These vehicles would operate from conventional runways, maneuver at the fringe of the atmosphere, and ascend into space orbit when required. The report concluded that the government could only provide part of the technological base and support to achieve those goals and that private industry must share in the development of new technology and in its application to new projects. (NASA Activities, May 85, 9)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it awarded a three-year, $35,181,700 contract to the Space Transportation Systems Division of Rockwell International for Space Shuttle systems integration work at MSFC, Kennedy Space Center, and Vandenberg Air Force Base. The contract called for provision of management, personnel, equipment, materials, and resources from July 1, 1985 to June 30, 1988. (MSFC Release 85-34)
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
NASA announced that a Pepsi-Cola dispensing technology would fly aboard Space Shuttle mission 51-F, scheduled for launch on July 12, provided time permitted completion of NASA qualification procedures at the Johnson Space Center. The container, developed by Pepsi-Cola USA and Enviro-Spray Systems (a subsidiary of Grow Group) at their own initiative and expense, was capable of dispensing carbonated beverages, as well as other liquids in space, because pressure within the can was automatically renewed, whenever necessary, to maintain a steady flow of liquid. Pepsi-Cola had granted NASA a license for unrestricted use of the dispensing technology for testing carbonated beverages in space, and NASA would receive the technical information necessary to fabricate its own cans. (NASA Release 85-97)
NASA announced it would award James Harford, executive director of the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), its Public Service Medal at a luncheon ceremony April 10 during AlAA's annual meeting in Washington. The award cited Harford "for more than 30 years of staff leadership of the nation's principal professional society for the advancement of aerospace." In 1953 Harford became executive secretary of the American Rocket Society (ARS), than a fledgling organization of about 2,100 missile engineers and scientists. When ARS and the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences merged in 1963 to form the AIAA, Harford became its deputy executive director and a year later its executive director. AIAA, under Harford's leadership, grew to 35,000	members with 66 professional sections and 132 student branches. Harford was a Fellow of AIAA, the British Interplanetary Society, the American Association for the Advancement of Science and an Associate Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society. (NASA Release 85-49)
Three quarters of a million gallons of water flooded Space Launch Complex-6 at Vandenberg AFB during a March test to determine whether the system, intended to suppress sound waves from the Space Shuttle during a launch, would operate properly, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sound waves, reflected off the launch mount and flame ducts, could seriously damage the orbiter and its payload. To prevent such damage, nozzles on the mount would begin spraying water into the three pad exhaust ducts seven and a half seconds before the Space Shuttle's main engines ignited. By ignition time, the spray system would reach its full flow rate of 985,000 gallons per minute and maintain that rate for nearly 30 seconds before tapering off after the Space Shuttle left the pad. Although Vandenberg officials had tested the spray system six times previously, the March test was the first time the nonflying prototype orbiter Enterprise, inert solid-fuel rocket boosters, and an external tank were in place on the mount during a test. Remotely controlled by the launch control center, the splash pattern of the gravity-fed water system resulted in no water splashing up into the main engines, where ice might form before ignition. The system sprayed water exactly where it would be needed at launch—down into the flame ducts and out over the concrete pad surface. George O'Gorman, site manager for complex-6, said most of the complex's construction work was complete, although some modifications were scheduled before the orbiter Discovery would arrive in September for launch in January 1986. The Air Force expected to make about four Space Shuttle launches a year by the late 1980s from Vandenberg AFB. The facility could handle as many as ten launches a year. (AFCS Newsreview, Apr 12/85, 3)
During a ceremony today at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, the Department of Defense (DOD) activated its first unified space command, SPACECOM, to oversee all military programs in space, the NY Times reported. SPACECOM would oversee and control all Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps defensive space activities, which consisted of systems devoted to intelligence-gathering, watching for an attack, and facilitating communications and navigation, and would operate separately from the civilian programs run by NASA. However, it was the potential role that the new command might play as headquarters for any space-based defense against enemy missiles that drew most attention, despite official assertions that any such assignment would lie far in the future. Although the U.S. was committed to the early stage of research for a missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative, Gen. John Vessey Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said after the ceremony that the command's purpose was an extension of the armed services' current strategy of deterrence, and he sought to allay concern that it would be a first step toward war in space. "There are several things the command will not become," he said. "It is not a force built to escalate the arms race. It is not a force built to achieve dominance for the United States. The command will make its contribution to that fundamental element of United States strategy, the prevention of war." Rep. Ken Kramer (R-Colo.), who strongly favored development of a missile defense system, said that the Space Command opened a new period in the lives of nations. Noting that he could "speak a little more freely" than the military officials, Kramer said, "I call it the post-nuclear era, in which the people of this nation and potentially all nations will no longer live in this shadow of potential nuclear destruction and nuclear holocaust." Kramer had fought hard to have the military's space functions united and based in his district and said Colorado had become the "military space capital of the free world." DOD named Gen. Robert Herres, who headed the North American Aerospace Defense Command and the United States Air Force Space Command, to command the new organization. Herres attempted to dampen speculation about SPACECOM's role in strategic defense development. "There is a lot of uncertainty about how that research is going to turn out. That's why we call it research," he said. "I could speculate about what our role might be, but those decisions will depend on how the research turns out. (NVT, Sept 24/85, A28)
NASA announced that its first Applications Technology Satellite (ATS-1), after more than 18 years of service, failed to respond to commands to correct its eastward drift from geostationary position over the Gilbert Islands in the western Pacific. Robert Wales, ATS project operations director at Goddard Space Flight Center (GFSC), said that the ground control station in Hawaii could no longer keep ATS-1 at its present location and it would likely drift out of useful orbital position during the next six months. ATS-1, launched in December 1966 with an expected lifespan of three years, most recently had provided a voice and data communications capability to several information networks in the Pacific basin. The pan Pacific education and communications experiments by satellite (PEACESAT) program, the major user of ATS-1, would dissolve with the loss of the satellite. Program participants had transmitted educational, health, research, technology, and community services through ATS-1 to 23 autonomous terminals located in Hawaii, Cook Islands, the Mariana and Caroline Islands, Western and American Samoa, the Marshall Islands, Melanesia, New Zealand, and Australia. Some of ATS-1's notable achievements were the first transmission in 1967 of full-earth, cloud cover pictures from geosynchronous orbit; first transmission in 1967 of real-time TV pictures (Apollo 4 splashdown); two-way communication tests with commercial airliners to determine aircraft orientation effects on satellite communications, a cooperative venture with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the airlines in 1967 and 1968; link-up between U.S. and USSR scientists during an atmospheric, sea, and ice condition experiment in the Bering Sea in 1971; transmission of electrocardiographs from Hawaii to New Zealand and from Alaska to the University of Washington; and presentation of medical conferences over the PEACESAT network. The medical world had praised the Alaskan "doctor call" service provided by ATS-1 as the first innovative approach to rural medicine in the U.S. In the program, Public Health Service physicians could communicate daily through ATS-1 with trained health aides in the remote Alaskan bush country. Loss of ATS-1 would leave one other comparable satellite, ATS-3, launched in November 1967, in operation. Positioned in geosynchronous orbit over the Pacific Ocean south of Mexico, ATS-3 covered the U.S., most of the Atlantic Ocean, and a large part of the eastern Pacific including Hawaii. (NASA Release 85-45)
The Circumnavigators Club in New York City would present Sally Ride, the first American woman astronaut, with its Order of Magellan, the Washington Post reported, which was presented to individuals who were dedicated to advancing peace and understanding in all parts of the world and who had circumnavigated the globe. Ride was only the 17th person to receive the award. Other recipients were Gen. Douglas MacArthur, former President Hoover, Neil Armstrong, Sen. Barry Goldwater, Lowell Thomas, and Thor Heyerdahl. (W Post, Nov 11/85, C3)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
The Smithsonian Institution announced that "Celestial Images: Astronomical Charts, 1500-1900," a special exhibition of 39 rare depictions of star patterns and planetary systems, would open May 16 at its National Museum of American History. The exhibition, intended to illustrate a unity of science and art from the Renaissance to the 1900s, would include two woodcuts, the first printed star charts with coordinates and scales from which positions of stars could be plotted, from the workshop of Renaissance artist and mathematician Albrecht Durer (1471-1528). The museum would also display from Lahore, India, a 17th-century Islamic celestial globe made of brass and inlaid with silver stars; the only extant copy of engraved paper gores (1599) for the first celestial globe by Willem Janszoon Blaeu (1571-1638), the first to incorporate the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe's unexcelled positions for 1,000 stars; and a 17th-century celestial atlas by Andreas Cellarius. In addition to reflecting artistic styles and conventions of their periods, the works represented differing points of scientific and philosophical debate. Charts that accurately fixed many constellations and thousands of stars also depicted Ptolemy's view of the earth as the center of the universe. Constellations rendered as mythological figures in one work might appear as Biblical figures in another. However, as a result of astronomer's access to stronger and technically improved instruments, the works showed increasing accuracy over the 400 years covered in the exhibition. (Smithsonian Institution Release, May 8/85)
NASA announced that the Department of Defense (DOD) had agreed that Space Shuttle mission 51-C, scheduled for launch January 23, 1985, from KSC, would carry the Australian aggregation of red blood cells [see Jan. 14] and shuttle storable fluid management demonstration (SFMD) experiments. NASA had scheduled both for previous missions, but withdrawn them due to orbiter-weight and center-of-gravity considerations. The SFMD, a joint NASA-Martin Marietta Aerospace/U.S. Air Force experiment, would test how weightless fluids behaved in transit from one tank to another to demonstrate the transfer of fluids planned for servicing and maintaining spacecraft in orbit. Space Shuttle crew would manually operate the experiment, consisting of 13-in.-diameter clear acrylic supply and receiving tanks, with a series of valves in which pressurized air would force fluid to and from transparent tanks, a video tape recorder and 35mm still camera photographing the operation and an accelerometer measuring any motion caused by the orbiter that affected the experiment. (NASA Release 85-10)
The successful landing test on October 30 of a new nose-wheel steering system on the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A meant that the orbiter Columbia would resume Space Shuttle landings on the concrete runway at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) when it returned following mission 61-C, the Washington Post reported. All Space Shuttle landings since April had been at Edwards Air Force Base, where the long desert runways allowed pilots to roll to a stop without excessive brake use. At KSC crosswinds tended to push the orbiter toward the edges of the narrow runway after the spacecraft touched down, which pilots countered by making "preferential" use of brake assemblies on the landing gear under the Space Shuttle's wings. By braking on one side or the other, pilots kept the orbiter on the runway. But a landing in April shredded three of the orbiter's tires and burned out a brake assembly. NASA built the new nosewheel steering mechanism into the orbiter so the pilot could steer the spacecraft without using his brakes. Challenger Commander Henry Hartsfield said after the Challenger landing that he was "very pleased" with the assembly, but recommended one more test on the concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. (W Post, Nov 22/85, A21)
Researchers in the Workload and Ergonomics Branch of the Armstrong Aerospace Medical Research Laboratory were working to adapt machines to pilots rather than the traditional other way around, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "The success or failure of a modern Air Force aircraft and mission depends on whether the pilot has the ability to handle the unpredictable situations typical in a wartime environment," said Maris Vikmanis, supervisory industrial engineer for the lab. He explained that laboratory researchers studied how pilots performed in different environments, including combat, to provide information to aircraft designers so that future aircraft would be better adapted to pilots. But he pointed out there was more to it than simply assessing new aircrafts' cockpit designs. "Not only do we have to observe how the pilot performs in the aircraft cockpit, we also have to tap into the pilot himself," Vikmanis explained. "We must know how much effort the pilot is expending, his mental capability, and his workload limitation." In analyzing cockpit design, researchers checked into how well a pilot could see and reach cockpit controls and displays. Only in existence as an aerospace research field since 1979, workload research measured both the pilot's performance and his internal state of wellbeing. By combining experiments in the laboratory and in flight, lab researchers measured human performance/workload using three different methods. First, researchers used a computer-based performance test to measure a pilot's physical and mental action. By having the pilot perform up to 11 different tasks, researchers could characterize various aspects of human behavior. Second, pilots answered, after flying a simulator or an actual aircraft, subjective questions about their experience. A third method measured human performance/workload from a physiological viewpoint by collecting and analyzing variable responses of the human brain, heart, muscles, and visual system. Lab scientists and engineers used the test data to prepare a workload scale, which focused on problems the pilot, aircrew, and the aircraft itself might encounter in the future. NASA was applying similar methodology to the Space Shuttle and its crew, particularly to examine the effects on astronauts of microgravity as an element of stress. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 7)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle today launched the Navy SOOS-I spacecraft from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. As a result of a 1962 NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) agreement for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle, the U.S. Navy asked NASA to provide Scout launches for the Navy Transit and NOVA programs. The Navy reimbursed NASA for the cost of Scout launch vehicles, WSMC launch services, and mission support requirements as needed. The Navy and other vessels used the Transit program, an operational navigation system, for worldwide ocean navigation. Prior to the August 1 launch there were six operating satellites in the system. NASA maintained two Scout vehicles on standby status to launch replacement satellites to fill any operational gaps occurring in the system. The Navy SOOS-I mission had two Transit satellites in a stacked configuration. The spacecraft, which weighed 283 lb., had orbital parameters of 670 km, apogee; 554 km, perigee; and 89.83°, inclination. (NASA MOR M-490-606-85-01 [postlaunch] Sept 30, [prelaunch] July28/85)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
NASA announced it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB, originally scheduled for October 15, 1985, until no earlier than January 29, 1986. NASA and Air Force officials had conducted in December 1984 an extensive review of Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch-facility readiness, the Department of Defense (DOD) payload, and impact of the orbiter Challenger tile problems on the Space Shuttle program schedule. They had decided to delay launch to maintain the current Space Shuttle manifest and to insure adequate margin in development of the DOD payload for the initial Vandenberg launch. NASA and the Air Force agreed that the orbiter Discovery would be delivered to Vandenberg in early September 1985 instead of May; NASA would use Discovery for two flights from KSC in mid-1985 to accommodate the impact of tile problems on the schedule and would deliver other Space Shuttle flight hardware (filament-wound cases and external tank) as soon as possible to Vandenberg to provide maximum schedule flexibility for the earliest launch. The Air Force had corrected problems with pipe welds and cleanliness at the Vandenberg launch site and was conducting ground systems tests with the orbiter Enterprise in preparation for initial checkout. NASA had delivered an external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster skirt ahead of schedule. NASA was completing the remainder of the 1985 Space Shuttle manifest with commercial and DOD payloads and would release a manifest covering August 1985 through 1989 in the near future. In reporting the delay, the Washington Post noted that Vandenberg was the only base from which Space Shuttles could fly into north-south orbits crossing the poles, an orbit ideal for surveillance and other earth-watching spacecraft because they could fly over the entire globe once every 18 days. (NASA Release 85-4; W Post, Jan 9/85, A9)
NASA and the National Science Teachers Association announced continuation for the sixth year of the Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program, which provided an opportunity for secondary school students (grades 9-12) to write proposals for space science experiments that would develop their awareness of space and stimulate interest in science and technology. During the next year's competition, the association would select up to five students from each of eight geographic regions who, along with their teachers, would receive all-expense-paid trips to a Space Shuttle symposium at a NASA center. Later, one semifinalist selected from each region would attend a national Space Shuttle symposium at Kennedy Space Center, during which the association would award scholarships to the three students submitting the most outstanding proposals. (NASA Release 85-70)
Astronauts Maj. Jerry Ross of the Air Force and Lt. Col. Sherwood Spring of the Army today stepped outside the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B for the second construction exercise in the weightlessness of space [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Nov. 30], the NY Times reported. To TV viewers on earth, the two appeared to manipulate with ease the heavy structures they were building, although both were sweating and breathing heavily after the first 20 minutes of work. Two hours into the spacewalk, they reported that though their hands, feet, and backs were moist with sweat, they were working comfortably. The purpose of today's spacewalk was the same as previously, to test the efficiency of techniques to build a 45-foot-high aluminum tower. However, the astronauts changed the way they worked and had the assistance of astronaut Dr. Mary Cleave, who was operating the Space Shuttle's 50-foot mechanical arm. She moved the men from place to place as their work required. Later in the exercise, the Washington Post reported, Ross and Spring took turns stringing cable along the four-story metal frame they had constructed, just as future crews might lay cable for a space station. They also removed parts of the tower and replaced them with other parts, simulating a space repair. NASA officials commented after the first spacewalk on November 30 that the work had proved more taxing than expected, perhaps because the astronauts' gloves, unlike the rest of their spacesuits, were not air-conditioned and could not carry away excess heat. Most of the work had entailed repeated squeezing and twisting with the hands. Ross and Spring said after the exercise that they would not want to repeat it before having a day of rest. They indicated that the activity had left their hands so numb and fatigued that they had trouble fastening the airlock of the Space Shuttle as they reentered it. NASA officials did note they were favorably surprised by the astronauts' rapid improvement in performance as they learned from successive repetitions of the exercise. (NYT, Dec 2/85, B6; W Post, Dec 2/85, A3)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
Discovery and its five-man crew on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 landed at 9:16 EDT today at Edwards Air Force Base after a seven-day mission [see Aug. 27], the Washington Post reported. During the mission, the crew deployed AUSSAT-1 for the Australian government, ASC-1 for the American Satellite Corp., and Leasat 4 for Hughes Communications (reports indicated Leasat 4 had lost its UHF communications link). In addition, the crew successfully retrieved and repaired the Leasat 3 originally deployed on STS 51-D. Later Hughes issued a statement saying "Leasat 3 is under full control by Hughes' ground command, and telemetry data continued to confirm the good health of the satellite. The liquid propulsion systems are intact and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures appear to be rising gradually toward acceptable levels," the JSC Roundup reported. Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said after the mission that "1 would have to characterize this mission as near to perfect as you can get. It was a perfect mission from the outset, one that shows America's space program at work." Moore added that he hoped there would be only two more Space Shuttle landings in California before pilots could resume landing in Florida. NASA switched to Edwards Air Force Base landings after brakes failed and a tire blew out in an April landing on Kennedy Space Center's concrete runway. (IV Post, Sept 4/85, A7; JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 1)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
NASA announced it had selected Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Western Development Laboratories, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract for the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) that would include three spacecraft (GOES-1, J, and K) and a two spacecraft option (GOES-L and M). The contract had a proposed cost of $221 million and would provide for a series of GOES satellite systems, each with a five-year design life, that would contribute to continuation of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) GOES program in the 1990 to 2000 era. NASA had scheduled a late 1989 launch for the first GOES satellite in this new series. The contract statement of work covered the satellite bus; imaging, sounding, and space-environment monitor instruments; and flight-support equipment and services to accomplish deployment of the spacecraft into geosynchronous orbit from the Space Shuttle. The contract also included operations ground equipment and support to ensure compatibility of the spacecraft systems with established ground systems operated by NOAA. NASA assigned Goddard Space Flight Center responsibility for project management. (NASA Release 85-80)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Materials Science Laboratory would make its first spaceflight on Space Shuttle 61-C, scheduled for launch on December 18, the Marshall Sfarreported. Using a mission peculiar equipment support structure (MPESS) in the payload bay, the Materials Science Laboratory-2 (MSL-2) would provide accommodations for three experiments in materials processing—the MSFC-managed Electromagnetic Levitator (EML) and Automated Directional Solidification Furnace (ADSF) and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory-Managed Three-Axis Acoustic Levitator (3AAL). The electromagnetic levitator experiment would allow scientists to study the effects of materials flow during solidification of a melted material in the microgravity environment. Six samples would be suspended in the electromagnetic field of a coil and melted by induction heating from the coil's electromagnetic field. The ADSF consisted of four furnace, or sample, units. The experiment would investigate the melting and solidification process of four different materials for later comparison to samples of the same materials processed on earth. In the 3AAL experiment, 12 liquid sampies would be suspended in sound pressure waves and rotated and oscillated in a low-gravity nitrogen atmosphere. Investigators would study the degree of sphericity attainable and small bubble migration similar to that having to do with the refining of glass. The standard switch panel in the orbiter aft flight deck would provide activation, deactivation, and status monitoring capability. (Marshall Star, Dec 18/85, 2) During December. NASA scheduled for launch on December 18 the Space Shuttle Columbia, making its first journey into space in two years, on mission 61-C, the 24th flight of the U.S. Space Transportation System. Robert Gibson would command the flight, his second trip into space. Charles Bolden, on his first spaceflight, would pilot; mission specialists would be Franklin Chang-Diaz, a physicist born in Costa Rica and the first American of Hispanic origin to fly in space, and Steven Hawley and George Nelson, both making their second spaceflight; and payload specialists would be Robert Cenker of RCA and U.S. Rep. Bill Nelson of Florida, chairman of the House subcommittee on space science and applications and the second congressional observer to fly in space. During the mission, the crew would deploy RCA's Satcom KU-2 communications satellite, the second in a series of three, with its payload assist module D-2 (PAM D-2) upper stage. The crew on mission 61-C in November deployed Satcom KU-1. Also onboard Columbia in the payload bay would be the Materials Science Lab-2 (MSL-2) [see Space Transportation System/Scientific Research, Dec. 18], the first Hitchhiker (HHG-1) payload, the RCA Infrared-Imaging Experiment (IR—IE), and 12 Get Away Special (GAS) experiments in specialized canisters mounted to a GAS beam attached to the payload bay. Hitchhiker G-1, a more sophisticated version of the GAS concept, consisted of a baseplate on which small payloads were mounted directly or enclosed in canisters. The carrier for the first time provided small payloads with access to the orbiter's 1400-watt power supply and to ground communications. Hitchhiker G-1 experiments would study experimental capillary pumped loop heat transport systems (sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center-GSFC), provide film images of the environment around the Space Shuttle (Air Force Geophysics Laboratory), and study the effect of the Space Shuttle environment on coated mirrors (Perkin-Elmer Corp.). The GAS Bridge was a beam supporting 12 GAS canisters that were mounted across the orbiter's cargo bay. The beam consolidated the canisters into a single easy-to-load and unlead unit. Experiments in the GAS canisters would:
The U.S. Air Force Space Technology Center's Kirtland Contracting Center awarded Aerojet Electro Systems a $17-million contract and Hughes Aircraft a $21-million contract for work on the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Under the contracts the companies would develop and build a space surveillance sensor called "the precursor above the horizon sensor," which would look across space using several frequency bands in the long-wave infrared spectrum to track the trajectory of intercontinental ballistic missiles or space systems. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 11/85, 3)
Hans Mark, former NASA deputy administrator, Ames Research Center director, and Secretary of the Air Force, on April 9, during part of an MIT dinner lecture series, disparaged government attempts to commercialize space, the Space Commerce Bulletin reported. "Now that I'm out of government, I can say that I found nothing funnier than bureaucrats wringing their hands in town around here about how to commercialize something where most of them, myself included, don't have the slightest idea on how to make investments, how to judge markets, how to do all those things that are important for commercialization," Mark said. He characterized commercial space efforts as being politically popular but backed with little substance, with much of his criticism directed at private sector remote sensing and expendable launch vehicle operations. He said he didn't believe either technology would be a commercial success in the U.S., and he predicted private Space Shuttle operation would never work. Mark considered true commercial space activity to be technology transfer programs and government-industry relations as set up in the 1950s to build hardware for government programs. He added, however, that government couldn't take credit for technology transfer as being space commercialization because that was not what "intellectuals think commercialization means and we need to do other things. So we need to hire 50 people in NASA headquarters to do commercialization." Regarding the impact of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) on commercial space, Mark said, "There's no doubt in my mind that important commercial ventures will follow from SDI simply because of the nature of the contractor systems that we use. We will build high-intensity lasers and the first commercial application of those lasers will surely be in welding or in something like that . . . That's what I like to call the commercialization of space," Mark concluded. (Space Commerce Bulletin, Apr 26/85, 1)
NASA expected the Space Shuttle's nose wheel steering capability, previously used only on an experimental basis, would achieve operational status by the fall, the Space News Roundup reported. NASA had attributed brake damage to the orbiter Discovery following the STS 51-D mission in part to crosswinds at KSC, which required the orbiter's commander to use the main gear braking system for differential steering. Nose wheel steering would allow Space Shuttle commanders to use the brake system for stopping orbiters rather than for braking and steering combined. A nose wheel steering capability was in the Space Shuttle design, but used only on an experimental basis. NASA had spent the last year upgrading the system to operational status. In addition, NASA instrumented the Challenger to provide better landing condition data and planned to add instrumentation to the landing gear system of the Discovery. In the 17 Space Shuttle missions to date, NASA had used 68 individual brake systems with 27 receiving no damage, 27 receiving slight damage, and 14 receiving significant damage in which either one or more stators or rotors overheated or suffered other problems. Until the nose wheel steering capability became operational, NASA intended to choose on a flight by flight basis between Kennedy Space Center and Edwards Air Force Base as the primary end of mission landing site. (JSC Space News Roundup, June 14/85, 2)
The orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F landed at 12:46 p.m. PDT today on Edwards Air Force Base's Mojave Desert lake-bed runway, the Washington Post reported. During the flight, Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three million miles. Technicians stood by at the runway to remove immediately the heat sensors from Challenger's main engines to check a NASA theory that the sensors caused the premature shutdown of the center rocket engine during the July 29 launch. NASA was confident enough that the sensors would be found at fault that it had equipped Discovery's engines with redesigned sensors before moving it August 5 to the launch pad. During the mission, Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory with more than $72 million of telescopes and other instruments to study the sun, stars, and distant galaxies. The NY Times reported that Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator, said, "We met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission. We're absolutely delighted." Dr. Eugene Urban, chief mission scientist, added, "Everyone has collected tantalizing new data. It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some have been very spectacular." Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, commented that the orbiter appeared to be in good shape after the landing, the eighth for the Challenger. "It was a beautiful landing," he said. "The tiles looked very good. The brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying machines." (W Post, Aug 7/85, A3; NYT, Aug 7/85, A1)
NASA successfully launched today an Aerobee liquid-fueled, sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, marking the end of that rocket series, which was the oldest continuous rocket-firing program. NASA's Sounding Rocket Division had launched 536 Aerobees with a 94% success rate. The Aerobee's reliability made it the workhorse vehicle for high-altitude studies. Commenting on the program, Maury Dubin, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) physicist, said "virtually everything that's been done in space research can be attributed to sounding-rocket technology. The Aerobee and other sounding-rocket research precipitated the rise of many disciplines, from astronomy to the upper atmosphere." The Aerobee program began in 1946 when Aerojet Engineering Corp. received a U.S. Navy contract to build the rockets, and the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) had supplied technical direction; Dr. James Van Allen had been project director. The Aerobee name, the Bumblebees, derived from a combination of Aerojet and APL's series of Navy missiles. NASA had used Aerobees extensively during the Internatl. Geophysical Year (July 1957 to December 1958) to gather information on the atmosphere, cosmic radiation, auroras, and geomagnetism. The Aerobee rockets consisted of a series of five with each rocket carrying as many as six experiments that included equipment such as cameras, vacuum bottles, mirrors, grids, sensing devices, lenses, and other mechanical PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	„ units. Most rockets recorded data and simultaneously transmitted it via telemetry to ground stations. The final Aerobee payload tested a new spectrograph that would be flown on NASA's Astro mission to record extreme ultraviolet Dayglow emissions in earth's upper atmosphere. George Kraft, GSFC flight support section director, said that, although the demise of small liquid-fueled sounding rockets was imminent, "sounding rockets would continue to be an important element in NASA's support of the scientific community. They're virtually the only vehicles that can conduct studies in the 40 km (25 miles) to 200 km (125 miles) high zone of the atmosphere." Balloons could travel only about 50 km (31 miles) high and satellites were ineffective below 200 km (125 miles) high. GSFC's Wallops Flight Facility managed the NASA sounding-rocket program. (GSFC Release 85-6)
NASA announced a new Space Shuttle manifest for 41 Space Shuttle missions through December 14, 1987 that included nine flights for the remainder of 1985, 15 flights in 1986, and 17 flights in 1987. Highlights for 1985 included the first Atlantis flight in late September for a Department of Defense mission; a Spacelab 3 flight in late April, Spacelab 2 with extensive European Space Agency participation in July, and another Spacelab flight in October dedicated to W. German scientific investigations. Also during 1985 NASA would deploy communications satellites for Hughes, AT&T, RCA, Mexico, Australia, Canada, and the Arabsat consortium. In 1986 the first launch of the Space Shuttle from Vandenberg Air Force Base would occur. The first liquid-hydrogen-powered Shuttle Centaur upper stage would be used to deploy Ulysses (formerly the International Solar Polar Mission), and the Galileo mission to Jupiter (also using the Shuttle Centaur) and the Hubble Space Telescope flight would be launched. NASA said launch dates of missions to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and to retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) were under review. Also, NASA assigned Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce McCandless as mission specialists for the Hubble Space Telescope flight on mission 61-J in August 1986. (NASA Release 8550)
Effective today Lockheed Corp. reassigned six officers of its Lockheed Space Operations Co. at Kennedy Space Center after a six-month corporate investigation of the management practices and work procedures used to process the Space Shuttle for launch, Aviation Week reported. E. Douglas Sargent replaced A.R. Schroter as president of Lockheed Space Operations Co. and became program manager of the Space Shuttle processing contract, David Owen replaced W. John Denson as deputy program manager and became executive vice president of the space operations company, and David Dickenson replaced Ronald Petersen as vice president and director of Kennedy Space Center operations. Although the replaced Lockheed managers had previously received unfavorable management evaluations, the management realignment came as NASA completed a report on its investigation of a March 8 incident in which a work platform fell in the Orbiter Processing Facility, damaging the orbiter Discovery and injuring a workman [see Space Transportation System, Launch Schedules, Mar. 8]. The report would assign a large part of the responsibility for the accident to Lockheed safety and quality control procedures. However, a NASA official said the platform incident did not precipitate the realignment. He said a Lockheed Corp. investigating team, which had analyzed Lockheed's performance at KSC since the previous October, had made detailed recommendations on how to streamline and improve performance. Also, after receiving a grade of excellent in the award fee evaluation during the transition period when Lockheed took over Space Shuttle processing work previously done by 15 separate contractors, NASA gave Lockheed a low score in the next evaluation period of April 1 to September 30, 1984. Lockheed's basic space processing contract with NASA ran through September 30, 1986, and there was a priced option period for three more years. The two priced contracts were worth $2.5 billion; three additional unpriced three-year options could bring the contract life to 15 years and value to more than $6 billion. NASA said it had no plans to recompete the Space Shuttle processing contract. (AvWk, May 13/85, 14)
The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL), Washington, D.C., announced its scientists devised a precise timing system that used highly efficient and relatively small hydrogen maser clocks that the laboratory expected would enhance timing in the Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS). GPS, a navigational system based on synchronized clocks (accurate to billionths of a second), would permit users to pinpoint their position within a 30-foot radius by measuring differences in the arrival times of radio signals received from NavstaPs satellites. And GPS would disseminate the Naval Observatory's master clock time to fleet units for their command, control, communications, and intelligence. Maser clocks were considered the most accurate clocks available; however their bulky size and weight (lighter ones weighed over 500 lb.) prevented their use aboard GPS satellites. Also, the massive, tuned cavity where the maser action took place required temperature control and magnetic shielding, which made masers impractical for use in satellites. The research team at NRL led by Ron Beard reduced the size of maser clocks by a factor of 16 and their weight to 50 lb. And by making the cavity smaller, using different resonant structures, and dielectric (sapphire) loading to produce the effect of a larger cavity, NRL "passive" masers (so called because they did not oscillate on their own) proved to be as accurate as the larger versions. Beard noted that NRL's involvement with masers and the subsequent idea to reduce cavity size came about only after two astro-industrial companies were unsuccessful in meeting GPS's timing demands. NRL built and tested two experimental maser development models and two advanced development models. An additional NRL project with Hughes Research Laboratories used a Q-multiplier approach to offset the inherently higher signal losses in small cavities. Research in the NRL maser program included advances in small loaded-cavity properties, beam optics, dissociator reliability, quadropole state selection, thermal/mechanical design, magnetic shielding/design, and vacuum design for space applications. The NRL-developed technology formed the basis for a $12 million contract awarded to Hughes Aircraft Corp. to produce two types of engineering development models of hydrogen-maser clocks. One clock type was for use in satellites; the other, for GPS ground stations and possibly ships. (NRL Release 58-85 R)
NASA announced that, during mission 51 —L scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986, it would release from the Space Shuttle a free-flying payload called Spartan-Halley to observe Halley's Comet. Scientists believed that comet exploration was a search for the beginnings of earth, because comets were the most unaltered samples of the early solar system. Spartan-Halley was the only NASA satellite dedicated solely to observing Comet Halley. During these observations, January 24 through 31, the comet would be in its most active period as it headed towards its closest approach to the sun on February 9. The objective of the Spartan-Halley mission was to measure from earth orbit the ultraviolet spectrum of Comet Halley using twin spectrographs designed and built by the University of Colorado's Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics. Spartan-Halley's cameras and instruments would analyze the active comet, looking for hydrogen and oxygen atoms and carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur molecules. If the spacecraft detected these elements, it might indicate more complex compounds could be present in the ice and dust that made up the comet's nucleus. Goddard Space Flight Center developed Spartan-Halley, a modified Spartan-2 spacecraft, to be a research carrier. The spacecraft consisted of the spectrographic instrumentation, attitude control cameras (which also provided science photography), a microprocessor, associated electronics, a sunlight baffling system, and a service module. The January mission would be the first for the Spartan-2 type carrier, a completely reusable spacecraft to be reflown later on several other missions. Following completion of the January mission, the Space Shuttle's robot arm would retrieve Spartan-Halley and store it in the cargo bay. (NASA Release 85-161)
NASA announced that it had launched INTELSAT V-A (F—12), 10th in a series of 11 Intelsat V-type satellites to be launched in the 1980 to 1985 period for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), from its facilities at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station aboard an Atlas/Centaur launch vehicle. INTELSAT assigned the satellite to the Indian Ocean region to replace Intelsat V{F-1), which INTELSAT ordered moved to the Pacific Ocean Region where, in combination with Intelsat V (F—8), it would replace Intelsat IVA satellites that were running out of stationkeeping propellants. INTELSAT awarded Ford Aerospace as prime contractor and an international team of manufacturers as subcontractors a contract for development and manufacture of Intelsat V-A satellites. INTELSAT was also considering a number of follow-on satellites with modified and expanded communications capabilities. (NASA Release 85-134; NASA MOR M—491-203-85-10 [prelaunch] Sept 19/85, [postlaunch] Oct 10/85.)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
Gen. Lawrence Skantze, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, declared that the U.S. military space program was about to begin a new era in which military space systems competed against terrestrial systems to determine which could better handle military situations, Defense Daily reported. Three developments had created the military space program, reaching what Skantze called a "critical mass." These were the establishments of the Unified Space Command that provided for the first time an advocate for U.S. space activities; the Project Forecast II technology study, which would propose among other things "quantum leaps in space capabilities;" and the growing momentum of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI). "This 'critical mass,' merging with the proven combat enhancement roles of space systems and a tight defense budget, would thrust the military into a new era of force structure decision," Skantze said. "A limited budget and its allocation process will place space systems in direct competition with terrestrial systems for resources and solutions to military problems," he commented. Space systems would have to demonstrate that the benefits they provided were worth more than the terrestrial force addition that would have to be foregone for the space system, Skantze pointed out. In the past, "space systems have often competed for R&D dollars with terrestrial systems that have traditionally done the same or similar jobs," he explained. "At times we have the luxury of being able to afford both. These times are gone. Given the more sophisticated treat, and the corresponding increased complexity and cost of all aerospace systems, tradeoffs among different mission areas are now essential. "In an era when fielding a single military satellite can cost up to $.5 billion, we need to carefully consider what we are willing to give up to get a space system," he asserted. Regarding the outlook for a shift to space systems, Skantze said that "future tradeoffs of space systems will be tough for several reasons. One is that right now, space systems are fewer in number, more costly, and subject to different logistics concepts than terrestrial systems. While multiyear contracting can reduce cost, we haven't been able to take advantage of economic order quantities the way we have for missiles, bombs, or even planes. Development and production costs for spacecraft will continue to exceed the flyaway cost of a B-1B or F-15—even with on-orbit satellite repair on the horizon. "While the Shuttle offers that possibility," he added, "we still have to build space systems reliable, redundant and survivable. For two to ten years at a time, military spacecraft must survive in-space radiation or combat, regulating their own systems or responding to remote controls. Ultra-high reliability is costly, but we can't yet afford squadron-level maintenance of military satellites on-orbit. For now, we're working on new maintenance concepts and better materials, propellants, and hardening to reduce some of the cost of space systems. However, they will remain expensive military alternatives until we find a new way of doing business." A second reason making tradeoffs between space and terrestrial systems difficult was that "the payoffs are different, and hard to compare," since space systems were "force multipliers," that is, they made weapon systems more capable, Skantze said. And a final reason that made tradeoffs difficult, he said, was "that a decision for a space system can be all or nothing," meaning the number of fighter wings could be pared and still provide an effective force to some extent, "while the Unified Space Command cannot cut back on satellite numbers and still operate an effective system. The investment question can boil down to doing it all or just not doing it," he commented. (D/D, Dec 18/85, 241)
NASA announced that in a two-and-one-half-year effort costing $15 million it had lengthened and improved its Aircraft Landing Dynamics Facility at Langley Research Center. The track, used to test aircraft wheels, tires, and landing gear, used a high-pressure water jet system to propel the test carriage along the rail/track system where researchers conducted experiments under simulated runway conditions. Track testing options included choosing between concrete or asphalt runway surfaces and among a full range of weather-related surface conditions, including dry, damp, or flooded runways or slush- or ice-covered surfaces. Even before the expansion, NASA believed the track to be the only facility in the world capable of testing full-size aircraft landing gear systems under closely controlled conditions simulating takeoffs and landings. Lengthening the track to more than one-half mile increased the facility's maximum test speed from 120 to 250 mph and made possible, for the first time, simulated landing tests of all modern aircraft and the Space Shuttle. Other facility improvements included a higher capacity water jet system and a newly designed high-speed test carriage. The improved catapult system produced a 1.7-million-lb. thrust on the carriage, resulting in a 17—g (gravity force) acceleration that pushed the carriage in only 400 feet from zero to 250 mph in two seconds, and the new carriage had a 20-by-40-foot test bay to accommodate larger test articles. NASA used ten thousand gallons of water in maximum speed run. Initial research at the modified facility would study the cornering forces and spin-up characteristics of the Space Shuttle main gear tire, which spun up from zero to landing speeds almost instantly at touchdown. NASA would mount a tire-wheel-brake assembly on the carriage for tests of tire wear and applied loads and would run these first tests on the facility's existing smooth concrete surface. Later runs would require the touchdown area of the track altered to simulate the roughness and grooving of the Space Shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center. NASA would then paint smooth the relatively rough runway to determine the best KSC runway characteristics to lessen Space Shuttle tire wear. Later tests would include a variety of aircraft landing hardware tests, averaging about 75 to 100 runs each. NASA estimated the facility could accomplish 300 runs a year with as many as six a day during the height of a test program. One test program, for example, would compare the performance of radial tires, not commonly used on aircraft, to that of conventional bias ply tires. NASA would run these tests in conjunction with a Federal Aviation Adminis-tration/NASA program to gather information on runway surface traction. NASA had scheduled over the next several years test programs that included track tests to develop a data based for the National Tire Modeling Program, an analytical computer model to aid in design of new tires, and a tire failure study. (NASA Release 85-109) Lewis Research Center
Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that Warren North, JSC specialist in astronaut selection and training, retired February 1 after 38 years with NASA. North had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA's predecessor agency) in 1947 as a test-pilot engineer at LeRC. In 1959 North had transferred to NASA Headquarters, where he participated in early planning for Project Mercury, including selection and training of the seven original Mercury astronauts; in 1962 North assumed leadership of the JSC division responsible for training astronauts for Gemini rendezvous and docking development flights and for the Apollo lunar landing program. North was currently special assistant to the JSC flight-operations director for planning Space Shuttle crew training and flight-simulation equipment and techniques. North received a bachelor's degree from Purdue University and master's degrees from Case Institute of Technology and Princeton University. (JSC Release 85-7)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that on February 4 technical/scientific teams from Australia, India, Finland, and the U.S. had begun a six-week meeting at Wallops Flight Facility, Va., to compare radiosonde instruments used worldwide. Measuring only a few inches square and weighing less than 2 lb., the radiosonde was a low-cost, mass-produced instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure, temperature, relative humidity, and wind while ascending on a small balloon up to about 25 km (15 miles), or more frequently 30 km (18 miles), above earth. Worldwide weather services used radiosonde data for forecasts to aid aviation and for research. There were currently 17 radiosonde manufacturers in a number of countries, resulting in occasional differences in instrument measurements and the need to make periodic comparisons. A working group on the quality of meteorological data meeting in 1982 at the World Meteorological OrganizaPRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	71 JNIgHTlOKAUr BLANK tion's (WMO) headquarters, Geneva, Switz. had agreed that two phases of tests were required. The United Kingdom's Meteorological Office had hosted the 1st phase in 1984, when researchers released 106 ballons. Phase-2 participants at Wallops launched four balloons a day, five days a week, weather permitting, for an anticipated total of about 100 flights, each balloon carrying four or more instruments. Researchers would then correlate Phase-2 data with Phase-1 results. (GSFC Release 85—8)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
NASA announced that Inorganic Coatings, Inc. was providing interior corrosion protection to the refurbished Statue of Liberty by means of a primer coating known as K-Zinc 531, an aerospace spinoff product developed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) to protect gantries and other structures at NASA's primary launch site, Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Because KSC was located on Florida's Atlantic Coast, its launch facilities required greater corrosion protection due to constant exposure to salt spray and fog. GSFC undertook a research program to develop a coating that would not only resist salt corrosion, but also protect KSC launch structures from very hot rocket exhaust and the thermal shock created by rapid temperature changes during a space launch. The GSFC research resulted in an inorganic water-based potassium silicate binder, a compound that provided long-term protection with a single application. NASA granted in 1981 a license for the coating to Shane Associates, which signed an agreement with Inorganic Coatings to allow it to become the sole manufacturer and sales agent under the Shane license. Inorganic Coatings assigned the trade name K-Zinc 531 to the compound, which was nontoxic, nonflammable, and had no organic emissions. The high ratio silicate formulation bonded to steel in 30 minutes and created a hard ceramic finish with superior adhesion and abrasion resistance. It required no straining before application and could be mixed on site. (NASA Release 85-64)
General Dynamics would delay for more than two weeks the delivery of the first Space Shuttle/Centaur upper stage to the company's facility at Cape Canaveral Air Force Base, adding an increased schedule risk to already tight timing for launch in May 1986 of the Galileo and Ulysses missions on trajectories toward Jupiter, Aviation Week reported. Martin Winkler, General Dynamics Space Shuttle/Centaur program manager, said the stage remained in San Diego to complete acceptance testing and also to conduct some tests that were to have been done in Florida. Winkler said that keeping the stage in San Diego to complete assembly and testing would not affect the testing and processing schedule in Florida, since it would be delivered in time for the scheduled mating with the Centaur integrated support structure (CISS). Winkler said the schedule called for completion of acceptance testing by September 11 and that there were no unresolved flight safety issues, although it was possible some might come up during future safety reviews and subsystem qualification testing. Problems fixed prior to shipment included a mislocated forward bearing bracket that held each of the 12 springs on the stage, installation difficulties resulting from a minor tooling problem, and strut reengineering required for installation of a component in the tank. The CISS, which was then in Florida for the first Space Shuttle/Centaur stage, was flight hardware and was a complete system with only some small parts yet to be delivered by mid-September. NASA had scheduled a major test for September 16, when the assembly would rotate with all of the installations in place to assure clearances. A November milestone would be four tanking tests. The second Space Shuttle/Centaur was on schedule; contract date for delivery of the second stage and second CISS was the end of December. General Dynamics estimated it would deliver the second Space Shuttle/Centaur on November 22 and the second CISS on October 29. (AvWk, Sept 9/85, 24)
