McDonnell Douglas Astronautics was selected for negotiations leading to the award of a threeyear contract, with another threeyear option, and a sixyear price tag of $327 million, to perform Payload Ground Operations for Kennedy Space Center activities, both in Florida and elsewhere inside and outside the United States. The work was being done by five different contractors, and NASA hoped to obtain a single, longterm contract. Responsibilities included payload/cargo processing and integration, Spacelab operations and integration, support to experimental integration activities, payload/cargo deintegration, NASA/Vandenberg payload operations, payload related facilities, systems and ground equipment operations, maintenance and sustaining engineering, customer accommodation and launchsite support functions, and payload related support operations and services. (NASA Release 86167)
Richard G. Smith, Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, announced his retirement. He plans to join the private sector with General Space Corporation. His achievements span 35 years in the space program and include work with the rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal; management of',0*the Saturn Rocket program at Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Headquarters, Director of the Skylab Task Force, and he is the recipient of awards for his contributions to Apollo, Skylab, and Space Shuttle programs. Smith had earlier warned that investigation into the Challenger accident would result in a mass exodus from NASA and later added that the investigation damaged the reputations of many officials. (NASA Release 8689; W Times, Jul 11/86; W Post, Jul 11/86; NY Times, Jul 11/86; LA Times, Jul 11/86
Al Louviere, who headed a team of engineers at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, recommended to Shuttle Program Director Arnold Aldrich that an escape system be built into orbiters. Equipped with pressure suits and an oxygen supply, astronauts could bail out of the aircraft while it was in gliding flight below 100,000 feet. Although no specific plan was given, Louviere stressed the fact that no escape system could have saved the Challenger crew. (p Inq, Jul 2/86)
Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
A device conceived by Donald Young of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for aiding scientists in treating bone loss resulting from extended space flights spawned hope among the medical community. The vibrating analyzer is placed in the center of a limb and the ratio of force applied to the bone and the bone's displacement indicate the stiffness of the bone. The device, it was thought, would offer earlier0*detection of osteoporosis and take guess work out of cast removal. (WSJ, Mar 3/86)
The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, announced plans to build, and open by 1989, a $40 million visitor's center near its complex. The center would include a large geodesic dome, two hightech movie theaters, a simulated lunar landscape, a Mission Control Center simulation, and an exhibit hall featuring past achievements. (LA Times, Oct 23,86)
Thomas L. Moser, Director for Engineering at NASA's Johnson Space Center, was appointed as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight to investigate the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8616)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), which operates the Nation's weather satellites, announced that its polar orbiting satellite NOAA8 was apparently lost. NOAA was informed by the Air Force that its tracking instruments detected "what appeared to be pieces of the satellite" in the vicinity of NOAA8 orbit. (NY Times, Jan 7/86) 0** Dr. William R. Graham, who was appointed Acting Administrator of NASA on January 3, 1986, stated in his first interview that he was the "acting administrator in every sense of the word" and that he felt very comfortable in his new position. He apparently made that statement to put to rest suggestions that the Agency would really be run by NASA Associate Administrator Philip E. Culberston while Graham learned the ropes. Graham was promoted to his new position, from the post of Deputy Administrator of NASA, when NASA Administrator James E. Beggs took a leave of absence to prepare his defense for a trial. Beggs had been charged with defrauding the Federal Government when he served as a top executive of General Dynamics NASA's acting administrator received his master's and doctoral degrees in engineering from Stanford University. He began his professional career at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico and then moved to the Rand Corporation in California. In 1971, he founded R&D Associates, a think tank in Marina Del Rey, California. He was a consultant to the Secretary of Defense and had served on an advisory committee on undersea warfare and human assisted strategic Air Force systems and on nuclear weapons panels. Prior to his appointment as Deputy Administrator of NASA in November 1985, Graham headed, for three years, President Reagan's advisory committee on arms control and The then 48yearold native Texan expressed great optimism in his assessment of the future of NASA and of space exploration in general. He said that "the agency in the coming decade would broaden mankind's understanding of Earth's environment, expand the reach of manned exploration, and extend scientific vision to the far edges of the universe." Stating that space exploration was limited only by "imagination," Graham promised to pursue vigorously President Reagan's mandate to make space more accessible to the ordinary citizen and free enterprise. (W Times, Jan 6/86; 7/86)
East Coast winter storms in the form of cyclones were studied by scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Concentrating their efforts on costal regions of North and South Carolina, where these storms develop and move northward, NASA scientists analyzed the upper atmosphere conditions using moisture and wind sounding balloons and the Nimbus 7 satellite to collect data. Another criterion for understanding these storms was the analysis of the transfer of moisture from the ocean into the atmosphere. NASA flew its fourengine Electra aircraft, outfitted with a combined laser/telescope (Lidar), to detect salt spray and aerosols as it fired a lazar beam that allowed the telescope to measure rising moisture and convection patterns. NASA's ER2 aircraft was used in higher altitudes for the same purpose; it carried microwave radiometers able to detect water vapor and cloud liquid water content. (NASA Release 8630)
The United States planned to resume its efforts to put nuclear reactors into space. The move would renew a program abandoned 10 years previous to this date, but now deemed necessary for President Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), "Star Wars." Even without SDI, said Air Force officials, reactors would be needed for the next generation of spacebased weapons; NASA could use such reactors to power Space0*Stations, lunar bases, interplanetary explorers, and satellite traffic control. The United States has mainly relied on solar energy for its space activities, but SDI would require more power than the panels could give. The Soviet Union never abandoned its plan for space reactors and sent up 20 nuclearpowered satellites, one of which crashed and spread radioactive debris over northwest Canada. (W Post, Apr 14/86)
NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station, established in March 1984 and chaired by Stanford University Professor Peter M. Banks, released its second major report for planning the scientific utility of the Space Station. The report pointed out that spacebased scientific progress had been slower than planned because of short time in orbit, rigid time lines, long periods between flights, and that the Space Station had the obvious potential of overcoming these Two major conclusions noted that Space Station facilities must be operated with the goal of producing outstanding scientific results; the station would be judged with respect to cost and research capability and the need for wellequipped, permanently habitable laboratories able to support a broad range of fundamental research in space. 0*The task force recommended that the Space Station emulate the adaptive science methodology used in terrestrial laboratories, introduce "telescience" (the ability to conduct research remotely), review safety standards to achieve a reasonable state of personal and system security, work with a crew size of 10, and develop "space mail" for delivering small samples of materials to ground laboratories. Other recommendations: (1) Attached payloads are an important part of the core Space Station, and NASA needs a more productive plan for converting observation experiments developed for Spacelab to Space Station; (2) freeflying platforms are essential for conducting many important scientific endeavors for the Space Station era (i.e. several platforms operating in different orbits); (3) NASA should enhance biological research activities in the preinitial orbit configuration period using Spacelabs and other attached payloads on the Space Shuttle to gain experience for conducting biological science research programs; (4) development of a humantended mode of scientific activity aboard a Space Station would be of little value and a need exists for a truly longterm, human capability; (5) it is essential that NASA look ahead to the activities that are anticipated over the 2530 year life span of the core facility and its associated elements; (6) the Space Station will facilitate development of a new type of research termed "science in space"; (7) the science operations of the Space Station should be separated from the operational management of the overall facilities; (8) and NASA must be prepared to change many of its nationally oriented selection, funding, and management procedures because of the important hardware and scientific contributions that will be made by international partners. (Written Statement to the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Committee on Science and Technology from Peter M. Banks, Apr 9/90; NASA Release 8643)
White House officials announced that top members of President Ronald Reagan's cabinet were in favor of halting commercial launches aboard the Space Shuttle, a move that would cost NASA $850 million in revenue. White House spokesman Larry Speaks argued that eliminating the launches would stimulate the private aerospace industry, reluctant to compete with NASA in the past, to quickly fill the void. Another reason for the reduced number of launches, he noted, was the increasing backlog of scientific and military payloads. Focus on those two types of missions exclusively would ease the immediate need for a fourth At the same time, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge said that he intended to ask Congress for $2.6 billion in order to acquire a fleet of rockets that would reduce both the backlog of 21 payloads and the Pentagon's dependance on the Space Shuttle. He added that no Space Shuttles would be launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base until 1992, a saving to tax payers of $1 billion. (W Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug 1/86; W Post, Aug 1/86; B Sun, Aug 1/86; NY Times, Aug 1/86; WSJ, Aug
Bernard M. Oliver, Chief of the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, received the National Medal of Science from President Ronald Reagan. The award recognized his accomplishments while working for Bell Telephone Laboratories, where he helped establish standards for television transmission, worked on automatic radar tracking, and advocated pulsecode modulation for the telephone system; and his accomplishments at HewlettPackard, where he developed the first handheld calculator with scientific functions and SETI, a program designed to search the stars for radio signals. (NASA Release 8627)
Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher became NASA's administrator for the second time. His first term in this position ran from April 1971 to May 1977. During the interim, he held the William K. Whitford Professorship of Energy Resources and Technology at the University of Pittsburgh and headed his own consulting firm. Past achievements include positions as research physicist with the United States Navy Bureau of Ordinance, research associate at Harvard University, instructor at Princeton University, positions in the private sector with Hughes Aircraft Company, RamoWooldridge Corporation and Space Electronics Corporation, and president of Space General Corporation. He also developed patents in sonar devices and missile guidance systems and has been associated with the President's Science Advisory Committee. After being sworn in, Fletcher announced that Space Shuttle flight would not resume for another 12 to 18 months and promised to fully review NASA's quality control program and decisionmaking process. He also noted that the 70 percent reduction in quality control staff for which NASA was recently criticized was "misleading" because "inhouse" work such as the Moonlaunched Saturn rockets were no longer a responsibility. A full Senate0*approved his nomination on May 6. (NASA Release 8660; B Sun, May 13/86; W Post, May 13/86; WSJ, May 13/86; NY Times, May 13/86)
NASA announced to Congress plans for modifying the Space Station that Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher predicted would be finished by 1994. The new design cut the amount of space walks during construction in half, increased the amount of living and laboratory space, and kept all human aspects concerning the project at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The Space Station, according to plans for assembly, would need 17 Space Shuttle flights between 1993 and 1994. In the meantime, Congress approved legislation, based on a
The Delta 178 rocket accident that occurred on May 3, 1986, was caused by mechanical damage to wiring caused by vibration during flight. The rocket's first failureafter 43 flights since 1977was attributed to a design change, a shift from polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulated wiring to Teflon insulated. Unlike PVC, which is overwrapped for greater abrasion protection, Teflon wiring bundles are overwrapped in only a very limited number of locations; the abrasion resistance of mechanical damping was not adequately considered when making the change. The investigating board recommended a review of the booster electrical control system and possible design changes, verification of the quality of all connectors, and a reemphasis on highly attentive, quality workmanship. Another study released concerned the Titan 34D mishap of April 18; it determined the cause of the accident to be insulation inside one of the two solid rockets being pulled away and allowing "burn through." Neither accident was deemed the result of any major design flaw and, subsequent to minor modifications, the United States planned to resume untended rocket launches. The investigating board also observed potential problems resulting from highhumidity conditions for vehicles stored at the Kennedy Space Center, to instrument limitations, and lack of protection from contamination of the Rocketdyne engine relay box. These problems were not directly connected with the Delta 178 `"rocket accident or the Titan 34D mishap. (NASA Release 8685; W (#Post, Jul 3/86; WSJ, Jul 3/86; NY Times, Jul 3/86; B Sun; Jul
NASA announced that the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and the launch of the first Earth Observation Mission have been switched. Under the new schedule, the Space Telescope would be launched on October 27, 1986, and the Earth Observation Mission would lift off on August 18, 1986. The change was made to provide additional time for delivery of the Space Telescope from the West Coast to Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The Space Telescope would be deployed into orbit from Space Shuttle Atlantis. It was expected to see 7 times farther and 10 times more clearly than any telescope on Earth. (NASA Release 862)
The $3 billion launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California was deemed unsafe according to a Senate report released on this date. The salient feature cited was the closed exhaust ducts that could fill with hydrogen gas in the event that a Shuttle's main engines were shut down to abort liftoff or at the end of a flightreadiness testfiring. The report also noted that fog, high winds, and cool temperatures were common to the area and that the proximity of the launch pad to the control center put support personnel at risk. Because the Department of Defense required the California site to achieve polar orbit for reconnaissance satellites, it was recommended that they adopt the "new" Titan missiles. (W Times, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jun 18/86; Jul 9/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
NASA extended a oneyear, $129.3 million contract to EG&G Florida, Inc. for base operation services, bringing the total to $565.3 million. The extension called for EG&G to provide institutional and technical support services at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida. (NASA Release 86184) 'J0** The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, selected Computer Sciences Corporation for negotiations leading to a 10year, $99 million contract to operate its computer facility. The company would provide the personnel, equipment, and supplies necessary to carry out duties at the Slidell Computer Complex. (NASA Release 86185) During 1986: The Space Shuttle Challenger accident and the subsequent investigation and recovery activities headed the list of prominent events for NASA. Some major accomplishments, however, are worthy of note: Voyager 2 encountered the planet Uranus in January, continued with its journey and was expected to reach Neptune by 1989. A new baseline configuration was drafted for the Space Stationa major milestone for development. NASA and the Department of Defense initiated a joint AeroSpace Plane research program concerning vehicles capable of horizontal takeoff and landing, singlestage operations to orbital speeds, and sustained hypersonic cruise within the atmosphere using air breathing propulsion. NASA signed an agreement with the 3M Company for conducting 62 materials processing experiments aboard the Space Shuttle, and Dr. James C. Fletcher, for the second time, became Administrator of NASA. Two books concerning NASA endeavors were published in 1986. Joseph P. Allen's EnteringSpace deals with an astronaut's journey into the last frontier, and William E. Burrows' Deep Black looks into space espionage and national security. (NASA Release 86177)
Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said at a Board of'#0*Governors meeting that he expected President Ronald Reagan's approval for a replacement Shuttle. He reiterated what he told the President earlier and averred, "We need a fourth orbiter right away, as soon as we can build it." Fletcher also warned that if it were not built and if we do not begin operating the Space Station by 1994, "that could be very dire, indeed, for the future of American science and technology and the American economy." (Remarks prepared for Delivery: Aerospace Industries Association of America, Board of Governors Meeting, Williamsburg, Virginia, May 22/86; P Inq, May 23/86; W Times, May 23/86; B Sun, May 23/86)
Because of the Challenger accident and the absence of any Shuttle activity, NASA was expected to announce layoffs at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where 800 to 1,000 employees would lose their jobs. For the same reason, Martin Marietta said that 700 to 800 of its workers would be laid off, by October 3, from its plant that produced Shuttle fuel tanks. (W Post, Sep 4/86; NY Times, Sep 5/86)
Dr. Dale D. Myers became Deputy Administrator for NASA; he succeeded Dr. William R. Graham who left NASA to become Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Prior to this appointment, Dr. Myers had served as an atlarge member to the NASA Advisory Council and before that as president and chief operating officer for Jacobs Engineering Group. Other achievements include positions as Undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Energy, vicepresident of Rockwell International, president of North American Aircraft, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, and vice president/program manager for both the Apollo Command/Service Module Program and the Space Shuttle Program at Rockwell International. (NASA Release 86149)'?0*October 21: Several senior staff changes were made at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, to include: Robert C. Goetz, from Deputy Center Director to Technical Assistant to the Center Director; Clifford E. Charlesworth, from Director of Space Operations to Special Assistant to the Director; Henry O. Pohl, from Division Chief to Director of Engineering; William R. Kelly, from Director of Center Support to Director, Administration; Dr. Wayne R. Young was named Deputy Director for Administration; Paul J. Weitz, from Deputy Chief of the Astronaut Office to Technical Assistant to the Center Director. (NASA Release 86151)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
Astronaut Joe H. Engle retired from the United States Air Force as a colonel and resigned from NASA. After coming to NASA in 1966, he commanded Columbia and Discovery flights and was named Deputy Associate Administrator, in March 1982, for the Office of Space Flight. (NASA Release 86166; W Post, Dec 3/86)
NASA opted to use the deactivated Minuteman facilities'<0*at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for longterm storage of debris recovered from the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Large concrete covers were to be placed over the tubes for a weather tight seal, concluding NASA's primary activities related to the analysis and disposition of recovered hardware. (NASA Release 86141)
NASA had another successful launch; a 25yearold rebuilt AtlasE rocket, a onetime ICBM, carried a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather satellite, NOAA10, into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA Director Larry Heacock said that the polar orbiting satellite would render "half of our satellite program restored to full working capability." (Public Affairs Plan For NOAAG Launch; ':0*Trib, Sep 18/86; W Post, Sep 18/86; W Times, Sep 18/86; NY Times, Sep 18/86)
For the fourteenth time since August 1985, the launch of a weather satellite that the Air Force had hoped to put into orbit was again postponed, this time because of a leak of liquid oxygen. Past delays were caused by technical problems with the AtlasE booster rocket and its payload and scheduling conflicts. The satellite was next intended to be launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on August 30. (LA Times, Aug 26/86; NY Times Aug 26/86)
As of this date, two companies (Boeing Aerospace Operations and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company) had submitted proposals for the Payload Ground Operations Contract, a threeyear costplusawardfee contract with optional extensions of up to 15 years. The selected contractor would be responsible for preparing all payload for launch aboard Space Shuttles and expendable launch vehicles, as well as operations, maintenance, and engineering of the related processing facilities. The contract would consolidate work that was performed under separate, onsite contracts involving about 900 people. Space Station components requiring launch from the Kennedy Space Center and preparation of NASA payloads at the Vandenberg Launch Site in California were to be included. (NASA Release 86109)
Following a speech in Washington, Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge told reporters that the Space Shuttle would not fly again until early 1988. The Air Force, he said, would use the expendable launch vehicles being developed as often as possible and that NASA's goal was to have military and nonmilitary payloads on a 5050 schedule. For reasons of security, Aldridge had hoped President Ronald Reagan would authorize funds for a new orbiter, but sources revealed that the President would hold back any decisions concerning the space program until after NASA began implementing some of the recommendations from the Roger's Commission. (W Post, Jun 24/86; W Times, Jun 24/86; NY Times, Jun
NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
Because the ocean surface mirrors the ocean floor as gravity pulls water down into depressions and forces it up around the mountains (looking north from Puerto Rico, for example, the ocean surface drops nearly 60 feet), scientists at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, employed satellites to map the ocean's floor. Data taken from altimeters on the Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and the Sea Satellite were used to generate a computer image of the ocean surface, reflecting the Earth's structure underneath the water. The data, said Dr. James Marsh, also increased knowledge of circulation and current systems. (NASA Release 86172) 'H0*December 9: Fortynine research proposals from 45 small, high technology U.S. firms, totaling about $23 million, were selected for immediate negotiation of Phase II contract awards. These proposals were chosen from 100 submitted to the Small Business Innovation Research program, a program designed to strengthen the role of small business participation in Federal research and development and contribute to the growth and strength of the private sector. (NASA Release 86174)
The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Columbia was again scrubbed, this time because of inclement weather at landing sights in Spain and the Sahara Desert. The weather situations in these distant areas were of concern to engineers at the Kennedy Space Center because the sites provided emergency landing in the event of an engine failure during the first few minutes of flight. This fifth delay, four in three weeks, raised questions concerning the NASA's ability to launch 15 scheduled Shuttle flights during 1986. (W Post, Jan 8/86; NY Times, Jan 8/86; USA `"Today Jan 8/86; P Inq, Jan 8/86)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
The Soviet Union's Vega I spacecraft sent back pictures of Halley's Comet as it passed within 5,500 miles of its nucleus. The photographs, displayed on screens at a Soviet Space Center, were viewed by scientists from around the world and brought the scientific community together behind the Iron Curtain. A host of new data such as the possibility that the Comet contains two nuclei, that the core is three or four miles across, and evidence bolstering the idea that the Comet is leftover debris from the solar system's creation some 4.6 billion years ago was revealed. The presentation also gave American scientists a chance to study Halley's Comet; the United States launched no spacecraft for that purpose. The Soviet's second probe, Vega II, passed 5,125 miles from the comet's core on March 9. (FBIS, Tass (Eng trans), Mar 7/86; NY Times, Mar 7/86; W Post, Mar 7/86; W Times, Mar 7/86; B Sun, Mar 7/86; C Trib, Mar 7/86; Mar 10/76; CSM Mar 7/86; March
A $13 million Air Force satellite that had served as a museum piece at the Smithsonian Institution was renamed Polar BEAR and lifted into polar orbit aboard a Scout rocket, NASA's smallest booster. The satellite's mission was to photograph the Northern Lights and sample electrical particles and the magnetic field in order to design better communications. (NY Times, Nov'C0*15/86)
A number of American space scientists expressed disappointment because no U.S. spacecraft would fly by Halley's Comet as it swings by Earth for the first time since 1910 and for the thirtieth time since 240 B.C. The scientists ascribed U.S. failure to have a mission to the comet to a "combination of over expectations, missed signals, poor planning, a streak of bad luck, and politics and infighting in the science community." In the meantime, the European Space Agency's spacecraft iotto, the Soviet Union's twin Vega spacecraft, and two Japanese0*spacecraft would each probe Halley's Comet. Particularly galling to American space scientists was the knowledge that none of these spacecraft could carry out their mission without U.S. help, as each was guided by U.S. Deep Space Network to reach the comet. The most sophisticated mission would be by the spacecraft Giotto. After a 60,000 voyage through Halley's "dusty tail," it would pass "within 300 miles of the coma, which with the nucleus forms the comet's head." The twin Soviet spacecraft were launched in
The Air Force was forced to destroy an unarmed Minuteman 3 ICBM over the Pacific Ocean after an undisclosed problem developed during its 30minute test flight. Since February 1995, ten successful minuteman test launches had been done when another rocket had to be destroyed. (NY Times, Aug 29/85; P Inq, Aug
Columbia, flight STS 61C, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a Space Shuttle record of seven postponements. The crew completed their mission of launching RCA's $50 million satellite into orbit, for which NASA received $14.2 million from the corporation. Ironically, after a 25day delay in getting off the ground, the Space Shuttle was told to come down a day early. NASA engineers feared that bad weather might hamper the original landing date. Already behind schedule, NASA wanted extra time to prepare the Shuttle for the next flight in March and its mission of observing Halley's Comet. The needed orbit for studying the comet would leave little room for delays of this launch. Most of Columbia's experiments were completed, but a camera device for photographing Halley's comet failed to work because a light intensifier had been inadvertently left on during the ship's seven launch delays. It was not until January 18, after a twoday delay because of poor weather, that Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California. Engineers had hoped to land the craft at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, from where it was scheduled to be launched on March 6. Therefore, an estimated five days were scheduled to be cut from its preparation time so that the critical date for observing Halley's Comet could be met. (NY Times, Jan 13/86; Jan 14/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 24/86; USA Today, Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86 W Times, Jan 13/86; CSM, Jan 13/86; Jan 21/86 P Inq, Jan 13/86; B Sun Jan 13/86; W Post Jan 13/86; Jan 15/86; Jan 16/86; C Trib, Jan 13/86)
Conrail, created by Congress from six bankrupt northeastern railroads, argued against a measure proposed by Senator John Danforth that would take $450 million from the Governmentowned railroad and transfer the funds to NASA. If passed, the plan would help compensate for the House and Senate Armed Services Committee's move to cut $566 million from the Air Force budget that was earmarked for NASA and military use of the Shuttle. (W Post, Jul 22/86)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a plan for a new orbiter that diverted $2.9 billion in defense funds for a reserve to be used by NASA. The proposal asked the Navy to reduce production of the F/A18 fighter and delay construction of a Trident submarine, the Air Force to delay construction of the C17 transport plane, the Army to buy fewer M1 tanks, and defense contractors to shoulder the burden of the cost of tools in its manufacturing. Although the plan called for NASA to oversee construction, the Air Force would launch and operate the new Shuttle. (W Post, Sep 11/86; Sep 12/86; WSJ, Sep 11/86; LA Times, Sep 17/86)
Two papers delivered by Dr. Allan Harris and Dr. Eugene Shoemaker to the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore dealt with the possibilities and consequences of a comet, asteroid, or large meteoroid striking the Earth. Chances of the first two bodies striking us in the next 100 years, the paper determined, were only 1 in 1000. An encounter with the third, however, would be more likely (this occurs about once every two decades) and'"0*although the meteoroid would explode in the atmosphere, less advanced nations might mistake the explosion for a nuclear attack. Asteroids and comets are still monitored, notwithstanding the low odds of a collision. Asteroids lend themselves to search methods because they follow an Earthlike orbit, but the latter have an elliptical orbit difficult to track. Also presented to the Baltimore meeting were the results of the findings of a joint U.S./Brazilian atmospheric study conducted in July and August 1985 by NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Analysis of the study concluded that gases from the rain forests in the Amazon Basin in Brazil set off a chain of chemical reactions that eventually impact global air quality and the Earth's radiation budget. Trace gases in the troposphere resulting from biological activity in forest soil and vegetation were measured with instruments aboard NASA's Electra aircraft. (NASA Release 8663; 8664)
The Lunar and Planetary Laboratory at the University of Arizona and NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, planned a Planet Mercury Conference for early August. More than 10 years had elapsed since the last conference and a significant amount of data had developed during the interim. Scheduled topics included Mercury's role in helping scientists understand the origin of planets, Mercury as an endmember planet, groundbased and Earthorbital observations of Mercury, and possible spacecraft missions to the planet. (NASA Release)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
NASA announced that James R. Thompson would be appointed Director of the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, in late September. He had been Deputy Director of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory since 1983 and previous to that had spent 23 years at Marshall, where he managed development of the Space Shuttle's main engines, worked in the Skylab Program, and was Associate Director of Engineering for the Center. He was also NASA's manager for the Challenger investigation (NASA Release 86106; NY Times, Aug 6/86)
An advanced reconnaissance satellite, believed to be a KH11 photographic reconnaissance satellite, was lost as the Titan rocket carrying it exploded seconds after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. With only one HK11 in orbit, officials were concerned that verification of arms control treaties would be hampered and that it would be more difficult for the Soviet Union and the United States to sign the treaties. Older satellites dropped film after photographing, but the KH11 beamed pictures to ground stations and could maneuver about while in orbit. An HK11 was lost in August 1985 when another Titan rocket failed. Assistant Secretary of Defense Donald Latham, estimated that it would be six or seven months before the Department of Defense could launch another satellite. Outside experts believed that the government might approve an emergency0*Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base because the only other reconnaissance satellite remaining on the ground was an HK12, believed too big for an expendable rocket. (NY Times, Apr 20/86; Apr 22/86; CSM, Apr 21/86; USA Today, Apr 21/86; W Post, Apr 22/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher acknowledged that NASA did not sufficiently consult Congress on decisions pertaining to Space Station management prior to the June 30 announcement and said he would postpone plans for moving Space Station management from Houston to the Washington, D.C. headquarters. Because "considerable misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the'00*intent of the decision on the Space Station work package realignment has resulted," said Fletcher "I intend to conduct a thorough review of all aspects of Space Station design, work package assignments and functions, and conduct extensive conversations with members of Congress." (NASA Release 86103; USA Today, Aug 1/86)
NASA reported that scientists observed Halley's comet from a University of Arizona telescope aboard NASA's Kuiper Airborne Observatory, a modified C141 aircraft operated by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. It was the first direct confirmation of water in a comet, and the discovery lent new support to astronomers' widely held theory that comets are "dirty snowballs" composed primarily of frozen water. The theory was conceived by Dr. Michael Mumma, head of the Planetary Systems Branch, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, who, together with Dr. Harold Weaver, an associate research scientist at the Center for Astrophysical0*Sciences at Johns Hopkins University, developed a theoretical model leading to this discovery. (NASA Release 864; W Post Jan 10/86; B Sun, Jan 10/86; NY Times, Jan 10/86)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced that NASA's budget should be doubled to ensure that the United States retains its lead in space programs. The Institute described the budget as "no growth" and said that it would "insure that the U.S. becomes and remains a secondclass power in space." The report called attention to advancements made by the Soviet Union, Western Europe, and Japan, and also recommended'60*attempting to develop a greater student interest in space science. (B Sun, Aug 28/86; W Times, Aug 28/86; CSM, Aug 28/86; P Inq, Aug 28/86)
NASA and the Astronauts Memorial Foundation, Inc. announced plans to build a memorial at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, dedicated to astronauts who lost their lives while flying, training, or awaiting assignment to fly for the space agency. The memorial would honor the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger crewFrancis Scobee, Michael Smith, Judith Resnik, Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, Christa McAuliffe, and Gregory Jarvis; the 1967 Apollo crewVirgil Grissom, Edward H. White II,0*and Roger Chaffee; Charles Bassett and Elliott See, killed in 1966, Theodore Freeman killed in 1964, and Clifton Williams killed in 1967all killed in T38 trainer aircraft accidents; and Edward Givens, killed in 1967 in an automobile accident. (NASA Release 8638)
NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics planned a symposium on Quality and Productivity for December. The event would focus on strategies for revitalizing organizations and provide a forum for discussing issues involved in increasing national quality and productivity. The symposium would bring together over 900 key executives from industry, government, and academia. (NASA anno)
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
NASA released studies done by Donald Heath, a scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, which reveal that the Earth's ozone layer is thinning at a much higher rate than previously thought, about 3 percent between 1978 and 1984. This data was gleaned from a satellite orbiting 570 miles above the Earth. (C Trib, Oct 20/86; B Sun; Oct 20/86)
Thomas L. Moser was named Director of the Space Station Program Office in Washington, D.C., a position created to conduct a longrange assessment of overall NASA capabilities and requirements. Moser began his career with NASA in 1963 as a mechanical systems design and analysis engineer, and served further as a structural subsystem manager for the Apollo command module; project manager for the Shuttle Structures and Mechanics Division; head of structural design and manager for the orbiter structure and thermal protection system; technical assistant to the director and deputy manager for the Orbiter Project Office; Director of Engineering at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 86152)
Testing of recently installed weather protection structures was scheduled for August 19 at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida with Space Shuttle Atlantis. The $3.3 million system of sliding and folding doors and seals would cover previously exposed, lower portions of the orbiter and greatly reduce risk to the heat protection tiles, subject to damage from heavy rains, hail, and windblown debris. (NASA Release 8695)
by the Presidential Commission were followed. The report called for correction of the Shuttle's braking system, development of an escape system, and review of more than 700 critical components; however, the biggest obstacle lay in the redesigning and testing of the booster rockets. The Commission recommended a costly and time consuming fullscale, vertical test for the new rockets. NASA had relied on a less expensive, scaled down, horizontal test for new designs in the past and made no commitment for following this advice. The added preparation time would most adversely affect the Air Force, who earlier had warned that even a 1year delay would produce a backlog of 40 payloads by 1992; some of their satellites could not fit aboard any untended launch vehicle then in use. Some former commercial customers had negotiated flights with the French Ariane rocket program, but because they were also grounded, China and Japan were being sought for President Ronald Reagan, in the meantime, had called for a replacement orbiter, but had not yet revealed how it would be funded. (NY Times, Jun 12/86)
This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquidfueled rocket flight. In 1926 Dr. Robert H. Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled rocket from his aunt's farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of the event, NASA planned to launch a fullscale replica of the rocket from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release
Joseph F. Sutter was appointed chairman of the NASA Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, an advisory group to the NASA Administrator. Sutter, in 1986, had a 41year career with the Boeing Company as an aerodynamicist, received numerous awards for development of jetpowered airliners, and was nominated to receive the Wright Memorial Trophy, to be presented in Washington, D.C. He had also been appointed to the Presidentiaal Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 86154)
In a part of NASA's strategy to return the Space Shuttle safely to flight, Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator, announced the new management and operations structure for the National Space Transportation System (NSTS or Space Shuttle program). The changes were aimed at establishing clear lines of communication in the information transfer and decision making processes. The management change, which also moved control of the operation to Washington, D.C., was directed by Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly and followed recommendations made by the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology and the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. As part of the restructuring, Arnold D. Aldrich, who joined NASA in 1959, was named Director, NSTS, and Richard H. Kohrs and Robert L. Crippen were named his deputies. Truly stated that "the formation of this program management organization is one of the most positive steps NASA has taken in the last several months to strengthen the Shuttle program and return to flight status." (NASA Release 86159; W Post, Nov 6/86; NY Times, Nov 6/86)
Martin Marietta announced plans to enter the private launching business with its Titan class rockets. The Titan was the largest of all U.S. expendable rockets, and spokesman Jack Boyd said that he hoped to market the launch for dual payloads. The corporation had previously submitted a formal request to the Air Force for use of its launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Aug 20/86; LA Times, Aug 20/86)
NASA announced that Lieutenant General Forrest S. McCartney, on assignment from the Air Force, would take over as Director of the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, beginning October 1. McCartney succeeded Richard Smith, who retired on July 31. The press opined that the move would give the military greater control of the space program. McCartney's past Air Force assignments include positions as satellite controller, as project officer in the Titan 3 program, in the Directorate of Space at USAF Headquarters, as monitor for satellite communications programs, and director of range engineering at USAF Eastern Test Range. (NASA Release 86117; W Post, Aug 21/86; NY Times, Aug
An official from the Pentagon warned members of Congress that a oneyear delay in the Shuttle launches would create a backlog of 10 military missions and a 2year delay would raise that number to 21. He and others viewed this a "national emergency." The Air Force Undersecretary further pointed out a need for a replacement Shuttle and 10 additional expendable launch vehicles. Congressional committees, however, had not yet decided how the cost, if approved, would be shared by the Air Force and NASA. (B Sun, Mar 27/86; W Times, Mar 27/86)
The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
The Pentagon considered waiting until 1991 before a Shuttle would be launched for the first time from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Temporarily closing the $2.8 billion facility would save $400 million a year in maintenance. The major advantage, however, given the increased number of launches per year, is that using only Cape Canaveral in Florida would save time because moving a Shuttle between the two coasts is time consuming. Only launches from Vandenberg, however, could safely put the Air Force's highly classified satellites into polar orbit. (NY Times, May 21/86)
Astronaut Paul J. Weitz was named deputy director of the Johnson Space Center (JCS), Houston, Texas. Past achievements include participation in the first astronaut visit to the Skylab, serving as commander of the sixth Space Shuttle mission, and serving as technical assistant to the JSC Director. (NASA Release
For the second time in two days, launch of the Shuttle Challenger at Cape Canaveral, Florida, was postponed because of bad weather. Meanwhile, NASA began conducting tests at Edwards Air Force Base in California to determine the effect of rain on insulating tiles and readied a sophisticated instrument landing system, hoping to minimize the weather factor in launches and landings for future orbiter flights at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (W Times, Jan 27/86; USA Today, Jan 27/86; P Inq, Jan 27/86; C Trib, Jan 27/86; B Sun, Jan 27/86)
Dr. James C. Fletcher released to members of Congress a statement indicating that employment at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, would increase from 12,600 to 14,000 employees during Space Station development, with a potential for another 1,000 jobs should JSC take on additional Space Station tasks. "Another way to look at this," he warned "is that without the Space Station program, JSC's employment level likely will not grow significantly over the next few years." The projected increase notwithstanding, officials at the JSC were concerned with their status because of the recent decision to move the habitation module's development to the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville Alabama. They were assured, however, that the move had to do with coordinating the habitation module and the module structure and that "the Johnson Space Center's role as NASA's preeminent center of excellence in manned spacecraft systems is not changing." (NASA Release 8698; NY `"Times, Jul 26/86; W Post, Jul 26/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
The first Soviet Space Shuttle, expected to be launched in 1986, would likely look very similar to U.S. orbiters, said scientists. Photographs of a scale model Soviet space plane that splashed down in the Indian Ocean revealed a miniature American Shuttle. Plans for the plane were easy for scientists to obtain as the program was never top secret and sources noted that the Soviets had often copied Western aircraft in the past. On a similar note, a report concerning the secretive launch from, presumably, the Soviet Union in summer 1985 concluded that an antisatellite weapon had gone up. Radar tracked debris that had orbited the Earth before burning up in the atmosphere, and researchers quickly deduced that the metallic scrap had come from a satellite on which the weapon was tested. The illegal launches were the first such unannounced flights by the Soviet Union since `"testing of orbital thermonuclear weapons. (W Times, Jan 21/86; (#WSJ, Jan 21/86)
