NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) selected the Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, in Columbia, Maryland, for negotiations on a contract for continuation of maintenance and operations of the NASA Deep Space Network (DSN). The DSN provides tracking and data acquisition for planetary spaceflight missions and for NASA's crewtended and untended space programs. The fiveyear contract, with an option for an additional five years, was expected to begin April 2, 1987. (NASA Release 879)h)0*0*0*February 5: Jesse W. Moore resigned from NASA, effective February 8, 1987. Moore joined NASA in 1966. Among the varied positions he held included Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science (19781979); Director of Space Flight Division (19791981); Director of the Earth and Planetary Exploration Division (19811983); Acting Associate Administrator of Space Flight (April 1984August 1984); and Associate Administrator of Space Flight (August 1984January 1986). He was named Director of the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston, Texas, in January 1986, and in October 1986 he moved to Headquarters as a Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Policy and Planning. (NASA Release 8710; NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87)
The world's two largest wind tunnels became fully operational at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The two tunnels, the upgraded 40by80 foot wind tunnel and the new, open circuit, 80by120 foot wind tunnel, are housed in the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex. Both tunnels are used for fullscale and largescale testing of advanced aircraft. They offer new capability for testing of rotorcraft and vertical and shorttakeoff and landing aircraft (V/STOL). (NASA Release 87180; P Inq, Dec 12/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA awarded a contract to the Computer Sciences Corporation, El Segundo, California, for operations support to the Mission Support Directorate of Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. Under the contract, Computer Sciences Corporation would provide maintenance, operations, and sustaining engineering of institutional ADP facilities, networks and work stations, and user support. About 30 percent of the work would be performed by two Computer Sciences Corporation subcontractors, International Business Machines Corporation and Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, a unit of Ford Motor Company. (NASA Release 87148; WSJ, Oct 7/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force signed a pricing agreement, establishing reimbursement policies for Department of Defense (DoD) flights on the Space Shuttle and NASA flights on DoDprocured expendable launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87147)
NASA announced that beginning March 14, 1987, the Pioneer 12 spacecraft, orbiting Planet Venus, would study the newly discovered Comet Wilson. The Comet was to be tracked by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, from March 1421,h)0*0*0*and again from March 31 to April 30. (NASA Release 8725)
NASA announced that it would launch a seventh Department of Defense Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida, no earlier than March 26, 1987. (NASA Release 8740)
Officials at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, reported that NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory would leave on October 31, 1987, for New Zealand on a monthlong mission to study the supernova SN1987a. Scientists aboard the Kuiper would make eight research flights to study the supernova, located 170,000 light years away. Supernova SN1987a is the closest supernova to Earth since the invention of a telescope some 400 years ago. (NASA Release 87162; AvWk, Nov. 9/87)h)#0*0*0*November 3: NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs James T. Rose announced new program initiatives to encourage and expand commercial space activity. Rose told some 270 executives from across the country, meeting for a threeday workshop in Nashville, Tennessee, that the new programs will build on earlier NASA commercial development policies. According to Rose, the agency already had awarded $50,000 grants to 206 small businesses for feasibility studies in this area. One of the program initiatives announced by Rose called for 28 percent space allocation for commercial secondary payloads aboard the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 87/165; NY Times, Nov 5/87; Tennessean, Nov 4/87; W Times, Nov 5/87)
NASA announced an international joint effort to investigate ozone depletion over the Antarctic. NASA was to be joined in this effort by other Federal science agencies; the Chemical Manufacturers Association; scientists from Harvard University, the University of Denver, and the University of Washington; and the governments of Argentina, Chile, France, Great Britain, and New Zealand. A specially equipped ER2 plane and a modified DC8 airliner were to make a number of flights through the ozone hole between August 17 and September 29, 1987, to see whether manmade chemicals, nature, or both are destroying the ozone. The findings will be examined by an international panel of policy makers meeting in Montreal, Canada, in September 1987. (NY Times, July 30/87; W Post, July 29/87; W Times, July 29/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
NASA announced that White Sands Space Harbor, New Mexico, was designated an alternate endofmission landing site for Space Shuttle missions STS26 through STS28. The new site was to be used for a Shuttle landing when conditions at Edwards Air Force Base in California precluded landing. (NASA Release 87 189)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
NASA launched a PalapaB2P, an Indonesian communications satellite, on a Delta 182 from Launch Complex 17B, Eastern Space and Missile Center, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, in Florida. The satellite, intended to serve Indonesia's 13,677 islands, was placed into an elliptical orbit ranging from about 115 miles to 23,000 miles above the Earth. The PalapaB2P satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft Company, was to be used as a backup for a failing relay station already in orbit. (NY Times, Mar 21/87; B Sun, Mar 21/87; P Inq, Mar 21/87; NY Times, Mar 22/87)
NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, at Headquarters in Washington, D.C., selected 29 life sciences investigators for space flight study. According to Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, Director of NASA's Life Sciences Division, the first phase of the study, the definition phase, which is expected to begin in the early fall of 1987 and last less than a year, would be followed by selection of investigators for actual flights aboard the Space Shuttle. Chosen investigators could participate in future Space Shuttle missions anytime between 1991 and 1994, or even later. (NASA Release 8754)
American and Soviet scientists agreed to joint effort in a wide range of space research. Their first joint project called for a launch of a Soviet "space zoo" satellite containing monkeys, rats, fish, and other living organisms. The 14day flight of this satellite was to provide Soviet and American scientists an opportunity to study the impact of weightlessness on the vital functions of animals. Some 26 other experiments were approved by working groups from the United States and the Soviet Union meeting for a weeklong scientific conference in Moscow. The joint project was the first to be conducted under the terms of a fiveyear space cooperation agreement signed on April 15, 1987, by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze and U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz. (C Trib, Aug 11/87; LA Times, Aug 11/87; P Inq, Aug
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced the composition of the Atlas Centaur 67 Investigation Board. The Board, chaired by Jon R. Busse, Director, Office of Flight Assurance, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would investigate the loss of the Atlas Centaur 67 mission on March 26, 1987 and recommend corrective action. The mission vehicle was destroyed 51 seconds after an apparently normal liftoff. (NASA Release 8745)
China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
NASA selected five American principal investigators and five Italian scientists for a joint U.S.Italian Tethered Satellite System (TSS1) project. The TSS1, a deplorable subsatellite to be 'tethered' to the Space Shuttle via a retractable cable, was expected to lift aboard Columbia in the fall of 1990. (NASA Release
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
NASA announced that the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite would be launched on a Delta expendable launch vehicle in early 1989 rather than on the Space Shuttle in July 1988, as originally planned. The change in schedule was caused by the backlog of science payloads awaiting launch on the Space Shuttle as a result of the Challenger accident. Designed to study the "Big Bang," COBE would be launched into a 560statutemile, sunsynchronous orbit from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. Because of the switch from the Shuttle to Delta, COBE would be reduced in weight from 10,500 pounds to 5,000 pounds and in size from 15 feet to 8 feet in diameter. Scaling down the spacecraft would also require that COBE be redesigned. (NASA Release 871)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that he would retain and strengthen the existing Space Shuttle processing arrangement at the Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, with Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida. The decision was recommended by a senior review group set up to study the ground processing of Shuttle flight hardware. The group was chaired by Roy S. Estess, Deputy Director, National Space Technology Laboratories, Mississippi, and included representatives from NASA Headquarters and from each field center. (NASA Release 8726)
The panel, headed by retired Air Force General Alton D. Slay, praised NASA's toptobottom review of hundreds of items and procedures that could cause another disaster. It added, however, that several analyses of possible equipment failure and of items considered critical to safety would not be completed until the summer of 1987. The panel recommended that NASA rank the most critical safety items, based on the likelihood of their failure, and that it closely link the engineering changes and the hazard analyses. (NY Times, Jan 15/87; W Post, Jan 16/87; UPI, Jan 16/87)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that its Denverbased Space Systems group was one of the companies awardedh) 0*0*0*two NASA contracts to study and design spacecraft for a mission to Mars. A contract to study the techniques of robotic rover to traverse Martian surface was awarded by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. NASA awarded a similar contract to the FMC Corporation of Santa Clara, California. The second contract was awarded by NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. It called on Martin Marietta to study braking methods that would allow a spacecraft to orbit Mars, enter its atmosphere, and descend to the surface of the planet. The Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, California, was the other company awarded this study contract by the JSC. Martin Marietta was the company that designed, built, and tested the twin Viking spacecraft that landed on the surface of Mars in 1976 and 1977. (AVWK, Oct 26/87; B Sun, Oct 1/87, Rocky Mountain News, Oct 1/87)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
NASA announced reopening, after major modifications, the wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Constructed in 1944, the 40by80foot wind tunnel was used for fullscale testing of civilian and military aircraft. Modifications to the tunnel included increasing power from six 6,000horsepower electric motors generating airspeeds of up to 230 mph to six 22,500horsepower motors generating top airspeeds of 345 The modified 40by80foot wind tunnel represented the first phase of the creation of the National FullScale Aerodynamics Complex, which included the Outdoor Aerodynamics Research Facility, at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The second phase, including the new "straight through" leg with its 80by120foot test section, was expected to be completed in late 1987. (NASA Release 8798)
According to a news release from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, NASA would manage a major international experiment on the use of satellites to study our environment. The experiment, part of the International Satellite Land Surface Climatology Project, would employ over 100 scientists from more than 25 institutions to study the interaction between the land system and climate system. Over 25 ground measurement stations would be set up on the Konza Prairie in Kansas for the experiment. Six research planes and five Earthorbiting satellites would also be used. (NASA Release 8795)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs Isaac T. Gillam named 28 teams that have submitted proposals to establish Centers for the Commercial Development of Space. The objective of the Centers would be to stimulate research in the microgravity environment of space. This research was expected to lead the development of new products that have commercial value. The proposed research fields include space power, space propulsion, remote sensing, communication technology, and bioscience. The overwhelming majority of the proposals came from American universities. (NASA Release 8769)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and General Kabbaj, the Inspector of the Royal Moroccan Air Force, signed an agreement permitting the United States the use of Morocco's Ben Guerir Air Force Base for emergency landing of the Space Shuttle. The facility would be ready for such an emergency in February 1988. (NASA Release 876)
NASA announced that Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, were studying concepts for designing and building a robot space vehicle for Mars exploration and samplereturn mission. If approved, the robotic space vehicle mission would be launched in 1998 and return with martian samples in 2001. The mission would precede human exploration of Mars. (NASA Release 8744)
Five NASA and U.S. Air Force pilots completed the first phase of research flying of the Advanced Fighter Technology Integration F111 aircraft at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During the first phase of research flying, the aircraft's wing was modified so that it could fly with optimum wing curvature at subsonic, transonic, and supersonic speeds. The MAW system was operated only manually, and the pilot selected the aircraft's wing curvature. The aircraft, with its distinct Mission Adaptive Wing (MAW), entered the second phase of research flying where the computers were modified so the wing curvature could adjust automatically. (NASA Release 87118; Def News, Aug 24/87)
NASA officials, who met in Moscow with their Soviet counterparts December 713 to discuss cooperation in space, said the Soviet Union planned to launch a spacecraft to Mars in 1992. In addition, the Soviets asked the United States to modify an American spacecraft to help relay data from another Soviet mission to Mars set for launching in 1994. (CSM, Dec 21/87; H Post, Dec 20/87; NY Times, Dec 19/87)
NASA announced that it, together with the Universities Space Research Association, in Columbia, Maryland, and the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, would establish a Center for Excellence in Space Data and Information Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, beginning October 1, 1987. The new research facility would serve as the nerve center for a network of researchers from leading universities and from industry computer science departments. The emphasis would be on research in areas of potential longterm application to NASA programs in the Space Station era. (NASA Release 8770)
NASA announced that Dr. Noel Hinners would replace Dr. Frank McDonald as Chief Scientist, effective August 24, 1987. At the same time, Dr. Hinners would retain his position as NASA's Associate Deputy Administrator(Institutions). NASA also announced Dr. Frank McDonald would return to the Goddard Space Flight Center as Associate Director/Chief Scientist. (NASA Release 87121)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, announced that the next Space Shuttle orbiter would be assembled in Palmdale, California. He gave costs and schedule factors as the reasons why this site was chosen over Califonia's Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 87100; H Chron, June 18/87)
Pioneer 12, which had been orbiting the planet Venus, was directed, by controllers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to begin tracking the newly discovered Comet Wilson. This would be the fourth time that Pioneer 2, orbiting Venus since 1986, interrupted observations of the planet H&to study a comet passing Venus on its way to the Sun. (LA Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA announced that its Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) supercomputer system, the world's most advanced, had become fully operational. The NAS system will make possible a wide range of aerospace vehicle technologies and capabilities and will ensure the Nation's preeminence in aeronautical research. By the end of 1987, the operational system was expected to be capable of a billion calculations per second, and within a decade its capability should reach 10 billion calculations per second. The 90,000squarefoot NAS building, located at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and containing a 15,000squarefoot central computer room was equipped with an array of systems for the optimal functioning of the computers. (NASA Release 8721; NY Times, Mar 10/87; CSM, Mar 10/87; SF Chron, Mar 10/87)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
NASA announced that astronaut Dr. Sally K. Ride would leave the agency in Fall 1987. Dr. Ride, the first American woman to fly in space, would assume the position of Science Fellow at the Stanford University Center for International Security and Arms Control in Palo Alto, California. (NASA Release 8784; B Sun, May 27/87; NY Times, May 27/87; W Post, May 27/87; W Times, May 27/87)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Director Lew Allen announced that Richard P. Laeser had been appointed to manage JPL's new support office in Washington, D.C., for NASA's Space Station Program. Laesar, who until his new appointment had been the manager of the Voyager mission to outer planets, would also serve as Director of the Office of Requisitions and Assessments for the Space Station. Norman R. Haynes was appointed the new manager of the Voyager mission. He formerly was manager of JPL's Systems Division. StarNews, Jan 5/87)
NASA selected Lockheed Engineering and Management Services Company to negotiate an engineering support contract for Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. The contract would consolidate work currently performed by Lockheed, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and Northrop Services, Inc. (NASA Release 8742; WSJ, Mar 27/87; H Chron, Mar 27/87)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
NASA announced that its scientists had joined with scientists from the Brazilian Institute for Space Research and from U.S. and Brazilian universities and institutes to conduct a 45day study of tropospheric (part of the atmosphere closest to Earth) chemistry in the atmosphere over the Amazon River Basin tropical rain forest during the wet season. NASA's program of global tropospheric experiments to study the chemistry of Earth's atmosphere and its interaction with land and oceans began in the 1980's. NASA used the Space Shuttle in 1981 and 1984 to measure tropospheric carbon monoxide with a gas filter radiometer. In July and August 1985, NASA's Amazon boundary layer experiment (ABLE) documented the importance of biosphereatmosphere interactions in determining chemical processes in the troposphere over undisturbed rain forests. The second ABLE experiment, begun in midApril 1987, was to study how tropical forests affect the gas exchange, chemistry, and budgets of several key gases in the troposphere. A NASA Electra aircraft, stationed in Manasus, Brazil, in the center of the Amazon River Basin, was expected to measure atmospheric trace gasses and aerosols during a series of flights. The results from the experiments aboard the Electra aircraft and from several investigations carried out at ground sites would be evaluated by the team of scientists late in 1987. NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D.C., was responsible for the tropospheric chemistry program. Langley's Atmospheric Sciences Division, with logistical support from the Bionetics Corporation in Hampton, Virginia, managed the ABLE project. (Nasa Release 8766)
NASA issued a request for proposal to U.S. industry for a program support contractor to assist the NASA Space Station Program Office, in Washington, D.C., with development of the Space Station. (NASA Release 878)
NASA selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Silver Spring, Maryland, to negotiate a contract for systems, engineering, and support services. The services provided by the contract would be in support of the Mission Operations and Data Systems Directorate, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8739)
An international panel of scientists selected three experiments submitted by NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission to be launched in early 1990's. The cometary ice and dust experiment (CIDEX) was designed to capture and analyze dust, ices, and gasses evolved from the comet as the coma and tail develop during its pass around the sun. The thermal infrared radiometer experiment (TIREX) would measure the thermal emission and the scattering of solar radiation from the comet. The third experiment would consist of an interdisciplinary scientist for exobiology, the study of chemical processes and physical events leading to emergence of life in the universe. The CIDEX mission was managed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. (NASA Release 8763)
Pilots from NASA, the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, and the Grumman Aerospace Corporation completed the first phase of experimental flying of the forwardsweptwing X29 aircraft. During the tests, the X29, with its threesurface pitch control system, reached an altitude of 50,200 feet and speeds of about 1.5 times the speed of sound. After a total of 104 flights, the pilots began the second phase of the flight research program at NASA's AmesDryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. During this phase, further flights would test the forward swept wing structure divergence tendencies and the overall aerodynamic performance of the wings and canards. Researchers would also investigate the aircraft's control system and handling qualities, as well as maneuvering characteristics applicable to military use. (NASA Release 87113)
