The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldest operating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch. The craft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly five times the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distance was the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launch from the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With only five lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pull was strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, thereby increasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317 days) and 6 million miles. The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, the heliosphere. After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's original instruments were still transmitting information on the turbulence of the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6 into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7, 8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6, this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stations monitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earth from the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solar effects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 8881)
In an interview with the Washington Post, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan to approve a joint SovietU.S. untended flight to Mars during the upcoming summit meeting in Moscow. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission was recommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbol of superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific and technological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation that would be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said. "And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (W Post, May 22/88; UPI, May 22/88; LA Times, May 22/88; B Sun, May 23; C Trib, May 23/88)
The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congress creating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program for the development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS was intended to provide a launch system that would meet longterm national launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, and responsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of the space launch system. The management plan created a joint program office headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputy program manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering and integration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA would manage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoD would accept full funding responsibility for the program, with any unique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline being funded by NASA. (NASA Release 885)
outward at 868 miles per second. Previous Kuiper observations of the expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed to understanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987a research was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, Space Science Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 88168; ARC Release 8889)
The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years of orbital observations of the clouddraped planet. Ceremonies were held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, to celebrate Pioneer's accomplishments. December 9 would also mark 10 years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had entered the atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hardimpact probes it had released. Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about the atmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity, and the magnetic field. Pioneer had also observed five comets, including Halley. Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, was scheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed upon entering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88165)
NASA began flight tests of a new design of lownoise, energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointly by NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan Test Assessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unducted propellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternative to highercost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version of the old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent a year in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofanpowered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast as conventional airliners. (NASA Release 8840)0** The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Soviet government agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for the Martian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moon and its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an American astronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobos mission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Soviet spacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 and be placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both would approach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes. (NASA Release 8841)
NASA's C141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO) departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solar eclipse of March 1718. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO was to make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves across the Pacific Ocean. The scientists were interested in the few seconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sun would be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of' 0*the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. The Kuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 miles northwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C141 jet transport aircraft, is fitted with a 36inch diameter telescope and flies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solar atmosphere would be made at the farinfrared wavelengths of 30, 50, 100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attempt to record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such a narrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 8837; ARC Release
NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to pay silent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at 11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39B on January 28, 1986. Flags around KSC and at NASA Centers throughout the country were lowered to half staff while workers stood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challenger flight. Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S. McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit and loudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the Space Shuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men and women of the Challenger crew." (UPI, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 29/88; C Trib, Jan 29/88;
The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle was rolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) to Launch Pad 39B in preparation for mission STS26, scheduled for late September. (UPI, Jul 4/88; NY Times, Jul 5/88; W Post, Jul 5/88; WSJ, Jul 5/88; W Times, Jul 5/88; P Inq, Jul
The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced further delays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel line inside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detected during a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed prior to the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttle launch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraft could be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled back to the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center. NASA officials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (NY Times, Jul 18/88; W Post, Jul 18/88; W Times, Jul 18/88; USA Today, Jul 18/88; P Inq, Jul 18/88)
Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the new Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASA Headquarters, effective immediately. Abbey had been Special Assistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, since November 1987. He began his NASA career in 1967 as Technical Assistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program. He became technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Director of Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight Crew Operations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numerous honors and service awards. (NASA Release 8836)
Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials for six safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, fire that killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting building at Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The Utah Occupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related to protection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, and failure to take precautions against static electricity buildup in a rocketcasting facility. An Air Force investigation into the immediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting of solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile segment, was pending. (UPI, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 17/88; NY Times, Mar 17/88; WSJ, Mar 17/88; W Times, Mar 17/88)
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr. Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office of Exploration. Martin had been serving as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Station office since September 1986. From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and of Space and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. From 1974 through 1983, he served in a variety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of the advanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunar divisions. (NASA Release 88158)
NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breaking computational model that could accurately simulate the complex, fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines and compressors. The new computational model, developed by NASA scientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significant savings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready for commercial applications. The model performed one of the most complex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the most accurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engine concepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimental methods, most often by building prototype engines and subjecting them to a battery of tests. Advanced computer techniques were far less expensive and much faster. Current computational work was performed on a Cray2 supercomputer at the new Ames Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 8894; ARC Release 8850; SF Chron, Jul 13/88; Bus Week, Jul 25/88)
NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract with Rockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division to consolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site. Under the contract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey, California, would be transferred to existing Launch Support Operations activity at KSC. During this same period, Rockwell's component overhaul and repair activities would move from its network of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the Rockwell Service Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. The move would complete a consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88156)
NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747100 jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) for the space transportation system. A letter contract was signed with Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the Boeing Company, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. The additional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability and eliminate a potential singlepoint failure in the space transportation system. The 231foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttle orbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processing facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747100, which is nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimize costs associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release 8828; JSC Release 88005) During February:
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a national competition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA0*specified that the name chosen not only should identify an American spacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's mission in space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challenger accident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, by Congressman Tom Lewis (RFlorida), called for the name of the replacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted by students. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASA Administrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from among suggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondary schools." The new orbiter, designated OV105, under construction by Rockwell International in California, was scheduled for completion in April 1991. (NASA Release 8846). During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destruct guidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and crew would have to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground. In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttle range safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety while at the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle as long as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before a destruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Force suggested barring all nonessential personnelVIPs, journalists, and spectatorsfrom the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttle launches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hide your head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist, that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert "Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second postChallenger Shuttle flight. (UPI, Mar 5/88, H Chron, Mar 6/88)
Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical Aerodynamics Simulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed a computer model that simulates the airflow field physics associated with vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes. Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss of lift and control for highperformance aircraft. Understanding and' 0*eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improve maneuverability and safety for highperformance aircraft. (NASA Release 8813)
NASA announced the selection of General Electric, AstroSpace Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiations leading to the award of a costplusawardfee contract for design, fabrication, instrument integration, and launch operation support of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions. The two GGS laboratories, with their complement of scientific instruments, were to examine the flow of energy from the Sun through the Earth's geospace environment. This project was to be part of the overall scientific investigations within the International SolarTerrestrial Physics Program. The contract would provide for delivery of the Wind laboratory to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readiness on December 30, 1992, and delivery of the Polar laboratory to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for launch readiness on June 30, 1993. Each laboratory would be launched on a government`"furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA News, Nov 23/88)
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate Deputy Administrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinners had been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of Space Science. From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. He was Director of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment as Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 88138)
NASA set a target launch date of September 29 for STS26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of the launch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impact of Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection with the announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set this launch date is based on over two years of persistence and dedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in the STS26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center on
A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeley uncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, the newly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15 billion light yearsmore than 90 percent of the distance to the visible limits of the universe. The discovery was made by a team of American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array (VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and was confirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17 was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxies have evolved since the time of the Big Bang. This research was supported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88111; P Inq, Aug 9/88; B Sun, Aug 9/88; )
The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the Moon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination for possible U.S./U.S.S.R. humanassisted missions. "Going to the Moon together would give the two leading spacefaring nations in the world an opportunity to build a stable base for further cooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission to Mars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperative experience, and technical readiness as three crucial factors favoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crewtended mission. Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year0*in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted the notion that American space leadership was lost. Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budget request for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S. leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery, National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs, Colorado, Apr 14/88; NASA Release 8852)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to the award of a prime contract for the design, development, testing and fabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer (FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features that would assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing of the Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress, the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on the Space Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight of the prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS was scheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedom assembly flight. (NASA Release 88150)
Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (Payload Flight AssignmentsNASA Mixed Fleet, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88120) During August: A Cray YMP, the fastest supercomputer in the world, arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation (NAS) Facility. The NAS was established as a national facility available to leading U.S. research institutions through a national network. It had longterm support from Congress to use the fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S. aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics, and chemistry. Supercomputer systems were complementing and extending aerospace research being done in wind tunnels and highvelocity (4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new YMP central processor would not only solve old problems four times as fast as existing systems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena that could not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers. Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system would be the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as the National AeroSpace Plane and the Space Shuttle. '!0*Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this new supercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989. (ARC Release 8880)
NASA announced that an international team of researchers, coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonic plates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers to chart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries using signals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teams carreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals from seven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department of Defense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers in South America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up to four GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated the location of receiving sites on the ground and are planned to compare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portions of the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the Pacific Ocean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, off the west coast of South America; and the South American plate, upon which lies most of the South American continent. The research was funded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Earth Science and Applications Division. (NASA Release 8830)
A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA announced that preparations were underway to bring on line two new Space Shuttle abortlanding sites in northwestern Africa. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilities in the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS26 and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at Ben Guerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, The With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use of sites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the total number of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir, Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel during the launch of STS26. Robert Fleming, program manager for the contingency landing site program at Kennedy Space Center, said, "These sites must be operational and all requirements met in time for the next mission. We hope we never have to use them. But they will be ready." (NASA Release 8834)0*March 10: NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radar receiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and study the remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overall system, including a 10meter receiving antenna called the Alaska SAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute, and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The system initially was to receive signals from three satellites carrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thick cloud cover and produces data for high resolution images. The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time for the April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite EERS 1. The facility was to receive data from Japan's JERS 1 satellite and the Canadianled multinational Radarsat satellite. NASA had assembled an ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientists from JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facility development. (NASA Release 8835)
NASA officially transferred custody of Launch Complex 17 and East Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S. Air Force. Since 1960, NASA had conducted 143 Delta launches from the twopad Complex, located at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 17 would continue to be used to launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air Force had procured 20 new Delta IIs for Department of Defense payloads. The first launch was scheduled for later in 1988. In addition, at least eight commercial Delta IIs would be launched by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington, Beach, California, from Complex 17 between 1989 and 1992. (NASA Release 8899)
