The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a fiveyear, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering support for the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and the Advanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin Marietta Corporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Force for modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release C90aa)
For the first time, Soviet defense committee lawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASA prepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that, said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs and intercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12day visit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and the committee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (W Post, Feb 19/90; NY Times, Feb 20/90)
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call for proposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flight demonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polar and high inclination orbits. The onorbit flight demonstration would exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbital replacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 9012)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
The Office of Technology Assessment warned that Space debris could make space activity too risky in 20 to 30 years if the most traveled orbits continue to be littered. With the average collision velocity in low Earth orbit 6.2 miles per second, an object having 1/35th the weight of an aspirin tablet has the impact of a .30caliber bullet, they said. The Air Force tracks such debris to advise NASA before Shuttle missions, but no course change has ever been deemed necessary. (W Post, Oct 12/90; C Trib, Oct 14/90)
Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS35) was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro1 for a 10day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one xray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that would supplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. The project originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, but subsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro1 crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttle history. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but the mission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The Xray telescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultraviolet instruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rain forecast. The Astro1 mission did not achieve all of its objectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lint in the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forced to aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135 of the slated 250 targets were observed. (NY Times, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90; W post, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)
landing postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set a precedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because the aircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of the captured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a few minor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector0*that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the three Inertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttle can land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine used by the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired for no reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargo bay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center in Florida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week. During reentry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamic and thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of the experiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing experiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imagery from the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degrees Fahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS28 flight. The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry Air Data System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data" to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(NY Times, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; W Post, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;C Trib, Jan 13/90;CSM, Jan 16/90; NASA Release 908)
Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center for integration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August0*1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at the University of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of an unexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called the extreme ultraviolet, between the Xray and ultraviolet wavelengths. (NASA Release 9034)
Physicians at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, announced in November that they had instituted a new treatment, promethazine, for space motion sickness. Since NASA's return to flight in September 1988, the medication had helped decrease the malady. (NASA Release 90155)
Three SR71 Blackbird aircraft, reconnaissance planes being retired by the Air Force, were Scheduled to arrive in February at Edwards Air Force Base in California, for "flyable storage." NASA hoped to use the highspeed aircraft, capable of Mach 3 at 80,000 feet, for tests relating to the Space Plane later in the year. Daily News, Jan 30/90; NASA Release 9024)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS38, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite, probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulf region. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would be assigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagon planned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the future. The satellite was deployed the following day. Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after a continuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASA preferred using the 7mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the 3mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had not been used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt no hesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixth time the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since the Challenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (NY Times, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; W Post, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASA
The Air Force and NASA entered their final stage of a $250 million, tenyear experiment for the X29 program, scheduled to be completed in March 1991. The test plane was designed to be 30 percent unstable and was dependent upon a sophisticated flight control system to produce and maintain stability. Glenn Spacht of Grumman Corporation, developer of the X29 and producer of the F14, said, "When applied to the F14, the plane will get better handling qualities, survivability, maneuverability, and antispin characteristics....The F14 can certainly reap the benefits of the X29." (Def News, Jun 25/90)
Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a $814 million, 10year station operation support contract. The contract would provide support for mission, flight crew, and facility operations for the Space Station and other flight programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Mar 7/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awarded Rockwell International Corporation a fiveyear extension on the contract for systems integration. The $1.36 billion contract extensions were for flight and ground systems engineering maintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of the hardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle mission support from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90A; C90B; WSJ, Jan 12/90)
The Air Force decided in September to convert the Space Launch Complex6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California for Space Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets. The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in 1986. (NY Times, Sep 30/90) Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study of cosmic Xrays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched last June, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station near Munich. The cooperative program between the United States, West Germany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited several international scientists. The pictures sent back represented a neutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova that occurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light years away, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASA Release 90133)
The projected cost for NASA's Earth Observing System (EOS) had soared from an estimated $12 billion to $30 billion dollars, Administration sources announced. It was the largest and most expensive project yet undertaken by NASA. President George Bush had asked the National Academy of Sciences to review the matter and recommend cost reductions. Lauded by environmental scientists and termed by former astronaut Sally Ride as a "mission to planet Earth," the plan called for putting platforms, launched by Titan 4 rockets from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, into polar orbit. Each platform would carry 10 sophisticated scientific instruments that could send 10 trillion bytes of data daily. The first EOS platform, said NASA, would not be in orbit until 1998. (LA Times, Jan 26/90)
NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program. Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business, the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a twoyear period. (NASA Release 90152) '%0*November 27: The sixmember Hubble Optical Systems Board of Investigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released its final report, cumulating a 5month study. The report stated that both NASA and the PerkinElmer Corporation, then known as Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirror that prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishing very faint objects. Lower management at the Corporation discounted any information that conflicted with certified procedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment. Upper management at PerkinElmer and at NASA, the report went on, were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have had in 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist, agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (NY Times, Nov 28/90; W Post, Nov 28/90) During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundation held their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington, D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among the innovations showcased were an implant device for releasing insulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument called the "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired to locate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signal processing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the "Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System; and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with stepbystep instructions to a student. Hightech gear only a few years away, said USA Today, included a spaceage washer and dryer, refrigerator, and gloves. USA Today, Nov 29/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, Exploration and Technology, announced an organizational change at the AmesDryden Flight Research Center, Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce and strengthen national flight research capabilities at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California. Kenneth J. Szalai was chosen as the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3, 1990. He was, however, located at Dryden and directed research and operations. Szalai previously served as Chief of the Research Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90149)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
A joint NASA/U.S. Geological Survey team of American scientists planned to work with a Soviet Science team to study volcanoes along Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, part of the Pacific's "Ring of Fire." The study would mark the first time Western scientists had been allowed in the region. (NASA Release
NASA announced the selection of Margaret G. Finarelli as Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations, and the names of microgravity mission payload specialist candidates. Finarelli, who had been Deputy Associate Administrator since December 1988, would temporarily replace Kenneth S. Pedersen, who had taken a oneyear teaching assignment with Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Candidates for payload specialists for the March 1992 STS53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J. DeLucas, Joseph Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASA Release 90107; 90108)
NASA tested two of its experimental aircraft at the AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. One of the aircraft, an F16XL, used an experimental wing surface for improving airflow at supersonic speeds. The second aircraft, an X29, demonstrated an increase for highangleofattack, the angle of an aircraft relative to its actual flight path. (NASA Release 9052; 9059)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 million contract to support the Applied Engineering Division in automation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firm was selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; the potential for the contract over a fiveyear period was $63 million. (NASA Release C90q)
Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic Defense Initiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids that threaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Grey noted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year, that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that the impact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a devastating effect. (P Inq, May 15/90; C Trib, May 17/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
NASA successfully tested its selfrepairing flight control system on an F15 aircraft at AmesDryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The system detected damaged flight control components, such as ailerons, rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces to compensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response. (NASA Release 9043)
After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's' 0*head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather, Atlantis (STS36) lifted off under dark skies from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300pound classified military satellite into orbit. The postponements tacked on an additional $2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Truly reiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules was secondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its $500 million military payload the following day at an orbit inclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly over every major populated and industrialized center in the Soviet Union. An even higher inclination orbit would have been preferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, from where such an orbit could have been safely achieved, was not operational; the weight of the larger satellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle. Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California on March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 41/2 day mission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission dedicated solely to the military.W Post, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; NY Times, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; P Inq, Mar 5/90))
A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California during tests, killing one worker and injuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing the rocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (C Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90)
NASA released a request on this date to various companies for a proposal concerning design, management, building and testing of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System. The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and could replace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A foursatellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit," said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSS promised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed for Space Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 902; C90x)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board of Investigation created by NASA met for the first time in Washington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes Danbury Optical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for the telescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and Gary Tesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allen said, "The board now has a good base of information from which to0*proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
In a flight test that concluded in August, NASA, the Air Force, and Boeing Commercial Airline Group announced betterthanexpected findings taken from the results of modifying a 22foot section of a Boeing 757 wing. The design reduced drag in what could equate to 10 percent if the entire span of both wings had been modified. A 1percent reduction would have amounted to a $100 million annual savings in fuel costs for the U.S. airline industry. (NASA Release 90115)
NASA reported on the completed computerized medical reference system, a project engendered by computer and medical experts at the University of Florida and the Kennedy Space Center in Florida in 1979 and known as the Clinical Practice Library of Medicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all of the text and graphics of seven commonly used medical reference books that are considered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweight as well as offering high speed access to references, the CPLM has great potential for both space travel and Earth uses alike. (NASA Release: 9030a)
