NASA postponed the landing of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of high winds at Edwards Air Force Base in California and bad weather at the alternate landing site of Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (P Inq, Apr 11/91; B Sun, Apr 11/91; W Post, Apr 11/91; W Times, Apr 11/91; NY Times, Apr 11/91; USA Today, Apr 11/91; AP, Apr 11/91; UPI, Apr 11/91)
NASA technology developed by the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, designed sensors to monitor potentially damaging heat build-up in electronic circuits. Such technology was to be used in connection with the huge television Jumbotron screen for the Superbowl game on January 27. NASA's Technology Utilization program is cited as an example of the applications that can be made from NASA findings. (NASA Release 91-10)
The Synthesis Group, a White House study group, planned to recommend US development of nuclear-propelled rockets to send manned expeditions to Mars, according to Aviation Week and Space Tehcnology. NASA established the group, chaired by retired Air Force General Thomas P. Stafford, an Apollo astronaut, to gather innovative ideas for lunar and Mars exploration. (AP, Mar 15/91;
NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute announced the cosponsorship of a conference on Advanced Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Technologies at the Cleveland Convention Center September 4-6. The conference is to be part of the Lewis Center's 50th anniversary celebration. (NASA Release 91-140)
NASA announced that the German Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT) began a new phase of operation on February 8. It started pointed observations of x-ray emissions coming from celestial systems with high energy phenomena. The US ROSAT Science Data Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, will process and distribute ROSAT pointed data and provide facilities for the scientific analysis of the data. Britain is also cooperating in this venture, which involved the original ROSAT launching from Cape Canaveral, Florida on June 1, 1990 on a Delta expendable launch vehicle. (NASA Release 91-23)
NASA announced that its Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc., both of Mountain View, California, would jointly develop a system to allow firefighters to merge elevation and vegetation data with live pictures of forest fires. This would enable firefighters quickly to "see" through a smoky forest fire and plan their strategy. The three-year, $600,000 project called for NASA to expand existing remote sensing technology and for Terra-Mar to develop portable computer work stations and advanced software. (NASA Release 91-56)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
Republican Congressman from California Tom Campbell said he would not object to the closing of a military installation in his district provided that it was "fair." In this connection he would not oppose the proposed closing of Moffett Field, from which NASA tests aircraft and spacecraft in wind tunnels and simulators and the Navy flies its P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare missions over the Pacific. Local officials and business people argued that closure of the field would cause Lockheed Missiles and Space Company to move elsewhere, taking its 25,000 employees, in addition to the some 12,200 jobs lost from the Navy. (W Post, Apr 22/91)
UPI reported that ground had been broken for the $70 million Space Center Houston being built just outside Johnson Space Center. The center is to be an "experience center" providing visitors with a sense of daily Space Station life. (UPI, May 28/91)
AP reported that Space Shuttle Columbia was bolted atop a jumbo jet and flown from Cape Canaveral to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, before proceeding on August 11 to Rockwell International's Shuttle assembly plant in Palmdale, California. The arrival of Columbia in Palmdale on August 13 was enthusiastically greeted by the inhabitants. (AP, Aug 10/91; Antelope Valley, Aug 14/91)
Atlantis returned to Kennedy Space Center from MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa. (AP, Apr 18/91)
NASA announced details of Space Shuttle mission STS-42, a worldwide research effort in the behavior of materials and life in weightlessness. This would be the 15th flight of Discovery and was scheduled for launch on January 22, 1992 from Edwards Air Force Base, California. Scientists from NASA, the European Space Agency, the Canadian Space Agency, the French National Center for Space Studies, the German Space Agency, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan cooperated in planning experiments aboard the International Microgravity Laboratory-1, which Discovery was to carry. This was to be the first of eight Space Shuttle flights planned for 1992, five of which were to feature international participation. (NASA Release 92-211)
NASA announced information about the flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis scheduled for launch July 23 from Kennedy Space Center. The Shuttle was to deploy NASA's fourth Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) into orbit to update the satellite tracking network. Details of the TDRS, its size, capacities, and capabilities, were provided. (NASA Release 91-97)
NASA announced that the first demonstration of digital radio broadcasting via satellite to a mobile vehicle, would occur December 2-6 in Washington, D.C. The presentation represented a joint effort of NASA and the U.S. Information Agency's Voice of America. (NASA Release 91-196)
According to the Los Angeles Times, NASA researchers produced various vegetables in their imitation space garden, free from soil or sun, at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The experiment, designed to prepare for Space Station existence, could not, however, reproduce weightlessness. (LA Times, Aug 18/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the award of a contract to the Ball Corporation, Boulder, Colorado, to complete construction of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement for the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release C91-oo; AP, Oct 16/91; PR Newswire, Oct 16/91; B Sun, Oct 17/91; WSJ, Oct 17/91)
The British journal Nature carried an article by Rodney A. Viereck and Edmond Murad of Phillips Laboratory, a space research center at Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford, Massachusetts. Their findings indicated that the probable reason for the eerie orange glow of the Shuttles was caused by oxygen in the upper atmosphere striking nitric oxide on the Shuttle's skin, forming excited nitrogen dioxide, which radiates light when it moves off the surface. (NY Times, Nov 12/91; Xinhua, Nov 12/91)
The Air Force Eastern Space and Missile Center became the 45th Space Wing on November 12. The East Coast launch organization was responsible for facilities at Patrick, Cape Canaveral, Antigua, and Ascension. (Fla Today, Nov 13/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the selection of TRW, Inc., Redondo Beach, California, for one Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer/Earth Probe Spacecraft (TOMS/EP). The contract was to provide for the design, development, fabrication, assembly, test, integration, launch, and post-launch support of the aircraft. (NASA Release C91-t)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
A number of NASA scientists participated in the International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids held in San Juan Capistrano, California, and jointly sponsored by NASA and The Planetary Society. At congressional request, a NASA committee headed by David Morrison, space science chief at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, was to recommend how to improve the search for asteroids. Another committee was to advise how best to divert threatening asteroids. At the end of the conference July 3, a statement advocated construction of several sophisticated new telescopes to find all significant asteroids and learn if any were on a collision course with Earth. (AP, Jul 1/91; AP, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; P Inq, Jul 6/91; Oakland Tribune, Jul 8/91)
Cort Durocher, executive director of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in Washington and a former combat pilot and space engineer, wrote in the Houston Chronicle that while working to minimize risks, space exploration involves occasional failures and possible loss of life. (H Chron, Mar 25/91)
The paper carried an article featuring Ali Abu Taha, whom it described as "telling NASA things it would rather not hear" over the preceding five years. He filed suit against NASA, Rockwell International (maker of the Shuttle's orbiter), and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. However, the U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Virginia rejected his three suits. (Washington City Paper, Oct 11/91)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
A space journal article discussed the likelihood of NASA's taking over Moffett Field in California in order to keep the Ames Research Center, which it shares with the Navy, going. Reportedly, NASA was considering such a move if the Defense Department closed the naval air station. The result would be operating a 1,000 acre airfield with two runways more than 8,000 feet long, the largest airfield complex operated by NASA. (AvWk, Jun 24/91)
NASA indicated that the Shuttle Atlantis had landed 200 yards short of its lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The reason was that astronauts were unaware of the wind shift, of which ground controllers did not inform them because they thought the information was not needed. Measures have been taken to prevent similar incidents in the future by installing more efficient brakes and a drag chute to help slow the aircraft after touchdown. (O Sen Star, Apr 23/91)
NASA announced the opening of the new Biocomputation Center at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The center, under Muriel Ross, had the task of studying the neural network to understand how nerves are organized and function. (NASA Release 91-129)
UPI reported that NASA managers reviewed plans to resume routine Shuttle landings at the Kennedy Space Center. The unpredictability of Florida's coastal weather was at issue but it was felt that improvements NASA made in the Shuttle fleet were such that routine landings could now occur. (UPI, Jun 19/91)
NASA announced the selection of seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities to receive Core Research Center grants to develop further their research capability and research infrastructure. The institutions were: Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta; Fisk University, Nashville; Florida A&M University, Tallahassee; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia; Howard University, Washington, D.C.; North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro; and Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama. (NASA Release 91-193)
The media reported that a private study by American scientists concluded that an international manned mission to Mars could be done within 21 years for less than $60 billion. These figures represented faster and cheaper estimates than those of a proposed United States-only project. (USA Today, Jun 27/91; UPI, Jun 27/91; AP, Jun 27/91; H Post, Jun 30/91)
Scientists from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that the ozone hole over the South Pole did not appear to be improving. The ozone loss in 1990 equaled the previous low detected in 1987 in "depth, duration, and area." The findings were based on NASA's satellite observations of a complete cross section of the ozone layer. The findings complemented measurements at certain altitudes taken by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's sounding balloons. (UPI, Feb 22/91)
NASA announced the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite was scheduled to be launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on May 28, 1992. The delay in the originally scheduled launch time was caused by the need for Modular Antenna Pointing System acceptance testing, which was completed, and software/hardware verification, which remained to be completed. (NASA Release 91-207)
NASA's Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced that it had selected Johnson Controls World Services, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a JSC plant maintenance and operation support contract. (NASA Release C91-q)
Florida Today published figures of Kennedy Space Center spending for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1991. The center spent $1.42 billion in Florida, an increase of 3.6 percent over the previous year. Of that amount, $1.03 billion  went for on-site contractors. (Fla Today, Oct 30/91)
A proposal that $211 million be spent on the chance that gravity waves could be exploited to fathom black holes and other cosmic enigmas divided scientists and faced Congress with a quandary. Involved was possible Federal funding of two proposed gravity wave observatories, a joint project of the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. American supporters of the project, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), admitted there was no guarantee of success but believed its scientific potential was gigantic if it succeeded. (NY Times, Apr 30/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced its selection of Fairchild Space, Germantown, Maryland, for a contract to provide engineering support services for the Space Technology Division. (NASA Release C91-w)
Newsweek carried a feature article about NASA's discoveries regarding the heavens: quasars, galaxies, black holes, dark matter, and the like, as presented at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Special credit was given to the instruments NASA developed to explore space. The mysteries remaining to be explored were highlighted and the new telescopes being installed to catch infrared rays to help solve some of the mysteries. (Newsweek, Jun 3/91)
The media reported the Air Force announcement that the second attempted launch of an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was postponed for at least one month because of a technical problem. (AP, Sep 2/91; NY Times, Sep 3/91; W Post, Sep 3/91; W Times, Sep 3/91; P Inq, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA Times, Sep 3/91)
NASA satellite observations indicated that Earth's protective ozone layer was thinning twice as fast as previously believed. The Environmental Protection Agency made the announcement. Richard S. Stolarski, a research scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center, found a 4 percent to 5 percent average decrease over the 11-year period he studied. During the winter, the depletion was 8 percent to 9 percent of the layer. Several scientists have stressed the importance of the public developing "good sun habits" in relation to the ozone depletion and reducing the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).(B Sun, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 5/91; WSJ, Apr 5/91; W Post, Apr 5/91; USA Today, Apr 5/91; W Times, Apr 5/91; LA Times, Apr 5/91; UPI, Apr 5/91; NY Times, Apr 9/91; CSM, Apr 9/91)
According to the media, a small Prospector rocket, launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, was blown up shortly after liftoff when it veered off course. This was Orbital's third attempt to launch the rocket for the University of Alabama in Huntsville, one of 16 NASA commercial space development centers. (AP, Jun 18/91; NYT, Jun 19/91; USA Today, Jun 19/91; W Times, Jun 19/91; WSJ, Jun 19/91; B Sun, Jun 19/91; W Post, Jun 19/91; C Trin, Jun 19/91; LA Times, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91; UPI, Jun 19/91; H Chron, Jun 20/91)
The Baltimore Sun published an article quoting Richard Stolarski, research scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, concerning ozone depletion. He stated that the hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic failed to shrink as was hoped. He wondered whether the same might occur over the North Pole and indicated the need to understand the limits under which ozone depletion occurred. Subsequently, NASA announced the findings of its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, which indicated the ozone depletion in Antarctica was almost as severe as the record year of 1987. (B Sun, Oct 5/91; NASA Release 91-165; AP, Oct 9/91; UPI, Oct 9/91; NY Times, Oct 10/91; USA Today, Oct 10/91; CSM, Oct 10/91; W Post, Oct 11/91)
Encore Computer Corporation filed an agency protest of a $191 million award by NASA Johnson Space Center to IBM Corporation for a mainframe requirements contract. NASA officials were to meet with Encore representatives over the disagreement, which involved pricing information submitted. (Federal Computer Week, Jun 10/91)
NASA announced the appointment of Leonard S. Nicholson as Director, Space Shuttle program, replacing Robert L. Crippen who is to be Director, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 91-208; AP, Dec 16/91; W Times, Dec 17/91; USA Today, Dec 17/91; Fla Today, Dec 17/91; W Post, Dec 18/91)
According to AP, the Shuttle Columbia left California on a piggyback jet ride to its home at Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (AP, Jun 19/91)
NASA announced the May 30 harvesting of its first research crop of lettuce grown in a specially outfitted chamber at Johnson Space Center, Houston, by the Engineering Directorate's Crew and Thermal Systems Division. This harvest was to follow a test crop harvested in February as part of the Regenerative Life Support Systems program focused on recycling air and water and producing food, as part of NASA's future long duration missions on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 91-78)
The Philadelphia Inquirer reported that the six moons of Neptune discovered by Voyager 2 spacecraft in 1989 were given names by the International Astronomical Union's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams. In addition, Saturn's newest moon, Pan, was discovered by Mark Showalter, a scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. (P Inq, Sep 28/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
NASA officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced the termination of the contract with General Electric Company, Astro-Space Division, for the design, development, and testing of the Attached Payload Accommodation Equipment (APAE) element of Space Station Freedom. A congressionally mandated review of the Freedom program contributed to the APAE termination. (NASA Release 91-27)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center was testing a beta version of Com's newest OSI routing software. The software was comparable to that known as Open Shortest Path First, which allows intermediate systems to talk to each other and figure out the best way to send information on the network from point A to point B. (Government Computer News, Apr 1/91)
The media discussed the forthcoming launch of Atlantis and the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) it will set in orbit. Gamma rays have the highest of all forms of radiation and are born deep inside atomic nuclei. GRO was to canvass the entire sky over a two-year period, scanning the whole sky during the first year and concentrating on the most intriguing objects the second year. GRO was to be controlled by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists from Germany's Max Planck Institute, which supplied GRO's imaging telescope, were to assist. GRO's Oriented Scintillation Spectrometer Experiment was to be the main instrument for examining the material enveloping supernovas to look for gamma rays. University of Washington astronomer George Lake believed GRO would find in the dark matter, strange particles called "wimps" (weakly interacting massive particles) in a Milky Way object called Geminga. The Soviet spacecraft Granat, carrying a French gamma-ray detector, found an object that accretes surrounding matter, generating antimatter that in turn creates gamma rays. (P Inq, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; UPI, Apr 1/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; UPI, Apr 2/91; CSM, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; USA Today, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; AP, Apr 3/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 4/91; P Inq, Apr 5/91)
NASA announced that the last of three SR-71 aircraft, loaned to NASA by the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to arrive at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, in late July. The Antelope Valley Press earlier reported the successful check flight of the Blackbird on July 10, prior to delivery to the NASA facility. The "Blackbirds" were to be used for high-speed, high altitude research in such areas as aerodynamics, propulsion, structures, and thermal protection materials. (NASA Release 91-111; Antelope Valley Press, Jul 11/91)
An article about the colorful sunsets along the California coast referred to the effects of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. According to Francisco Valero, chief of atmospherics research at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, Pinatubo probably spewed some 16 million tons of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, causing the spectacular sunsets. However, the aftereffects were that the cloud of sulfuric acid droplets could further accelerate the depletion of the ozone layer. (P Inq, Aug 3/91)
The Baltimore Sun quoted Anne Thompson, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center with reference to the interconnectedness of the atmosphere's mounting problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and smog. As examples she pointed out that some hydroxyl-enhancing gases contributed to acid rain; others contributed to the greenhouse effect, while at the same time, hydroxyl played a vital role in stemming depletion of the Earth's ozone layer. (B Sun, Nov 9/91)
The Test Technique Demonstrator program at Langley Research Center, Langley, Virginia, provided hypersonic data on airframe/engine integration applicable to design of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The program involves an industry consortium, which includes North American Aviation division of Rockwell International, General Dynamics, and McDonnell Douglas for airframe design, and Pratt and Whitney and Rocketdyne for the propulsion system. C. Larry Edwards, manager, NASP Aerodynamics Technology Program, said the hypersonic testing phase should be completed by 1992. (AvWk, Mar 25/91)
Randy Berridge of the Astronauts Memorial Foundation stated that the memorial to American astronauts killed in the line of duty was closed for inspections after strange noises were heard coming from the monument. After engineers checked the structure, it reopened on August 17. Subsequently, Representative Vernon Peeples, chairman of the Florida House Transportation Committee, questioned whether money for the monument had been misused. (UPI, Aug 6/91; P Inq, Aug 7/91; W Post, Aug 7/91; USA Today, Aug 7/91; LA Times, Aug 19/91; P Inq, Aug 20/91)
Queen Elizabeth visited Johnson Space Center in Houston. (AP, May 22/91; W Times, May 23/91; LA Times, May 23/91; UPI, May 23/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center announced the award to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, of a modification to the Space Station Freedom Schedule A contract. Schedule A provided hardware components for the Space Station and the modification will encompass the Integration, Test, and Verification Environment and Ada Compiler. (NASA Release C91-pp)
The Sunnyvale, California City Council approved a position paper prepared by the Moffett Field Committee, composed of representatives of NASA's Ames Research Center, and several neighboring city councils and chambers of commerce. The paper proposed that if Congress approved closing the Moffett Field Naval Air Station, NASA operate the field instead to ensure that research and transport activities continue. (San Jose Mercury News, Apr 17/91; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 18/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center asked for proposals for a follow-on system to its Payload Data Management System (PDMS). The system was to be used to manage data relating to payloads for Space Shuttles and ultimately for the Space Station. The new system was to include a relational data base management subsystem, a project management subsystem, a technical documentation subsystem, and a page printing subsystem and covers a 10-year period. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
The media reported on the "spectacular" nature for some viewers but confusing for some telescopes of the total solar eclipse. Drake Deming of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt said his team was up most of the night but succeeded in time in solving a problem with one of their instruments. (AP, Jul 11/91; UPI, Jul 11/91; W Post, Jul 12/91)
NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program was featured in the Christian Science Monitor. Harvard University professor Paul Horowitz, designer of the Planetary Society equipment, was cited as an enthusiastic listener for signals from space over the past eight years. (CSM, Dec 4/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
The media reported NASA's announcement that henceforth the Kennedy Space Center in Florida would be a prime Shuttle landing site beginning with Atlantis's mission in July. However, because of Florida's temperamental weather, Shuttles were expected to return to California 60 percent of the time, according to Robert L. Crippen, director of the Space Shuttle program. (AP, Jun 20/91; UPI, Jun 20/91; NYT, Jun 21/91; B Sun, Jun 21/91; LA Times, Jun 21/91)
The New York Times reported that fuel cells, first developed for use in space in the 1960s, were being used increasingly in commercial plants. A fuel cell is a device that converts the energy of a fuel directly to electricity and heat, without combustion. The United States had developed an experimental plant in San Ramon, east of San Francisco, and other plants were considering use of the new technology. (NYT, Jun 30/91)
NASA announced that on June 29 its 114th Scout launch vehicle placed an Air Force Radiation Experiment into a 450 nautical mile polar orbit. The launch occurred from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, and was delayed one day by bad weather. (NASA Release 91-102)
NASA announced that based on satellite observations of Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula, researchers from NASA and Geo Eco Arc Research in La Canada, California, had located a "nearly perfect" semicircular ring of sink holes forming a crater more than 125 miles in diameter. The scientists believed that this evidence of an impact crater formed by a comet or asteroid might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs and other species about 65 million years ago. The findings were being published in Nature magazine. (NASA Release 91-71; UPI, May 9/91: LA Times, May 10/91; San Francisco Examiner, May 10/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, May 11/91; LA Times, May 27/91; W Times, May 31/91)
The Antelope Valley Daily News reported that NASA might be flying one of the Advanced Tactical Fighters, namely the F-23 prototype, about which it was negotiating with Northrop Corporation. The aircraft would be used for aeronautics research at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Jul 7/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the ceremony that would take place on April 25 on the occasion of the rolling out of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour. The ceremony was scheduled for Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, where the orbiter was assembled by Rockwell International Corporation's Space System Division. Truly praised the efforts of all those in NASA and industry who had cooperated on the program. Part of the ceremony would involve the presentation to NASA by Robert Duce, Dean of the University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography, of Endeavour's first "payload," a sternpost remnant recovered from the orbiter's namesake, the first ship commanded by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1768-71. During the ceremony Truly announced the creation of the NASA Endeavour Teacher Fellowship Program  with the gifts donated to NASA by the public for the replacement orbiter. The program would award scholarships to American undergraduates studying to be teachers. (NASA Release 91-62; UPI, Apr 24/91; NASA Release 91-64)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that Advanced Computer Systems, Inc. of Fairfax, Virginia, would provide administrative automated data processing services for GSFC's Information Management Division. The contract would take effect April 1, 1991, and would consist of a one-year basic period and four one-year priced options for a total of $58.8 million. (NASA Release C91-d)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it planned to request proposals for a study for the Space Network Control (SNC). If the SNC becomes a project, it would result in a new control center in time for the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (ATDRSS) about 1997. The ATDRSS would increase services and add more satellites. (Federal Computer Week, Jan 7/91)
Stanley G. Rosen, retired director of long-range planning for the US Air Force Space Division in El Segundo, California, and vice president for public policy of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, said the Persian Gulf War demonstrated the need for radar satellites. Such satellites could penetrate clouds and battlefield smoke as well as monitoring all troop movements and could possibly detect Scud missile launchers. (LA Times, Feb 18/91)
Space Shuttle Endeavour arrived at Kennedy Space Center. Considerable work remained to be done on the Shuttle, including the installation of the three main engines. (AP, May 7/91)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, mounted atop NASA's Boeing 747 Shuttle carrier, began its two-day flight back to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (AP, Dec 7/91; W Times, Dec 8/91)
The Los Angeles Air Force Base at El Segundo was omitted from the list of proposed base closings of the Department of Defense. The base houses the Air Force Space Systems Division, a 3,200-employee unit that oversees military contracts for procurement of space hardware. (LA Times, Apr 13/91)
NASA named Margaret G. Finarelli as Associate Administrator for External Relations and John D. Schumacher as Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations. Finarelli, who has served in a number of U.S. government agencies, joined NASA in 1981 as Chief of the International Planning and Programs Office. Schumacher came to NASA in 1989 from a law practice in New York City. (NASA Release 91-3)
An editorial raised the fairness issue with regard to NASA's anchor tenancy contracts to help the commercial space business. To date Spacehab, American Mobile Satellite Corporation, and Orbital Sciences Corporation have such contracts. The editorial advocated that other agencies, such as the Department of Justice in the case of mobile services and environmental and ocean agencies in the case of fish research, should reimburse NASA for these costs. (SP News, 11-17 Mar/91)
NASA announced that two additional releases, one of barium and one of lithium, would be made during February as part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CCRES). CCRES was a joint NASA-US Air Force program to study the Earth's magnetic fields and the effect of space radiation on spacecraft components. (NASA Release 91-22; AP, Feb 7/91)
NASA announced that the Antarctic ozone levels had reached the lowest values ever observed on October 6 (110, plus or minus 6), according to preliminary data from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-168; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
AP quoted Guy Brasseur, director of the atmospheric chemistry division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colorado, as stating that his research indicated the eruption of Mount Pinatubo could lead to reduced levels of protective ozone over North America and Europe in the winter of 1991-92 and the summer of 1992, possibly increasing the risk of skin cancer. Richard Stolarski, ozone researcher at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said the projections were plausible but based on ozone depletion from El Chichon, a Mexican volcano that erupted in 1982, the thought there would be less ozone depletion than predicted. (LA Times, Jul 20/91; P Inq, Jul 20/91)
The media gave extensive coverage to the smooth landing and successful mission of Atlantis that ended with touchdown at the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral on August 11. In addition to launching a giant communications satellite to channel data from low-orbiting spacecraft, the astronauts tested equipment for possible Space Station use such as computer items and conducted 22 scientific experiments. Several articles dealt with final experiments on board and preparations for landing. (W Post, Aug 10/91; LA Times, Aug 10/91; AP, Aug 10/91; UPI, Aug 10/91; NY Times, Aug 11/91; W Post, Aug 11/91; NY Times, Aug 12/91; W Post, Aug 12/91; W Times, Aug 12/91; WSJ, Aug 12/91; P Inq, Aug 12/91; LA Times, Aug 12/91; AP, Aug 12/91; UPI, Aug 12/91; B Sun, Aug 13/91; NY Times, Aug 13/91)
NASA's Earth Observing System faced possible funding cuts as a result of questioning by Representative Ralph Hall, chairman of the House Space Subcommittee, and his colleagues. Concerns exist also within NASA regarding program costs. Tension reportedly existed between NASA headquarters and Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, over the amount of the data system to be centered at Goddard as opposed to other NASA sites. Some congressional members questioned NASA's accountability and deplored rivalry between NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
An international conference at the University of California San Diego, sponsored by the university's Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the California Space Institute, and Los Alamos, New Mexico's National Laboratory Center for National Security Studies expressed concern over the rising cost of space exploration and the difficulty of justifying such costly ventures as sending humans to Mars. Roger Bonnet, chief scientist of the European Space Agency, which cooperates with the United States on the Space Station, regretted American hesitations on the Space Station. (LA Times, Jan 12/91)
A spy satellite monitoring center, officially known as the Onizuka Air Force Base, near Sunnyvale, California, needed no longer to be considered top secret. The center controlled 80 Pentagon military and spy satellites but this responsibility was gradually being transferred to the Consolidated Space Operations Center at Falcon Air Force Base in Colorado. According to a government report, the transfer would not be complete until 1993. (LA Times, Dec 2/91)
NASA announced that its Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) was maneuvered to point at its first scientific target of opportunity, the sun, on June 7. Controllers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, repositioned the observatory to gather data from two X-class solar flares. All four GRO instrument teams reported receiving good data on solar activity as a result. (NASA Release 91-91)
The New York Times reported that the United States would announce today at a scientific meeting in New Mexico its intention to buy an advanced Soviet nuclear reactor, known as Topaz 2, built to power systems in space. The United States at present has no working nuclear reactors in orbit and this purchase constitutes a high point in East-West cooperation on technical matters. Topaz 2 is designed to operate up to five years in space and will be set up in the Albuquerque area. It was to be tested by the University of New Mexico, the Sandia National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Air Force Phillips Laboratory. The Topaz 2 can generate from 6,000 to 10,000 watts of electricity. (NY Times, Jan 7/91)
The speech of Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, at a September 19 meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, was published in Washington Technology. Fisk first dealt with the causes and effects of negative publicity about NASA and went on to defend NASA's accomplishments and the rationale for NASA's existence as being an absolute rather than a relative one, which made developing a consensus harder. He concluded that "The adventure of space is a vital part of our society. The space program needs to be perceived as the best this country has to offer." (Washington Technology, Oct 10/91)
Washington Technology reported that a major effort is underway to move NASA's Space Station program office to a site near Goddard Space Flight Center (SFC) in Greenbelt, Maryland. Other sites being considered are Johnson SFC near Houston or Marshall SFC in Huntsville, Alabama. (Washington Technology, Feb 7/91)
NASA announced it was scheduled to launch a $3 million U.S. Air Force Radiation Experiment (REX) Scout rocket June 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The REX was designed to test sophisticated communications in a high-radiation environment. (NASA Release 91-93)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
The media discussed Forrest McCartney's being asked by NASA to step aside as head of the Kennedy Space Center so that he could be replaced by Robert Crippen. McCartney said he would have liked to stay on another year, but this was not possible. (W Post, Nov 1/91; W Times, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; AP, Nov 1/91; P Inq, Nov 2/91; UPI, Nov 2/91; NY Times, Nov 3/91; SP News, Nov 4-10/91; O Sen Star, Nov 9/91)
An article critical of NASA for emphasizing space at the expense of the domestic aviation industry appeared in the Los Angeles Times. An example cited was Boeing's need to use a wind tunnel research facility operated by the Royal Aerospace Establishment in Britain to test its new top-secret 777 passenger jet because NASA had shut its decrepit wind tunnel in Sunnyvale, south of San Francisco. The aeronautics community reportedly felt neglected because only 6 percent of NASA's budget was allocated to aeronautics. As a result, there was little government support for research and development in U.S. general aviation, which has suffered in relation to government support given by other countries to their aviation industries. (LA Times, Dec 22/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston announced the award of a contract to McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California, modifying the Space Station Freedom Program Integration Support (Schedule B) contract. Schedule B involved the integration of Space Station components. (NASA Release C91-nn)
A study by the University of Southern California found that space exploration was viewed as "frivolous" by the average American. These results were disclosed at the 7th annual National Space Symposium. A space journal commented that NASA needed to find new ways of communicating its message more effectively. (Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Assistant Administrator for the Office of Procurement. The highest ranking woman career executive in Air Force contracting, she served previously as Principal Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff for Contracting, Headquarters Air Force Systems Command, Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland. (NASA Release 91-94)
NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), through its Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer (FIRAS), mapped the distribution of nitrogen throughout our galaxy. The COBE team reported this information at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia. These all-sky measurements are unencumbered by atmospheric and instrument emission and enable astronomers to understand better the processes occurring throughout the Milky Way. Scientists can measure the wavelength of emissions from ionized nitrogen atoms, the total energy of the galaxy, and test other theories. FIRAS is one of three instruments aboard COBE, NASA's first satellite primarily designed for cosmological studies. The data were analyzed at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
NASA announced the naming of astronaut Colonel Guy S. Gardner as Commandant of the USAF Test Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California. He was to leave the astronaut corps in June 1991 to assume his new post, which is part of the Air Force Systems Command. (NASA Release 91-52)
The wire services commemorated astronaut Alan B. Shepard's flight 30 years ago on May 5 as the first American in space. (AP, May 4/91; UPI, May 4/91)
Media coverage was extensive of NASA's cutting short by three days the mission of Space Shuttle Atlantis because of a failed navigational unit. Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, December 1. The Shuttle landed in good condition although it lost a small electrical connector part on landing. (W Post, Dec 1/91; W Times, Dec 1/91; NY Times, Dec 1/91; B Sun, Dec 1/91;P Inq, Dec 1/91; P Inq, Dec 2/91; NY Times, Dec 2/91; W Post, Dec 2/91; W Times, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 2/91; USA Today, Dec 2/91; AP, Dec 2/91; C Trin, Dec 2/91; UPI, Dec 2/91; B Sun, Dec 3/91; NY Times, Dec 3/91; W Times, Dec 3/91; USA Today, Dec 3/91)
According to the press, Al Boggess, an astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, at a news briefing at the Spce Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had observerd that a gas disk that ringed the star Beta Pectoris appeared to include large clumps of matter spiraling in toward it at speeds of up to 120 miles a second. This was a "new phenomenon, not seen around any other star." (NY Times, May 18/91; C Trin, May 19/91; CSM, May 22/91)
Scuba divers exercising on an underwater treadmill at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, are helping gather data to be used in NASA's spacesuit design. (NASA Release 91-11)
NASA officials announced that its X-29 experimental aircraft flew five times on January 25, setting a new record for daily flights from the Ames-Dryden test center. The second of two X-29s built by NASA, it was conducting high angle of attack test studies and military utility in a joint project with the Air Force. (Antelope Valley Press, Feb 14/91)
NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had made a supplemental agreement to the contract with McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company, Huntington Beach, California. The modification included the changes made in Space Station Freedom Program review activities. (NASA Release 91-124)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
At a press conference associated with the American Astronomical Society meeting in Seattle, Ted Stecher, Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) Principal Investigator, announced that UIT team members had identified hundreds of newly found young stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Several of these hot stars might eventually become supernovas. (NASA Release 91-84)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
An editorial in a space journal commented on the work of cosmonauts in the Soviet Mir Space Station who are conducting advanced materials and fluids experiments in at least five processing systems. In addition, Soviet engineers were preparing several evolutionary unmanned materials spacecraft that would provide Soviet scientists more processing time in unmanned spacecraft than their US counterparts. Whereas these Soviet facilities presented opportunities for use by American researchers for experimental purposes, which they were doing increasingly, a challenge was also presented to the United States. NASA bureaucracy and deficiencies in the US microgravity program, for example, resulted in it taking some researchers two years to book commercial processing flights on the Shuttle. Although NASA planned microgravity budget increases from $125 million in FY 1992 to $225 million in FY 1995, this would require White House and congressional support. (AvWk, Apr 29-May 5/91)
According to UPI, the new Shuttle Endeavour's maiden voyage in April 1992 faced a significant delay because of numerous problems discovered after it was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center. Among other reasons for the delay were the parts cannibalized from Endeavour to avoid major launch delays of other orbiters. As the Shuttle was inspected, more than 1,400 problem reports were filed regarding work needed. (UPI, Oct 19/91)
NASA announced its launching of the NOAA-D environmental satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The satellite was to collect meteorological and environmental data and ultimately would replace NOAA-10, which was nearing the end of its life. (NASA Release N91-36; W Times, May 15/91; USA Today, May 15/91)
Lowell Hawkinson, chairman of the Gensym Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, which created the G2 system, announced that Biosphere II, would be initiated in March. Biosphere II is an environment controlled by the advanced computer program G2 and designed for eight scientists to seal themselves inside for two years. NASA had been using G2 on its Shuttle flights to control certain functions since October 1989. According to Tony Heindel, a light controller at Mission Control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, G2 monitors 16,000 data points per second, gathering such information as temperature, voltages, availability of jet thrusters, and condition of on-board computers and instruments. (NY Times, Feb 10/91)
Lieutenant General Donald Cromer, commander of the Air Force Systems Command Space Systems Division, told a Space Expo '91 audience that the next generation of rockets would lift payloads into near-Earth orbit for $300 a pound instead of the $3,600 per pound it now costs a Titan 4 launch vehicle. Cromer worked with NASA to develop an advanced launch system (ALS). The goal was to develop engines ready for testing in 1995-96 with a first flight by 1999-2000. (AP, Mar 26/91)
NASA spokeswoman Vera Hirschberg said former American University president Richard Berenzen was working for Booz-Allen and Hamilton in investigating the societal benefits of the Space Exploration Initiative on behalf of NASA. (AP, Mar 11/91)
According to AP, a communications satellite needed to transmit long-distance telephone calls made in Alaska was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (AP, May 29/91; W Post, May 30/91)
Space Shuttle Columbia, according to AP, began its trip from an assembly building at Kennedy Space Center to the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, a four-mile journey. (AP, May 2/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
The local newspaper carried an article on an area resident, Dale Reed, who said his "lifting-body concept"--an aircraft shape that eliminated the need for wings, influenced the design of the Space Shuttle. He built scale models of his idea and convinced his boss, Paul Bikle, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, to try it on a glider. Reed was a NASA engineer for 32 years and subsequently worked as senior engineer for PRC, Inc., a NASA contractor. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Sep 13/91)
An article in Florida Today referred to former NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's proposal that some 100 top Shuttle program managers around the country be moved to Kennedy Space Center under a consolidation plan NASA was considering. The recommendations were to be discussed at a December 9-10 meeting with NASA Administrator Richard Truly. (Fla Today, Nov 15/91)
The Washington Times reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center near Houston had 842 pounds of moon rocks brought back by 12 moonwalkers on six Apollo flights between 1969 and 1972. The rocks are loaned to scientific groups for study. Each nation in the world also has a small piece of moon rock, sent at President Nixon's instruction in the early 1970s. (W Times, May 24/91)
In an article by NASA Deputy Administrator J.R.Thompson, he called on the White House to rescue the Space Station, citing its contribution to maintaining American leadership in space, international cooperation in science and technology, jobs, and education, in addition to its specific scientific research contributions. (Roll Call, Jun 3/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly issued a statement expressing his pleasure at being present with the Space Exploration Initiative and the work done by retired Air Force Lieutenant General Thomas S. Stafford and his Synthesis Group. He referred to past cooperation of NASA with these and other agencies and appreciation for innovative suggestions received from the Outreach Program efforts. Press comments on the Stafford committee report emphasized the controversial nature of some of its recommendations, such as landing Americans on Mars by 2014 and obtaining metals, ceramics, and energy sources from the moon and Mars. (NASA Release unnumbered; LA Times, Jun 12/91; W Post, Jun 14/91; Huntsville News, Jun 25/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax, Virginia, made a reputation for fast, frugal flights into space that won it a number of contracts with NASA and the Air Force. It developed the Pegasus rocket, which was launched from under the wing of a B-52 in 1990. Since then it has developed various other rockets designed to boost Shuttle payloads. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
NASA announced that David Reasoner, Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project scientist at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would chair the May 28 meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore. At the session, results of the CRRES artificial Earth auroras experiment would be discussed. (NASA Release 91-77)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
NASA rolled the Shuttle Atlantis to a launch pad at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for a scheduled April 6 liftoff. (W Post, Mar 16/91; LA Times, Mar 16/91)
The Pentagon was secretly developing a nuclear-powered rocket for boosting heavy military payloads into space as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as "star wars." The program was disclosed by the Federation of American Scientists and was confirmed by government documents obtained by the New York Times. NASA reportedly was quietly evaluating the program. The Federation opposed the program because of the risk of radiation release. (B Sun, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; WSJ, Apr 3/91; W Times, Apr 4/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
The media covered preparations of the Discovery crew for the first Shuttle night landing at Cape Canaveral, scheduled for September 18. As it developed, the bad weather forced a diversion of the Shuttle from Florida, and the actual landing occurred the night of September 18 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Reportedly, preliminary findings were that the Shuttle was in good shape after its landing. (USA Today, Sep 17/91; AP, Sep 17/91; UPI, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 18/91; USA Today, Sep 18/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; C Trin, Sep 18/91; AP. Sep 18/91; UPI, Sep 18/91; P Inq, Sep 19/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; W Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91; W Post, Sep 19/91; USA Today, Sep 19/91; LA Times, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 19/91; B Sun, Sep 19/91)
NASA announced the selection of PacificCorp Capital, Inc., Reston, Virginia, for a contract for Institutional Automatic Data Processing (IADP). IADP was to support the Johnson Space Center, Houston, and the White Sands Test Facility, New Mexico. (NASA Release C91-p)
According to AP, antennas on six major spacecraft had malfunctioned during the preceding 17 months, threatening the crucial flow of information from missions. Accordingly engineers conducted extra reviews of antennas on Atlantis. Henry Hoffman, guidance and control chief at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said part of the problem was that antennas were increasingly large and complex, requiring folding for launch and problems arose when they were extended or unfolded. (AP, Aug 4/91)
Florida Today described the opening on September 3 at the Kennedy Space Center of a third garage for NASA's four-Orbiter Space Shuttle fleet. The hangar was outfitted with equipment intended for the Air Force's mothballed Shuttle launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, saving NASA about $40 million. (Fla Today, Sep 4/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, announced that it had selected BAMSI, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a $140 million preventive and remedial maintenance and services contract. (NASA Release C91-u)
At a news conference at Goddard Space Flight Center, researchers from NASA and from the Soviet Central Aerological Observatory near Moscow announced the success of the first U.S.-Soviet space effort in 16 years. The engineer's model of the first Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS--U.S. technology-transfer laws prohibited the launch of a state-of-the-art TOMS aboard a Soviet satellite) was launched aboard a Soviet satellite August 15, and was sending back "high-quality data", according to Soviet deputy director Vyacheslav Khattatov. (B Sun, Nov 23/91; NY Times, Nov 23/91)
Four Israeli high school students paid a two-week visit to the United States after winning an astrophysics contest in Israel. The competition was sponsored by the National Museum of Science, Planning, and Technology in Haifa to encourage Israeli youth to focus on technology and the sciences.  The students visited Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and NASA's headquarters. (Washington Jewish Week, Apr 11/91)
Lewis Schiff, program coordinator for NASA's High Alpha Technology Program, a cooperative research program at NASA's Ames, Langley, and Lewis Research Centers, announced that tests were underway on an F/A-18 fighter aircraft in the world's largest wind tunnel at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. (NASA Release 91-92; LA Times, Jun 24/91)
According to the Washington Post, as part of U.S.-Soviet discussions leading to a summit, was the possible exchange of American astronauts flying on Mir and Soviet cosmonauts being launched on a U.S. Space Shuttle. (W Post, Jun 29/91)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
Daniel DeVito, manager of the Central Data Handling Facility (CDHF) at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, commented on the way the use of CDHF in the forthcoming NASA Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite mission might lead to similar systems on larger NASA projects. CDHF was a new concept that both the International Solar Terrestrial Physics project and the Earth Observing System mission were looking at to handle data more efficiently and distribute data to scientists through a multiple network. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, California, one day late. It was to be flown to Cape Canaveral atop a modified Boeing 747. The astronauts appeared in excellent condition. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; B Sun, Apr 12/91; W Times, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; NY Times, Apr 12/91; WSJ, Apr 12/91;  W Post, Apr 12/91; LA Times, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91; UPI, Apr 12/91)
NASA gave an update about the launching of Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket being launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Because of bad weather, the launch was postponed to June 9. (NASA Joust 1 Update, Jun 7/91)
NASA announced a number of contract arrangements. A contract extension was awarded to Vitro Corporation of Silver Spring, Maryland, to continue safety and support services at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. NASA further selected Nichols Research Corporation, Huntsville, Alabama, and BDM International, Inc., McLean, Virginia, to compete for a support contract for the Earth Observing System Program Office in Washington. In addition, NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, contracted with Johnson Controls, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida to provide maintenance and operational services at Johnson. (NASA Releases C91-dd, C91ee, C91ff)
Per Gloersen, a senior scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was quoted by the media as reporting in the British publication Nature findings concerning the shrinking of the polar ice cover. Global warming might be the cause, but Gloersen said 30 years of records would be needed for a definite conclusion. (UPI, Jul 3/91; B Sun, Jul 4/91; LA Times, Jul 4/91; W Post, Jul 8/91)
Astronomers Joss Bland-Hawthorn of Rice University, Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland, and R. Brent Tully of the University of Hawaii, using the telescope atop Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii have found a huge object. It might be a "supermassive black hole," but if so it would be more than 100 million times larger than the largest black hole thought to exist. It might also be a dead or dormant quasar. Astronomers hoped that the Gamma Ray Observatory of Atlantis would help to resolve the mystery. (NY Times, Apr 9/91; AP, Apr 9/91; P Inq, Apr 10/91; W Post, Apr 10/91; USA Today, Apr 10/91; UPI, Apr 10/91; LA Times, Apr 15/91)
According to Florida Today, the Atlantis astronauts were scheduled to arrive at Kennedy Space Center in a few days, to begin preparations and a practice countdown for the Space Shuttle flight. (Fla Today, Oct 28/91; UPI, Oct 31/91)
NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Paris Observatory, using data from the Voyager 1 spacecraft, for the first time had described an anti-greenhouse effect on a solar system body. In an article in Science magazine, they also described the temperature structure and energy balance on Titan, Saturn's largest moon. (NASA Release 91-143)
NASA unveiled a three-dimensional view of Venus created from images recorded by the Magellan spacecraft. Magellan detected a five-mile high volcano known as Maat Mons, about the size of Earth's largest volcano, Hawaii's Mauna Kea. (P Inq, Oct 30/91; W Post, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; W Times, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; Fla Today, Oct 30/91; C Trin, Oct 30/91; AP, Oct 30/91)
Fred Gordon, spacecraft operations manager at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that NASA officially had retired the Dynamics Explorer-1 (DE-1) satellite on February 28, 1991, after nine years of collecting scientific data. The decision was based on an evaluation of the costs for DE-1's operations compared to the expected value of the science gained. According to Dr. Robert Hoffman, Project Scientist for the program, the spacecraft's cameras could see an entire Auroral zone, and the quality and quantity of data produced by the two DE spacecraft far exceeded expectations. DE-2 ended operations February 19, 1983. (NASA Release 91-42)
The Defense Department lifted military secrecy from Shuttle missions, not because of decreased Soviet threat or the nature of the payload but because of the cost of security. The move was expected to save the government $80 million. Security would be applied more selectively because the Soviet Union and the American public were considered to be familiar with the nature of most space flights to date. Discovery would carry a payload known as Cirris, for Cryogenic Infrared Radiation Instrumentation for Shuttle, designed to determine the feasibility of the space-based detection of enemy aircraft and missiles. (NY Times, Apr 22/91; P Inq, Apr 23/91)
The Bush Administration proposed $14.7 billion for NASA for FY1972, an increase of $1.2 billion. The proposal would allow starting a new family of rockets to lift heavy payloads. The budget would also authorize NASA and the Air Force to spend $175 million each to develop a new launching system by the end of the 1990s. The Administration also proposed almost $2 billion to continue development of a Space Station and almost $1 billion for NASA's "Mission to Planet Earth" as part of the study of global environmental change. (NY Times, Feb 5/91; USA Today, Feb 5/91; WSJ, Feb 5/91; UPI, Feb 4/91; UPI, Feb 5/91; Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
NASA announced its closing for security reasons of the public viewing site for watching Space Shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base until the end of the Persian Gulf War. (Daily News, Feb 22/91)
Stormy weather prevented Space Shuttle Atlantis from landing at Kennedy Space Center so it landed instead at MacDill Air Force Base; the flight would resume when the weather cleared. (AP, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
The media reported a study contained in the British journal Nature, written by Brian Toon, senior researcher at NASA's Ames Research Center in Moffett Field, California, Christopher P. McKay, who also worked at Ames, and James F. Kasting, associate professor of geosciences at Pennsylvania State University. The authors concluded it would be relatively easy to alter Mars' atmosphere to make it suitable for plants. Making the planet fit for people, however, would take about 100,000 years. (P Inq, Aug 8/91; USA Today, Aug 8/91; C Trin, Aug 8/91; LA Times, Aug 8/91; UPI, Aug 8/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
An article citing Technology Review, referred to the system developed by NASA's Ames Research Center and Terra-Mar Resources Information Services to fight fires by enabling firefighters to "see" through the fire. (San Francisco Examiner, Aug 14/91)
Tom McGlynn, a Computer Sciences Corporation software scientist for the Gamma Ray Observatory (GRO) Science Support Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, described four data analysis systems developed for GRO. The GRO launched by Atlantis carried four instruments designed to study overlapping portions of gamma rays, the highest energy radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 29/91)
General Thomas S. Moorman, Jr., commander of Air Force Space Command at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, said orbiting satellites were integral to mid-air and ground operations in the Persian Gulf War. He spoke at a conference at Tufts University on "The United States Air Force: Aerospace Challenges and Missions in the 1990s." (CSM, Apr 12/91)
Robert C. Cowen, a science writer for the Christian Science Monitor, wrote of a recent article in the journal Science by Compton J. Tucker and Wilbur W. Newcomb of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Technical University in Lubbock. They used American polar-orbiting weather satellites to show the shifting sands of the Sahara Desert. (B Sun, Aug 30/91)
NASA stated that an artificial aurora borealis lasting from five to 15 minutes would be created by its satellite's release of chemicals the evening of January 10. The faux aurora is part of the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES) project of NASA and the Air Force, probing the Earth's magnetic field. (W Post, Jan 11/91; UPI, Jan 10/91; AP, Jan 11/91)
Eugene Kranz, Director of the Mission Operations Directorate (MOD) at Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the establishment of a Space Station Mission Operation Project Office within MOD. The new office, headed by Charles R. Lewis, was to have responsibility for the development and implementation of Space Station Freedom flight operations. (NASA Release 91-35)
NASA announced the selection of Taft Broadcasting Company of Houston for a contract providing television support services for the Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-x)
Dr. Sally Heap of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported to the American Astronomical Society meeting in Philadelphia that the High Resolution Spectrograph, an advanced instrument on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, made the best spectrograms ever obtained of Melnick 42. Melnick 42, some 80 to 100 times larger than the sun, is a massive star in a galaxy 170,000 light-years from Earth. The star, which is evolving toward a supernova state in the next few million years, is shedding its hot gases at a great rate in a "stellar wind" that strips the star of an amount of gas equal in mass to the sun every 100,000 years. The Hubble Space Telescope also revealed that the activity of pulsars inside a globular star cluster known as M15 was preventing the collapse of matter into a black hole and in some cases creating "born-again" pulsars in binary pairs form. (NASA Release 91-8; NY Times, Jan 17/91; B Sun, Jan 17/91; USA Today, Jan 17/91; P Inq, Jan 17/91; W Post, Jan 17/91; AP, Jan 16/91; LA Times, Jan 17/91; W Times, Jan 18/91; P Inq, Jan 18/91)
Florida Today reported that Forrest McCartney, who had headed Kennedy Space Center since 1986 would be retiring in about a year. Subsequently, the media reported that McCartney had been asked to step aside early by top NASA managers. (Fla Today, Oct 23/91; UPI, Oct 25/91; AP, Oct 26/91; W Times, Oct 27/91; O Sen Star, Oct 30/91)
NASA announced its award of a $191 million, five-year contract to Krug Life Sciences, Houston, for medical operations and research support services. The work, covering the period March 1, 1991 through February 29, 1996, was to be done at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (NASA Release C91-f)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
UPI reported that new Space Shuttle Endeavour was delayed an additional day in its trip from the factory in California to Kennedy Space Center in Florida because of stormy weather. (UPI, May 6/91)
An editorial in Florida Today referred to NASA Deputy Administrator J.R. Thompson's comment about NASA giving serious consideration to consolidating Shuttle operations at Kennedy Space Center. He estimated this would cut Shuttle costs 25 percent. Such a move would also result in consolidating Shuttle management, as recommended in the Advisory Committee report. (Fla Today, Feb 7/91)
Construction of NASA's Ames-Dryden Integrated Test Facility at Edwards Air Force Base was 18 months behind schedule and $3.1 over its original cost estimate because three successive contractors pulled out of the job, NASA said. Efforts were underway to find a new contractor. NASA spokesman Don Haley asserted that the construction delays had not hindered aircraft tests. (Los Angeles Daily News, Apr 15/91; Californian, Apr 19/91)
NASA stated that Endeavour would not be convoyed through Lancaster as previous Shuttles were, but instead would fly via a 747 jet to Houston's Johnson Space Center. There a dedication ceremony would be held before Endeavour was flown to Florida to prepare for its mission. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
Forrest McCartney, director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, said NASA might have to close one of its two Shuttle launch pads to save money. (P Inq, Oct 22/91)
The National Research Council in its report The Decade of Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics, after two years of study recommended that more modest instruments than the Hubble Space Telescope and only a few large observatories be developed. The next instrument, the $617 million Gamma Ray Observatory, was to be launched in April 1991. During the 1990s, of more than 50 proposals made, the report endorsed only four: the $1.3 billion Space Infrared Telescope Facility; an $80 million infrared-optimized telescope on Mauna Kea in Hawaii; the $115 million Millimeter Array, a group of telescopes to cover star-forming regions and galaxies; and a $55 million optical telescope to operate in the Southern Hemisphere. The report recommended several more modest programs including the $230 million Stratospheric Observatory for Far-Infrared Astronomy; the $250 million Astrometric Interferometry Mission to map positions of celestial bodies more precisely; the $15 million Large Earth-based Solar Telescope; and a $70 million spacecraft dedicated to the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopy Explorer satellite and increasing to five the Explorer satellites to be launched on rockets. (UPI, Mar 19/91; W Post, Mar 20/91; W Times, Mar 20/91; NY Times, Mar 20/91; LA Times, Mar 20/91; B Sun, Mar 24/91)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
NASA announced its selection of Orbital Sciences Corporation (OSC), Fairfax, Virginia, for a contract to provide ocean color data. These data were to support research performed by the Laboratory of Hydrospheric Processes, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The contract would run for about 7.5 years, of which 2.5 years would be development time and five years of data production. The mission's scientific objective was to measure changes in ocean color that indicate where concentrations of phytoplankton and chlorophyll lie on the surface of the ocean. For global change research, measuring concentrations of phytoplankton are essential in understanding the role of oceans in the global carbon cycle. The phytoplankton's photosynthesis stores vast amounts of carbon and understanding better how oceans store and release carbon will help understand global climate.
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of an extension to the United Technologies Corporation's Hamilton Standard Division's Extravehicular Mobility Unit hardware contract. (NASA Release C91-rr)
Gerald Fishman, a NASA astrophysicist at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced at a conference of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle that the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) carried on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory was detecting gamma-ray bursts with greater sensitivity than previously. (NASA Release 91-81; UPI, May 28/91)
Final approval was given for the construction of a new visitors' center at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The Manned Space Flight Education Foundation helped raise funds for the $60 million structure. (AP, Apr 12/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
Jim Gunn, an astronomer at Princeton University and designer of equipment for the Digital Sky Survey, was planning a map of the universe that would fit in a desk drawer. Based on Gunn's work on the Hale telescope in California, the Sky Survey's 100-inch "smart" telescope would perch on top of the Sacramento Mountains in New Mexico. (W Times, Feb 8/91; LA Times, Feb 17/91)
The oldest B-52 bomber, which serves as a test-bed aircraft for the NASA Ames-Dryden facility at Edwards Air Force Base, and was built in 1952, may be facing retirement. Difficulties in obtaining spare parts were a major consideration according to Jack Levine, director of NASA's Flight Projects Division. NASA would like to substitute a newer B-52, such as the G model delivered in the early 1960s, for which spare parts are readily available. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 24/91)
Findings presented at the American Astronomical Society's Division of Planetary Sciences conference suggested that Mercury had an ice cap on its north pole, even though it was the planet nearest the sun. The findings surprised the California Institute of Technology scientists who discovered them and were based on August experiments, the first radar photographs of an entire hemisphere of Mercury. The brightest reflection on the planet's north pole indicated a highly reflective substance such as ice over an area of an estimated 150 square miles. (AP, Nov 6/91; B Sun, Nov 7/91; P Inq, Nov 8/91; LA Times, Nov 11/91)
The media reported that because of high winds in California, Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The right tire was severely damaged on landing, but the new stronger brakes worked well. In addition, twice as much fiberglass thermal tile filler would have to be replaced than was customary after a flight. The astronauts accomplished 32 of 33 planned primary observations, 18 of 21 secondary observations, and 41 of 44 category-3 experiments. (P Inq, May 7/91; W Post, May 7/91; NY Times, May 7/91; USA Today, May 7/91; B Sun, May 7/91; WSJ, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91; AP, May 7/91; UPI, May 7/91; P Inq, May 8/91; AP, May 8/91; UPI, May 9/91)
The Washington Post featured the space biology team at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston, which has created a stir with a government-patented invention that allows large quantities of many types of human cells to be grown by removing the force of gravity. NASA's Rotating Wall Bioreactor had great potential for improving patient treatment and may grow still more cells when used in space. In this connection, NASA announced that the rotating wall vessel developed at the Johnson Space Center's Biotechnology Program, would be tested in space during the Atlantis flight. (W Post, Nov 18/91; NASA Release 91-195)
The crew of Atlantis talked with American schoolchildren while in orbit over the United States. (AP, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 7/91; B Sun, Apr 7/91; NY Times, Apr 7/91)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, has selected Hughes/Santa Barbara Research Center, Goleta, California as its contractor for the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Nadir (MODIS-N) instrument for the Earth Observing System (EOS) program. EOS is central to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Program. MODIS-N is the key research instrument to fly on a series of EOS unmanned polar spacecraft. Over a 15-year period, it would measure terrestrial, oceanographic, and atmospheric parameters to assess environmental changes. (NASA Release C91-1)
The Astro three ultraviolet and one x-ray telescopes carried by Columbia showed no traces of the decay processes of tiny invisible particles known as neutrinos, it was announced at the American Astronomical Society conference. These particles are connected with the Big Bang theory. (NY Times, Jan 18/91; W Post, Jan 18/91; LA Times, Jan 18/91; C Trin, Jan 20/91; CSM, Jan 23/91)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, awarded Metric Constructors, Inc., of Tampa, a $56,215,000 contract to build the Space Station Processing Facility. The 457,000-square-foot facility was to contain preflight and processing points for Space Station Freedom as well as 63,000 square feet of dedicated payload processing space. (NASA Release C91-h)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
NASA announced the renaming of the Gamma Ray Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, by Space Shuttle Atlantis, in honor of American physicist Arthur Holly Compton. (NASA Release 91-151)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) sponsored a workshop of scientists, environmentalists, regulators, and aerospace industry representatives the summer of 1991. As a result, a report was issued on October 17, concluding that rockets blasting into space generate pollutants that deplete stratospheric ozone, increase acid rain, contribute to global warming, and reduce air quality. Jerry Grey, science and technology policy director for the AIAA, said all nations that launch rocket-powered vehicles should contribute to an international effort to reduce the problems. The United States used more solid rockets than any other nation. For example, NASA estimated that each Space Shuttle flight deposited about 75 tons of chlorine into the ozone layer. Subsequently, Reuters interviewed Steve Newmann, chief environmental engineer in NASA's Office of Space Flight. He admitted NASA played a minor role in depleting the ozone layer it was studying but said NASA was working to make its next generation of space vehicles more environmentally friendly. (NY Times, Oct 18/91; B Sun, Oct 28/91)
The press reported that NASA had staged a mock emergency landing in preparation for Columbia's touchdown at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (USA Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91)
A Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) Synthesis Group, led by former astronaut and Air Force general Thomas Stafford, was collecting ideas for NASA and the White House concerning exploration of the Moon and Mars. A number of Department of Defense programs relate to SEI, such as the Advanced Launch Development Program to improve propulsion technology; the National Aerospace Plane program to develop a hypersonic research aircraft; radiation-hardened avionics and sensors; advanced structural and thermal protection materials; improved orbital propulsion systems; and laser communications between spacecraft. (SP News, Mar 25-31/91)
