The National Space Club named the NASA/TRW observatory team that built the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory the winner of the 1992 Nelson P. Jackson Award at an awards ceremony April 10 in Washington, D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft and space fields." (Business Wire, Apr 15/92)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
NASA announced that a group of Alaskans had started a three-year experiment in the use of a small emergency radio transmitter known as a Personal Locator Beacon to communicate with a 10-year-old search and rescue satellite system that up to now had been used primarily for aircraft and ship emergencies. The locator beacon has the potential to save lives when used in emergencies in remote areas. The experiment was being carried out by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U. S. Air Force, and the U. S. Coast Guard. (NASA Release 92-115)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
NASA issued its strongest warning yet about the quickening deterioration of the ozone layer over large, populated areas in northern latitudes. Experts warned that thinning ozone will let in more harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun and lead to more skin cancer and cancer deaths. An ozone layer hole could appear as early March 1992 if certain meteorological and chemical conditions occur, said the scientists. Even if the hole does not appear right away, the chances are "very high" that it will occur over the next decade, said James Anderson, a Harvard University chemistry professor who is involved in the project. (WSJ, Feb 4/92; P Inq, Feb 4/92; NY Times, Feb 4/92; USA Today, Feb 4/92; W Post, Feb 4/92; W Times, Feb 4/92; LA Times, Feb 4/92; B Sun, Feb 4/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
James Abrahamson, former Strategic Defense Initiative Director, left Hughes Aircraft to serve as co-chairman of Oracle Systems. A former Air Force general, Abrahamson was expected to supervise such projects as NASA's Space Shuttle and the Air Force's F-16 fighter. (Bus Wk, Sept 28/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company was awarded a three-year extension of its existing contract for payload ground operations services, valued at approximately $561.4 million, at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (NASA Release C92-21)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
The Air Force reported that a YF-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, prototype of the planned F-22, had slammed onto the main runway of Edwards Air Force Base with its wheels retracted during a practice approach. The radar-eluding plane, designed to be the hottest air combat fighter going into the 21st century, slid several thousand feet and burned for 90 seconds. A Lockheed pilot escaped with only minor injuries. (B Sun, Apr 29/92)
A team of American and British astronomers detected the flare of a supernova almost halfway to the edge of the known universe--five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed. Light from the supernova was expected to help astronomers grapple with the questions of whether the universe is infinite and will expand forever or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse. (NY Times, Nov 15/92)
At a meeting with NASA employees at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA chief administrator, Dan Goldin, emphasized the need for increased attention to aeronautics research in the face of competition from Europe and Japan. Goldin also said that NASA would have to do things "better, faster, cheaper"--the message Congress had just sent the agency by not increasing its $14 billion budget. Goldin also urged senior managment to place more minorities in its ranks and indicated that agency personnel would be reshuffled in the future. (Daily News, Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley Press, Sept 4/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
NASA, in conjunction with the nation's two leading aircraft engine makers, reported that it would be developing advanced materials that could make a next-generation supersonic airliner possible by the year 2005. A five year, $88 million partnership with General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, and United Technologies, Pratt and Whitney Division, East Hartford, Connecticut, was to center on critical composite materials and processes that U.S. industry would need to design and build a fleet of high-speed civil transports. The planes would fly at more than twice the speed of sound and at much higher altitudes than today's commercial airliners. A cost-effective, environmentally compatible supersonic airliner could cut long-distance trip times in half. For example, a future high-speed civil transport could fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo in 4 1/2 hours instead of the 10 hours taken by present subsonic passenger planes. While NASA, Pratt and Whitney and General Electric will form the core of the team, many other U.S. engine companies, materials suppliers and composite fabricators also will play an integral part. This interaction will provide the base for a future U.S. manufacturing capability in high-temperature composites and will let the involved firms take early advantage of the program's technical results. The composites also will help American manufacturers of subsonic airplanes, power systems and military aircraft. (NASA Relese 92-21)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
The U.S. Air Force said that budget realities had necessitated cuts in plans to have the National Aero-Space Plane reach orbit and fly 25 times the speed of sound. The experimental hypersonic craft's top speed was likely to be cut from Mach 25 to Mach 12 or Mach 15 and its runway-to-space approach might be abandoned in favor of launch from the back of another airplane. Cost was projected to drop from $10 billion to $3 billion. (W Times, Dec 9/92)
To help bolster the competitiveness of American industry, NASA and the Department of Energy announced that they had formed a partnership to enhance the transfer of technologies developed in their laboratories to American enterprise. Areas of cooperation included outreach to business and non-profit research organizations, access to federal technology resources, training and education, dissemination of scientific and technical information, and technology transfer policy and program analysis.
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
L. Eugene Root, a pioneer U.S. aircraft builder who led Lockheed Missile and Space Company to maturity and was a member of the RAND think tank died in Menlo Park, California, at the age of 87. As president of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences in 1962, Root combined his organization with the American Rocket Society, co-founding the major U.S. aerospace society, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (LA Times, Jan 25/92)
It was reported that on March 17, 1992, that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel will present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly at NASA headquarters, Washington, D.C. The panel reviews, evaluates, and advises the NASA Administrator on present and future NASA programs and activities. Priority is given to programs that involve the safety of manned flight. (NASA Note 92-21)
A panel of experts recommended that the Air Force assume sole responsibility for developing a new all-purpose national launch system called the "Spacelifter" by the end of the decade. NASA's fleet of Shuttles would be phased out at the earliest opportunity, having become too costly and fragile a system to dominate the space program much longer. The report did not call for a large, heavy-lift vehicle but focused instead on development of lower-cost, medium-size rockets that could satisfy virtually all known payload needs and be tailored to carry cargo or people. (W Post, Nov 19/92 and Nov 21/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92 and Nov 22/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
Dr. Mark M. Phillips, acting director of Cerro Tololo, an American operated observatory in Chile, said the New Technology Telescope developed in Europe was capturing images up to six times more revealing than those obtained by comparable American telescopes of conventional design. The new European telescope contained advanced optical elements that automatically correct the distortions caused by gravity and wind as the telescope moves. There was an uneasy feeling among some scientists that the salad days of United States astronomy were drawing to a close and that the new European telescopes would leave American astronomers far behind. (NY Times, Feb 4/92)
The North American Air Defense Command said that it was tracking nearly 7,000 spacecraft and pieces of debris bigger than a square yard that were in orbit around the Earth. The proliferating use of satellites has resulted in a ring of several hundred of the spacecraft around the Earth's equator, most in low-Earth to mid-Earth orbit. As a result, concerns were being raised about possible interference from one satellite to another and about the need for adequate distance between satellites in view of plans for more satellites in the 1990s. (W Times, Jul 19/92)
David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to receive the Inventor of the Year Award for their development and design of a new class of horizontally rotating tissue culture systems--also known as the rotating wall bioreactor--that in some ways simulate microgravity. Bioreactors are cell maintenance devices used for research in growth and culturing cells or tissues and have been recognized as valuable tools for pioneering research in lung tissue, skin growth, intestinal disease, cartilage growth, colon cancer, brain tumor growth, and therapeutics. (NASA Release 92-33)
Congress planned to give the fledgling U. S. commercial space business a boost next year by pumping $10 million into launch site improvements. Most of that money was expected to be spent on upgrades to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station facilities. (Fla Today, Oct 8/92)
A status briefing marking the 20th anniversary of Pioneer 10's launch was scheduled for March 2 at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The briefing was to examine new and past space accomplishments and a spacecraft signal was scheduled to be "piped in" to the briefing from five billion miles away. Also featured in the briefing would be a launch-identical, full-scale replica of Pioneer 10 shown for the first time. (NASA Note N92-16)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)
The U.S. Air Force, NASA, and Grumman aircraft company said they had reached the mid-point of the X-29 vortex flow control (VFC) program at Edwards Air Force Base in California, producing yaw rates of up to 20 degrees. The use of VCF to yaw the aircraft while at high angle-of-attack is an aviation first according to Col. William Gotcher, X-29 program manager.(Flight International, Aug 19-25/92)
John L. Sloop, 76, an electrical engineer who was a retired official of NASA, died in Washington, DC. Mr. Sloop retired in 1972 as assistant associate administrator for advanced research and propulsion after a 30-year career with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (W Post, Oct 7/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
Paul Beaver, editor of the military affairs magazine Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an interview that the U. S. Air Force was operating a new generation of secret spy planes capable of reaching eight times the speed of sound. Code-named "Aurora," the plane was believed to operate at night and to incorporate the latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied that such an aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and aviation fans had speculated that a successor to the famed SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane was under development and testing. (The Sun, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 12/92)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
The Air Force reported that a Titan 2 rocket was launched into space carrying a secret military payload into a polar, low-earth orbit. The two-stage rocket, a modified Titan intercontinental ballistic missile, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, about 250 miles northwest of Los Angeles. (W Times, Apr 26/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
A panel of experts at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science said that computers now perform some medical functions better than doctors and that machines are going to get even smarter in the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of Southern Connecticut State University said that NASA and the Department of Defense were working on a "smart" battlefield stretcher, which as envisioned, could provide expert diagnostic capabilities and would be able to dispense drugs or even jolt the heart back into normal rhythmn. (AP, Feb 7/92)
The Air Force and NASA announced that they were developing a new family of rockets to meet the unmanned launch needs of the next century. As currently conceived, the National Launch System would include three new vehicles designed to lift cargoes ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 pounds into low Earth orbit. The new rockets were expected to become operational in 2002 and would carry supplies to Space Station Freedom at less cost than present U. S. delivery systems. (W Times, Aug 18/92; Birmingham News, Aug 19/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
It was reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center plans to award a broad computer services contract later during the year to support the center's host computers, networks, workstations, application software and telecommunications systems. The contract, which analysts estimate will cost up to $180 million, was to include software acquisition, development and maintenance, installation, engineering, integration and costumer services. (Federal Computer Week, Feb 17/92)
Cornell University astrophysicist Thomas Gold said in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" that there is probably more life inside the Earth than there is on its surface. This life would be in the form of bacteria and other microorganisms, and its overall volume probably surpasses that of all the plants and animals living on the planet's surface. NASA scientist Stephen Maran said that if Gold's ideas prove correct, "they will revolutionize scientific theories of geology and the evolution of life on Earth." Gold speculated that similar life forms may exist inside the moon and other planets in our solar system. "The surface life on Earth, based on photosynthesis for its overall energy supply, may be just one strange branch of life. The deep, chemically supplied life, however, may be very common in the universe," Gold commented. (P Inq, Jul 1/92)
The Kennedy Space Center awarded three indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts for its Personal Computer Acquisition contract program. The three winners were to provide a range of personal computers, peripherals, and software packages and would be required to compete against each other for NASA orders throughout the duration of the contract, an arrangement designed to provide NASA with the most up-to-date equipment at the lowest cost. (Federal Computer Week, July 13/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
On the second day of Discovery's mission, astronauts took turns being spun in a chair, strapped blindfolded onto a lurching sled, and jolted by electrodes high above the Earth in a study of space motion sickness. Between medical tests, the seven astronauts tended to organisms carried into orbit for research, including roundworms, fruit flies, stick insects, lentil roots, bacteria and billions of single cells. The mission was scheduled to end at Edwards Air Force Base in California. (NY Times, Jan 24/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Evgeny Sverdlov, director of the Institute of Molecular Genetics in Moscow, told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), that the demise of the former Soviet Union had created a "brain drain" that challenged the future existence of the Russian scientific research community. Because of the lack of funds, many research centers were on the verge of collapse. He added that it was good for young scientists to hone their skills abroad. But he said it would be a disaster for science in his country if they did not return. (CSM, Feb 13/92)
In an interview with Final Frontier magazine, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin gave his views about NASA and its contribution to American society. "I took this job because I believe NASA is critical to America's future. NASA provides hope, opportunity, and inspiration to the American public. It does this through its primary mission: to reach for the stars, in the broadest sense, of course. . . . For the last 30 years it has been demonstrated over and over again that the space program helps take America's value-added industry right to the cutting edge and provides jobs and opportunity." (Final Frontier, Sept/92)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
McDonell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space Center division was chosen as a finalist for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy, which is given annually to the NASA contractor which makes the greatest achievements in applying Total Quality Management (TQM) principles to their day-to-day operations. The goals of the award are to incorporate more efficient ways of 222doing business throughout NASA and its contractors and to transfer the performance improvement methods of award winners from company to company. "It is clear from your company's application that you have positive steps to advance quality, productivity and the continuous improvement process," NASA safety chief George Rodney told division officials in a recent letter. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
In an experiment co-sponsored by NASA and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, D.C., a novel cell culture system for growing bone cells was to undergo its first test in weightlessness on a Space Shuttle mission. The objectives of the Space Tissue Loss-1 (STL) experiment involve studying the effects of the microgravity environment on the biochemistry and functional activity of various tissues including muscle, bone and blood cells. Post-flight electron microscopic analyses of cells from the flight experiment were to be conducted by Dr. Stephen Doty of the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City.(NASA Release 92-30)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
In a letter to the British journal Nature, two American scientists at the University of Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, David Kring and Willima Boynton, said that they had found what they believe to be the location where a gigantic object from outer space crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago, possibly ending the age of the dinosaurs. The site is a buried crater 110 miles across on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. (The Sun, Jul 9/92; WSJ, Jul 9/92)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Ceremonies at Edwards Air Force Base marked the 50th anniversary of the birth of the jet age. On October 2, 1942, Bob Stanley first flew the XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed at Muroc Air Base (now Edwards Air Force Base). (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 2/92)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
The Delta launch team at Cape Canavaral Air Force Station reported that the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company group was gearing up for two launches in the next 25 days. The first, a mission to deploy an Indonesian communications satellite, and the second, a mission during which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer would be hurled into orbit, was scheduled for launch June 4, 1992. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Leaders of the world's space nations attending the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C., last week said that they lacked the money to go it alone in space, yet the will to cooperate internationally seemed also to be lacking. Two views about space exploration emerged among scientists. An optimistic view held that space exploration methods could worthwhile projects at affordable prices. The pessimistic view held that space cost too much, lacked public support, and that ideas must be constrained. The congress, the largest gathering of space experts ever convened, attracted more than 5,000 delegates from 70 nations and featured more than 2,700 technical papers. (Space News, Sept 7-13/92)
NASA and a contractor team headed by Rockwell International said they were conducting supersonic laminar flow experiments using two General Dynamics F-16XL demonstrators on loan from the U. S. Air Force. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
General Dynamics Corporation said its space systems unit had won a $112.6 million Air Force contract to modify space-launch facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. (WSJ, Nov 6/92)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were investigating the importance of gravity to life on Earth. They also were studying whether intermittent exposure to gravity might help keep future space explorers healthy. Volunteers were confined to their beds for 24-hours a day in the head-down position to induce the physical changes associated with exposure to the microgravity of space. Results of the study indicated that these volunteers could avoid the changes simply by standing quietly for 15 minutes of each hour over a 16-hour period. Standing for two hours a day or walking at three miles per hour were almost as effective, according to Dr. Joan Vernikos, the study's Principal Investigator and Acting Chief of Ames's Life Science Division. (NASA Release 92-67)
NASA's plan to transfer work modifying Space Shuttles from Palmdale to its Kennedy Space Center in Florida triggered protests from California's congressional delegation and the governor's office. The NASA decision would affect about 500 jobs at Rockwell International's Palmdale facility, where five of the orbiters had been assembled since the 1970s and where the space agency had done major modification work on the Shuttle fleet. (LA Times, Feb 1/92)
For the first time, virtually every nation with an interest in space or its practical benefits sent delegates to the World Space Congress. Meeting in Washington, D. C., at the invitation of President George Bush, almost 4,000 representatives began a week of meetings that were expected to usher in a new era of international cooperation in space exploration. The conference was sponsored by the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, NASA, the U. S. Academy of Sciences, the International Astronautical Federation, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (The Sun, Aug 31/92;  CSM, Aug 31/92)
Gerard K. O'Neill, a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the idea of colonizing space, died in Redwood City, California. O'Neill, 65, was the author of The High Frontier, a 1977 book that proposed the construction of giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could live in space. (P Inq, Apr 29/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
Lockheed Corporation's Space Operations Company unit won the competition for a $200-million-a-year contract to manage the Kennedy Space Center in Cocoa Beach, Florida. NASA said the contract would run for an initial period of four years, plus three two-year options, for a total potential contract period of 10 years. Its estimated value over the 10-year period was $1.9 billion. (WSJ, Nov 19/92; W Post, Nov 19/92; Fla Today, Nov 19/92)
A $25 million, five-year program to expand the ability of helicopter pilots to fly close to the ground, around obstacles and in bad weather, was initiated by NASA and the U.S. Army. Experiments conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would study displays that give pilots information, better guidance and navigation systems and ways to improve helicopter weapons systems. The program's main research tool would be a modified UH-60A Black Hawk helicopter called the Rotorcraft-Aircrew Systems Concepts Airborne Laboratory or "RASCAL." In addition to Ames, flight tests were also to be conducted at Crows Landing, a U.S. Navy facility in California's San Joaquin Valley. (NASA Release 92-28)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
A Japanese amateur astronomer detected Comet Swift-Tuttle on its return to the inner solar system. Swift-Tuttle, last seen during the American Civil War, is currently the longest predictable periodic comet, returning approximately every 130 years. (W Post, Sept 29/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
In a carefully hedged report, the General Accounting Office said that crucial American high-technology industries including consumer electronics and robotics may have lost ground in the 1980s to foreign competitors, particularly Japan. The sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equipment, supercomputers, pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, fiber optics, robotics, consumer electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and flexible manufacturing systems. (NY Times, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 18/92)
The Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of the "ozone hole" has shifted for the first time to a populated island in Tierra del Fuego off the southern tip of the South American mainland. Data from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer on the Nimbus 7 satellite confirmed that the area of depleted ozone extended for some 8.9 million square miles over the south polar region, an increase of about 15 percent from 1991, the largest ozone hole ever observed. (W Times, Oct 11/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; P Inq, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and American scientists would spend nine to 12 months looking for signs of gravity waves--distortions in space and time caused by gigantic black holes--in tape recordings of radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on Earth. Discovery of gravity waves would provide strong confirmation of Albert Einstein's theory of how the universe works, and could prove the existence of black holes. (W Times, Mar 19/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
The Kennedy Space Center, Florida, said it had awarded first-of-a-kind contracts to three firms under NASA's Personal Computer Acquisition Contract program. Throughout the five-year life of the contracts, the three companies would have to compete against each other for NASA orders to supply personal computer hardware and software to Kennedy Space Center and other NASA locations. NASA established this competitive arrangement so that the agency could be assured of a steady supply of high-quality products for the best price. (NASA Release C92-10)
