Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)
NASA officials at Kennedy Space Center released their annual economic impact statement in terms of the effect of the Center on Brevard County. Despite budget cuts, the 1994 impact on the economy was $1.18 billion in comparison to $1.32 billion in 1992; the total workforce (including contractors, civil service, and construction) was 16,500 in 1994 in contrast with 18,700 in 1992. The review of NASA operations should result in more job cuts, which would occur in early 1995. (Fla Today, Nov 24/94)
Kathryn Hire, who worked at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) for Lockheed Space Operations Company, became the first KSC worker to be selected as a future astronaut. (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
Scientists of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which managed the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanography satellite, had been studying data it developed. The findings from two years of monitoring the oceans, which were to be announced at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, indicated that the average sea level had risen about 0.12 inches a year from December 1992 to September 1994. Such a rise was an indicator of global change and supported theories than an increase in "greenhouse" gases was causing long-term global warming. (Pasadena Star News, Dec 7/94)
NASA announced that it had begun resurfacing the runway at the Kennedy Space Center, which would improve the wear on Shuttle tires and potentially lead to an expansion of the Return to Launch Site landing crosswind flight rule beyond the present constraint of 15 knots. (NASA Release 94-153)
The impact of a huge Fragment G, a two-mile-wide piece of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, was as great as 6 million megatons of TNT when it hit Jupiter early July 18, according to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center. A similar piece hit late July 18, and a further piece was expected on July 20. In contrast the total energy that could be created on Earth with atomic bombs was 10,000 megatons. The comet left a scar larger than Earth's diameter on Jupiter's gaseous surface. Scientists began to study the long-term effects on Jupiter of the comet's impact. The media also focused on the work of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in tracking developments on Jupiter and the excellent view of Jupiter for astronomers at the South Pole. In the final stage of the comet barrage that ended late July 21, four large comet fragments hit Jupiter, creating tremendous fireworks for watching astronomers. Furthermore, as a result of the scars made by the fragments, white hot gases from the planet's interior erupted through the holes in great fireballs. In measuring the dazzling light produced, astronomers believed they had detected hydrogen sulfide, which could contribute to Jupiter's colors. The potential dangers associated with the comet collision with Jupiter led the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology to propose legislation that, if passed, would direct NASA to submit a plan by February 1995 for a 10-year program to catalog "all comets and asteroids that are greater than one kilometer in diameter" traveling along orbits that intersect that of the Earth. (LA Times, Jul 18/94; C Trib, Jul 18/94; LA Times, Jul 19/94; W Post, Jul 19/94; W Times, Jul 19/94; USA Today, Jul 19/94; B Sun, Jul 19/94; C Trib, Jul 19/94; NY Times, Jul 20/94; USA Today, Jul 20/94; W Times, Jul 20/94; LA Times, Jul 20/94; B Sun, Jul 20/94; CSM, Jul 20/94; C Trib, Jul 20/94; P Inq, Jul 20/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94; C Trib, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 22/94; NY Times, Jul 22/94; W Post, Jul 22/94; B Sun, Jul 22/94; USA Today, Jul 22/94; W Times, Jul 22/94; Time, Jul 25/94; LA Times, Jul 26/94; NY Times, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 26/94; CSM, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Aug 1/94)
NASA announced the selection of Raytheon Service Company, Burlington, Massachusetts, to provide logistics support to the Mission Operation and Data Systems Directorate at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-h)
The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket with a Defense Department secret payload from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (Reuters, May 3/94; H Chron, May 4/94; H Post, May 4/94)
NASA announced that a press conference was being held at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., at which four astronomers would discuss the initial findings resulting from the Hubble Space Telescope and spectroscopic data concerning the spectacular July bombardment of Jupiter by comet P/Shoemaker-Levy 9. Two of the astronomers were affiliated with the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., for NASA, under contract with the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Among questions to be discussed was the nature of the body that struck Jupiter: whether it was indeed a comet or an asteroid. (NASA Release 94-161; W Post, Sep 30/94; H Chron, Sep 30/94; H Post, Sep 30/94)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, announced the selection of Loral Space Information Systems of League City, Texas, to provide support services for JSC's Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance Office. (NASA Release C94-cc)
NASA announced the selection of Boeing Information Systems, Inc., Vienna, Virginia, for a contract to provide information resources and management support services to NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release C94-ll)
NASA announced the near completion of a $115 million restoration of a unique NASA wind tunnel located at Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, which began operating nearly 50 years ago. (NASA Release 94-193)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin visited the Johnson Space Center in Houston as his first stop on a fall tour of all NASA facilities. In a tough speech to all employees, he said he wanted more innovation and less bureaucracy. He stressed that in a time of tight government budgets, "every single person is going to have to justify their activity--all the time." In emphasizing the need to improve business practices, he cited the NASA worker-to-manager ratio on some projects as 2-to-1, whereas 12-to-1 was the private sector goal. (H Post, Sep 13/94; H Post, Sep 14/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Brian Welch as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-116)
NASA determined it was cheaper to tear down the giant hammerhead crane originally built for the Apollo moon landing program rather than to refurbish it. Therefore, the crane was in the process of being dismantled at the Kennedy Space Center launch pad. (Fla Today, Dec 11/94)
NASA announced that a new satellite, the NOAA-J, a joint project of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, was scheduled to be launched on December 4 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The new satellite would circle the Earth every 102 minutes, passing over the North and South Poles on each orbit. The satellite would collect meteorological data and transmit them directly to users around the world to enhance local weather analysis and forecasting. (NASA Release 94-189)
NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)
NASA scientists would like to send an unmanned spacecraft to look for ice inside craters on Mercury, the solar system's hottest planet with temperatures reaching 800 degrees at its equator. However, inside the craters at Mercury's poles the temperatures were 235 below zero and scientists conceived that life might exist. Robert M. Nelson of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena discussed JPL's proposal for a mission to Mercury, named Hermes, which NASA was considering. The discussion occurred at a meeting of the American Geophysical Union. (AP, Dec 6/94)
The International Federation of Professional and Technical Engineers filed unfair labor practice charges against NASA because of the April 4 memorandum from Jeremiah Pearson, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, transferring several positions from headquarters to Johnson Space Center and Kennedy Space Center without collective bargaining. (SP News, Apr 11-17/94)
U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
A feature article described the potential scenario envisaged by David Morrison, chief of space science research at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, and Clark Chapman of the Planetary Science Institute and Science Applications International Corporation, Tucson. Their 20-year study of asteroids led them to predict that the Earth was on a calamitous collision course with an asteroid that could kill 1 billion or 2 billion people. The odds of the collision in any one year were 1 in 500,000. (USA Today, Feb 8/94)
NASA announced that the French space agency, Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) was awarding the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon management team the CNES Medal in recognition of their achievements. Seven team members from NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, and the CNES project office received the awards.Launched August 10, 1992, TOPEX/Poseidon continued to study the topography of the oceans. (NASA Release 94-132)
Anser Inc., a public service research institute, announced the appointment of Richard Kohrs, formerly director of Space Station Freedom at NASA headquarters in Washington, D.C., as manager, aerospace business development. Kohers served more than 30 years with NASA in various capacities. (PR Newswire, Oct 24/94)
The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) signed a three-year cooperative agreement with NASA to make NASA's space and Earth science data available to elementary school students and their teachers over the Internet. TASC was scheduled to work with the staff at Franconia Elementary School in Fairfax County, Virginia, to design and develop software allowing kindergarten through 6th grade students to access NASA's vast remote sensing weather data. Fritz Hasler, manager of the project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, said that the project should not only help students learn about the weather but also improve their knowledge of the information highway. (PR Newswire, Oct 19/94)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
Space Shuttle Discovery was launched, and the six astronauts began a series of experiments. These included testing the first space-based optical "radar" to probe clouds and aerosols in the atmosphere; carrying the first automated factory in which a robot, not an astronaut, did the work; and later in the week testing SAFER, a new self-rescue rocket-powered backpack. Also being tested was the Shuttle's manipulator arm to measure the effect of Discovery's thruster plumes, which might pose a problem ultimately in docking with the Russian Space Station Mir. The astronauts experienced some difficulties with a high-speed data recorder that would not work and a communications glitch related to the analysis of steering jet exhaust plumes. The astronauts successfully conducted extensive environmental monitoring using the LIDAR space-based radar--in this connection, NASA warned that looking at Discovery through a large telescope might result in eye damage. On September 13, Discovery released the Spartan (Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy) satellite to study the solar wind, the streams of charged particles hurtling from the sun through the solar system at 1.5 million mph. The Spartan was scheduled to be picked up again by Discovery on September 15, but the capture of the satellite would be complicated by the failure of Discovery's radar system, which meant that Spartan could not be tracked. Meanwhile, NASA added another day to Discovery's mission to allow more laser-beam and jet-exhaust experiments to be conducted. On September 15, the astronauts recaptured Spartan on schedule and the radar operated, facilitating the operation. On September 16 two of the astronauts took spacewalks without a tether, testing SAFER in space for the first time. They took turns during a 6.5 hour outing and were limited to staying with 25 feet of the Shuttle so that they could be retrieved if SAFER failed. Bad weather prevented the Shuttle landing on September 19; it ultimately was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base, California, where it landed September 20. (H Chron, Sep 10/94; USA Today, Sep 12/94; H Post, Sep 12/94; H Chron, Sep 12/94; CSM, Sep 13/94; USA Today, Sep 13/94; P Inq, Sep 13/94; AP, Sep 13/94; W Post, Sep 14/94; P Inq, Sep 14/94; C Trib, Sep 14/94; UP, Sep 14/94; Reuters, Sep 14/94; NY Times, Sep 15/94; USA Today, Sep 15/94; P Inq, Sep 15/94; W Times, Sep 15/94; UP, Sep 15/94; Reuters, Sep 15/94; W Post, Sep 16/94; NY Times, Sep 16/94; USA Today, Sep 16/94; B Sun, Sep 16/94; W Times, Sep 16/94; CSM, Sep 16/94; AP, Sep 16/94; UP, Sep 18/94; Reuters, Sep 18/94; USA Today, Sep 19/94; AP, Sep 19/94; UP, Sep 19/94; Reuters, Sep 19/94; W Post, Sep 20/94; NY Times, Sep 20/94; B Sun, Sep 20/94; P Inq, Sep 20/94; USA Today, Sep 20/94; AP, Sep 20/94; Reuters, Sep 20/94; LA Times, Sep 21/94; W Post, Sep 21/94; W Times, Sep 21/94; P Inq, Sep 21/94; B Sun, Sep 21/94; H Post, Sep 21/94; AP, Sep 21/94)
Abe Martinez, assistant U.S. attorney in Houston, said that one corporation and eight individuals, including a NASA contracting officer, Stephen Cleland, had pleaded guilty to criminal charges in connection with Operation Lightning Strike at NASA's Johnson Space Center. The U.S. attorney's office was to ask a grand jury to indict another Johnson official, David Proctor. (SP News, Apr 4-10/94)
NASA Program Manager for Human Systems Technology in the Office of Aeronautics, Washington, D.C. announced that NASA was designing an electronic chart to make flying safer for aerial firefighters who often fly in potentially dangerous conditions above forest fires. The Electronic Chart Display being developed at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, shows pilots an area's terrain and obstacles on a computer screen. (NASA Release 94-69)
NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, announced the award of a contract for logistics services to Pioneer Contract Services, Inc., Houston. (NASA Release C94-ee)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin stated that the "GAO report is a validation of what we've been saying for months--Russian participation in the Space Station is a good deal for the American taxplayer." Goldin added that it would save hundreds of millions of dollars. He was "particularly pleased with the GAO's positive assessment of how valuable the Russian contribution will be in terms of significantly improving the capability for science and engineering research." Other benefits of Russian cooperation included completing the Space Station 15 months earlier than otherwise would be possible. (NASA Release 94-103; AP, Jun 24/94; Reuters, Jun 24/94)
Astronaut Frank Culbertson, charged with helping to arrange the series of Shuttle missions to Russian Space Station Mir, discussed some of the frustrations of working with the Russians and the American need for patience and flexibility, given the linguistic, cultural, and economic differences between the two countries. Culbertson indicated that the initial Russian response to U.S. requests was "No" and that, for example, the Russians had withheld key information about the explosive charges, which were developed for a military program, that were involved in the Russian latching mechanism that would enable U.S. Shuttle Atlantis to dock with Mir. Another problem was the delay in getting U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment to Mir. A longer range hitch entailed the Russian guidance and propulsion module being built for the U.S. International Space Station. So far the Russians had received a U.S. commitment of $25 million for the component but it appeared they wanted up to $245 million. When Thagard was interviewed about U.S.-Russian space work, he said that it would seem that thus far the two had managed to make their cooperation work. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
Some 100 astronomers from around the world, including Tim Livengood from the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, traveled to the European Southern Observatory at La Silla in the mountains of northern Chile, to view the collision of the comet with Jupiter in July. (W Times, Aug 7/94)
Two groups of astronomers, one centered at Indiana University and the other at Harvard University, announced, based on findings from the Hubble Space Telescope, that the universe was billions of years younger than previously estimated. The Indiana group said the universe could be as little as 7 billion years old whereas the Harvard group estimated the age of the universe at between 9 billion and 14 billion years. The Indiana study was published in the September 29 issue of Nature and the Harvard study in the current Astrophysical Journal. According to Stephen Maran, a senior astronomer at NASA's Goddard Space Center and a spokesman for the American Astronomical Society, the findings should lead to further research to explain the discrepancy beween the oldest stars and the age of the universe. (LA Times, Sep 29/94)
Although NASA as yet lacked congressional approval for a proposed $2 billion wind tunnel complex for testing commercial aircraft, California's congressional delegation lobbied NASA's Administrator Daniel Goldin to have the wind tunnel built in California at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View. Goldin refused to discuss the subject. Virginia also expressed interest in being a site for the wind tunnels, according to Representative Robert C. Scott. (LA Times, Apr 12/94; SF Chron, Apr 12/94; San Jose Mercury News, Apr 12/94; LA Times, Apr 12/94; Daily Press, Apr 20/94)
NASA announced the development at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, of a new tile known as Toughened Uni-Piece Fibrous Insulation (TUFI). The low-density composite thermal insulation was to undergo its first flight test on the Endeavour in April. (NASA Release 94-54)
In anticipation of spending cuts when the new fiscal year would begin October 1, NASA had begun to cut civil service and contractor positions at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) at Cape Canaveral. Although NASA was eliminating four times as many jobs as in the previous two years, KSC contractors were obliged to let 17 workers go for every government job eliminated. These cuts were taking place despite NASA's plan for eight Shuttle launches in the coming year. (O Sen Star, Aug 14/94)
The New Zealand Antarctic Programme and the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA) issued a joint statement saying that a hole in the ozone layer over the Antarctic had reappeared and was wider than in 1993. NIWA scientist Tom Clarkson said that NASA data showed a rectangular-shaped area of very low ozone concentration covering Antarctica, compared with a slightly smaller triangular hole in 1993. In contrast to the NIWA statement, NASA announced on October 6 that a NASA instrument aboard a Russian satellite had detected a hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica with a surface area equal to the size of the North American continent. It added that that the ozone hole levels for 1994 were "nearly as large and as deep as the record lows from October 1993," according to preliminary data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (Reuters, Oct 4/94; NASA Release 94-167; USA Today, Oct 7/94; AP, Oct 7/94; NY Times, Oct 8/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced its selection of NSI Technology Services of Sunnyvale, California, for a contract to provide engineering, technical, logistical, and administrative technical services to support two airborne science aircraft at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-bb)
Terri Bracher, Patrick Air Force Base spokeswoman, said the first nighttime practice rescue operation for Space Shuttle crew who might be downed at sea is to be conducted on May 18 near Kennedy Space Center. More than 200 members of the Air Force, Air National Guard, Marines, Air Force Reserve, Coast Guard, and NASA were to take part. Rescuers were to use night vision goggles and NAVSTAR Global Positioning System receivers to find the floating crew members. (O Sen Star, May 17/94)
A study released by the Virginia-based Teal space consulting group said that since the space age began, 271 missions have failed or malfunctioned. Of the 271 missions, 108 were considered failures and of these, two-thirds or an estimated 71 were Soviet. The remaining 34 failures were American. The most failure-prone spacecraft over the period appeared to be the Soviet-made Cosmos satellite. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
NASA announced the selection of a system to control microbial contamination in drinking water as both the NASA 1993 Invention of the Year and the NASA 1993 Commercial Invention of the Year. NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston, Deputy Chief of the Biomedical Operations and Research Branch Richard L. Sauer developed the system together with Gerald V. Colombo and Clifford D. Jolly of Umpqua Research Company, Myrtle Creek, Oregon. The process had applications for long-term space flight as well as commercial use in developing nations particularly. (NASA Release 94-33)
Space Shuttle Columbia was moved to the launch pad to begin preparations for a July launching at Kennedy Space Center. (Reuters, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 18/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and its affiliated sites--Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island, Virginia, and NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C.--announced the selection of Cortez III Services Corporation of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to provide comprehensive logistics services to these sites. The services included transportation, flight project planning and coordination support, supply management, warehousing, property management and disposal, mail services, forms and records management, and interior design. (NASA Release C94-s)
NASA was learning to "fly leaner" as a result of a shrinking budget. Examples given were that launches now were no longer scheduled on weekends when overtime would need to be paid and if the weather were bad, liftoff was called off before fueling, saving $400,000 in tanking costs. More than 1,400 Shuttle-processing jobs had been eliminated at the Kennedy Space Center in the previous three years and various Shuttle improvements had been deferred. (W Times, Nov 13/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a life sciences support services contract to Dynamac Corporation, Rockville, Maryland. The contract supported Kennedy's Biomedical Operations and Research Office and the Payload Management and Operations Directorate in program management support for life sciences activities. The work included processing medical, biomedical, and biological flight experiments for launch and landing in addition to continuing research on NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support System, a bioregenerative concept for long-term space travel. In addition, Dynamac would be responsible for environmental and ecological monitoring of Kennedy's premises, located on a national wildlife refuge. (NASA Release C94-kk)
A former NASA researcher and subcontractor at the Johnson Space Center, Jong-Hun Lee, was ordered deported as a suspected North Korean agent. The action followed a hearing at which he was not allowed to see all the evidence against him. (AP, Sep 24/94)
NASA announced the selection of 38 college students for an intensive six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at its Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The summer residence training program was for undergraduate students majoring in life sciences, bioengineering, and related science and engineering fields. (NASA Release 94-95)
Ecologists Christopher Potter and Steven Klooster of NASA's Ames Research Center processed ten years of data to construct a map charting one month's exchange of the heat-trapping gas carbon dioxide between the atmosphere and the Earth's land plants and soils. This is a key process in determining the extent to which the release of this gas through burning fossil fuels and land-use changes might cause global climate warming, and this is the first time satellite data have been combined with computer simulation of soil processes. A 1990 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change gave estimates in billions of tons of carbon per year to try to answer the question of where missing amounts of extra human-released carbon dioxide go. Princeton University geochemist Jorge L. Sarmiento hypothesized a terrestrial sink, while Harvard University geochemist Steven Wofsy agreed with Potter that simulation also needed detailed studies of plant-soil processes. (CSM, Jan 19/94)
An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
NASA announced its selection of Brown & Root Services Corporation, Houston, as a contractor to provide minor construction, modification, and rehabilitation to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-y)
An interview was published with retired Princeton physicist Freeman Dayson in which he strongly criticized NASA. He advocated that NASA be dismantled like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and inefficent. Instead, science should be done by individuals following their own curiosity and creativity. (CSM, Dec 7/94)
Businessman James Robertson of James M. Beggs Associates consulting firm of Arlington, Virginia, pleaded guilty to accepting inside bid information involving NASA contracts at Johnson Space Center, Houston. (AP, Mar 2/94)
Although Congress killed NASA's search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) program, the subject survived as Project Phoenix. The SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, indicated existing contributions of $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the project. NASA renamed the project High Resolution Microwave Survey to reflect the technology's ability to screen out Earth-based radio interference while listening for cosmic signals on millions of channels at once. (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb 15/94)
NASA announced that Jack Farmer, a paleontologist and geologist at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had developed a strategy to search for microfossils on the planet Mars. Farmer presented his strategy, which was based on principles of Precambrian paleontology, at the Geological Society Meeting of America in San Bernardino, California. (NASA Release 94-49)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had discovered the best evidence yet of a black hole in the constellation Virgo. The proof consisted of a whirlpool of hot gas at the core of galaxy M87, which lies more than 52 million light-years from Earth. The stars in the whirlpool appeared to be streaming toward the galaxy's center and then into orbits bound to an apparent black hole hidden at M87's core. Data from the Hubble spectrometer, used to measure the velocity of stars orbiting within the nucleus of the M57 galaxy, also appeared to confirm the black hole. Sally Heap, a NASA astronomer, at a national meeting of the American Astronomical Society, commented on the Hubble findings in terms of her own research. (NASA Release 94-82; Fla Today, May 25/94; B Sun, May 26/94; USA Today, May 26/94; W Post, May 26/94; NY Times, May 26/94; W Times, May 26/94; Fla Today, May 26/94; WSJ, May 26/94; O Sen Star, May 26/94; AP, May 26/94; CSM, May 26/94; Oregonian, May 27/94; Fla Today, May 29/94; AP, May 30/94; H Chron, May 31/94; C Trib, May 31/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; Plain Dealer, Jun 2/94; Newsweek, Jun 6/94)
NASA Kennedy Space Center spokesman Bruce Buckingham said that that NASA had worked out a plan that would allow NASA employees to have the Labor Day weekend off and still would permit the launching of Shuttle Discovery on September 9. (Fla Today, Aug 15/94)
NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
NASA continued tests of the Research External Vision Display (REVD), a new optical system allowing pilots to see a runway during nose-high landings without computer-generated views. The REVD, basically an upside-down periscope, is a system of lenses and mirrors that reflects the view of the runway under the aircraft nose to the pilot. NASA started the first of up to 20 tests on the device on an F-104 aircraft at its Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The REVD approach differs from that used in the European Concorde and Russian Tu-144 supersonic transports, which drop the entire nose of the aircraft in front of the windshield. It could be used on a future U.S. supersonic airliner. (NASA Release, 94-2)
Air Force Colonel Sanford Mangold told members of the House of Representatives Government Operations Committee of his dismissal for recommending the cancellation of the $27 billion military satellite program Milstar. He considered Milstar, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, to have "fundamental, insurmountable problems," including "unacceptable" costs of $1.4 billion for each satellite. (NY Times, Feb 3/94)
An Air Force panel was completing the space launch modernization study mandated by Congress; and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy was preparing recommendations on vehicle developments. The trade Aviation Week & Space Technology publication advocated the United States' developing a modern expendable launch vehicle with money both from government and industry. The next step, which would need multi-billion-dollar investment, would require "leapfrog technology" such as the use of propulsion, and could benefit from cooperation with the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AvWk, Mar 21/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science told the NASA Advisory Council that NASA wanted to launch one Discovery mission every 12 to 15 months on a Delta or smaller expendable launch vehicle (ELV). NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center planned to issue a competitive procurement later in the year for up to 15 ELVs, paying $25 million to $30 million per vehicle. (Defense Daily, Apr 14/94)
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers task force studying budgeting for NASA issued its report to the subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee. It said that "The proposed funding levels are inadequate to support both a balanced aerospace science-technology program and an active program of human spaceflight, including the redesigned space station." The report maintained that the work intended for the proposed Space Station could be done by robotic spacecraft or other efforts. (H Chron, May 21/94)
NASA announced the selection of Scientific Applications International Corporation, of San Diego, California, for a contract to provide occupational safety, industrial hygiene, and environmental services to support NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release C94-jj)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
Clementine spacecraft, launched January 25 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, took just released high-resolution color photographs of the moon. The purposes of the spacecraft were to test anti-missile military technology and explore space. Reportedly, the pictures, which were available to the public, were of high quality and the cost of the program was relatively low. (Reuters, Mar 2/94; W Times, Mar 20/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center obtained an Andros robot to increase the safety of its workforce and save time and money. The robot could perform such tasks as deflating Space Shuttle tires and checking for bombs, which would be dangerous for humans. (Fla Today, Oct 30/94)
Arthur F. Obenschain, project manager for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, had overseen construction of the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) weather spacecraft. He reported that all previous major technical problems had been overcome and that the first of the GOES was scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral on behalf of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration on April 13. Launched on schedule, GOES was predicted to provide more accurate tracking of hurricanes and other storms than did previsous weather spacecraft. (NY Times, Apr 12/94; Fla Today, Apr 12/94; H Chron, Apr 12/94; AP, Apr 13/94; USA Today, Apr 14/94; W Post, Apr 14/94; NY Times, Apr 14/94; Plain Dealer, Apr 14/94)
At a conference at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C., officials of NASA and of Spacehab Inc., the Arlington, Virginia, company that built and leased the laboratories that fly in the Space Shuttle, described progress made in the more than 80 missions that had included research payloads. Other private and university researchers were encouraged to join in such projects. (UP, Sep 28/94)
Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Sidney M. Gutierrez would leave NASA effective August 8 and retire from the Air Force to become Manager for Strategic Planning and Development at Sandia National Laboratories in his hometown of Albuquerque, New Mexico. (NASA Release 94-129)
In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA reported that tests of corrections made to the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) were proceeding well and that the first new pictures were expected within days. David Leckrone, Hubble project senior scientist and NASA public information officer Mike Finneran at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, expressed great satisfaction with progress made. To perform one of its primary mission objectives, the study of the universe's infancy, the HST must concentrate 70 percent of an object's light within a core image only 0.1 arc-second in diameter, but the HST's previous spherical-aberration defect distorted its 2.4-meter (94.5-inch) main mirror to the extent that only 15 percent of the light reached the sharp-focus zone. Two sets of corrective optics were installed--the Wide-Field Planetary Camera (due for replacement, anyway) and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replecement (Costar), a two-meter-long set of five pairs of coin-size mirrors. A problem of jittering caused by solar-cell arrays was also resolved, and new gyroscopes, magnetometers, and computer electronics were installed and have been tested. (CSM, Jan 11/94)
Of the 250 people who flew in orbit on U.S. spaceships since 1961, only six astronauts were black. This surprised J. Alphred Phelps, a retired Air Force master sergeant and author of a just published book: They Had a Dream: The Story of African-American Astronauts. The author described two black Americans who almost became astronauts in the 1960s, as well as the six who made it: Guion Bluford, Ronald McNair, Frederick Gregory, Mae Jemison, Charles Bolden, and Bernard Harris. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission, sponsored by the Department of Defense Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, had completed systematic mapping of the lunar surface to produce the first global digital map of the moon. NASA's Clementine science team mapped the topography and composition of major regions of the moon in detail and produced other important science results released at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore, Maryland. The digital data cover 38 million square kilometers of the moon mapped in 11 colors in the visible and near infrared parts of the spectrum during the mission's 71 days in lunar orbit. (NASA Release 94-84; B Sun, May 27/94)
Swales and Associates, Inc., Beltsville, Maryland, received an eight-year small-business set-aside cost-plus-award-fee contract of $275 million to support the Mechanical Systems Division of the Goddard Engineering Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). (NASA Release C94d)
The U.S. attorney confirmed that David R. Proctor, an engineer assigned to the Life Sciences Project Division, was the first NASA Johnson Space Center employee indicted as part of the FBI's Operation Lightning Strike. The Operation began in December 1991 as an undercover probe into aerospace contractors. Proctor was indicted on charges of conspiracy and bribery, among others. (UP, Jun 9/94)
NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida, announced the award of a contract to Rockwell International Corporation, Downey, California, to continue providing Shuttle Orbiter logistics operations requirements. (NASA Release C94-hh)
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced that aerospace industry engineers were finding NASA's Remote Access Wind Tunnel (RAWT) at the Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, was saving them time and money in testing a model of a next-generation supersonic transport. The RAWT was equipped with a computer and video camera that allowed them to send real-time test data to engineers at aerospace companies nationwide. (NASA Release 94-186)
In connection with the July 16 projected smashing into Jupiter of fragments of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 at a speed of about 130,000 miles an hour, numerous media presentations appeared. Although collisions were scheduled to occur on the far side of Jupiter, the impact sites should rotate into view in less than an hour, so lasting effects could be studied by observatories on earth and by NASA's crippled Galileo spacecraft. NASA was setting up an around-the-clock Comet Impact Newsroom at Goddard Space Flight Center to assist scientists interpreting the event. (SP News, Jul 11-17/94; LA Times, Jul 11/94; NY Times, Jul 12/94; LA Times, Jul 12/94; USA Today, Jul 12/94; Reuters, Jul 12/94)
NASA Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn L. Huntoon announced a number of changes designed to assure the success of the Shuttle and International Space Station programs. Changes included the establishment of a new Projects Office, a new Business Management Directorate, and a new Information Systems Directorate; encouragement of rotational assignments and "teaming"; and new leadership appointments. Larry Bourgeois became head of the Projects Office, Terrence Hesse became director of the Business Management Directorate, and Jane Stearns became director of the Information Systems Directorate. A number of other appointments also were announced. (NASA Release 94-036; H Chron, Jun 17/94; H Post, Jun 17/94)
Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)
The joint Air Force-NASA space plane program, which involved NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, ended September 30. It was replaced by a program that focused on the plane's engine rather than the entire plane. Engineers at Langley had conducted space plane engine research for 35 years under the Hypersonic Systems Technology Program and were attempting to solve the most challenging problem: how to propel the space plane into space. Currently they were testing a scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet). In addition to Langley, engineers were working on the space plane at NASA centers in Ohio, California, and Mississippi, and at Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. (Daily Press, Nov 6/94)
Burton J. Squires, an engineer at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, in a letter to the editor, commented on the media's failure to commend the outstanding success of the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. (W Post, Feb 5/94)
Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)
A feature article described the Voyager spacecraft and the work of Paul Schenk, who had been a college summer intern at NASA'S Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and was now with the Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston. Schenk became fascinated with Voyager and its images. With his colleagues, Daniel G. Wilson and Robert D. Morris of LPI and Jeffrey M. Moore of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, he created stereo views of various bodies in the outer solar system using images provided by Voyager. (Science News, Nov 12/94)
Lawrence Dietlein, assistant director for life sciences at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, said that in 1963 and 1974 the Center conducted experiments involving the use of very small doses of radiation on humans. The experiments, done with the consent of the subjects, concerned bone loss and weightlessness during space flight. (Reuters, Feb 17/94; W Times, Feb 18/94; USA Today, Feb 18/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
NASA announced the selection of a research consortium headed by IBM to carry out research and test computer systems for a new national aeroscience research program using parallel computer technology. NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was to be the main computational site for the new program (NASA Release C94-k)
The six pilots at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base believed that they had the best flying job in the world. Their work entailed a great deal of variety, flying in different types of planes and conducting numerous research experiments. (Antelope Valley Daily News, Apr 18/94)
Following a final flight ceremony at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA retired its last F-104 fighter jet of the 1950s. NASA used the plane, known as the Starfighter, for biomedical research and to simulate the X-15 jet. The F-15 was to replace Lockheed's Starfighter. (Bakersfield Californian, Feb 4/94)
Free-lance journalist Alcestis Oberg maintained that following the November elections NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin planned to cut jobs at Johnson Space Center drastically. According to the article, Goldin hoped to reduce the Space Shuttle operations work force by 50 percent in five years. A worst-case scenario involved a cut of 30 percent in 1995. (H Post, Oct 20/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis, refitted over a 19-month period at a cost of $96 million to enable it to dock with Mir, was expected to arrive at Kennedy Space Center from its overhaul at Rockwell Space Systems Division in Palmdale, California. The plan was for Atlantis to dock with Mir during a series of 10 shuttle flights between 1995 and 1997. Other modifications were designed to make Atlantis safer. Atlantis's return means limited space at Kennedy Space Center for processing the various Shuttles. (Fla Today, May 27/94; AP, May 29/94; W Post, May 30/94; Fla Today, Jun 1/94)
The National Full-Scale Aerodynamics Complex (NFAC), the world's largest wind tunnel, turned 50 in 1994. The NFAC, located on 12 acres of NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, tested World War II aircraft and continued to operate by testing the Space Shuttle and other aircraft and equipment. (UPI, Jul 25/94)
University of Maryland radio astronomers indicated they had spotted water clouds near the center of a galaxy called Markarian 1, which is about 200 million light years away in the constellation Pisces. The finding was reported at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Astronomical Society. At that meeting, Johns Hopkins University astronomers reported several days previously having "very strong" evidence of a black hole at the center of the Andromeda galaxy. (B Sun, Jun 2/94; P Inq, Jun 3/94; W Post, Jun 3/94; USA Today, Jun 3/94; NY Times, Jun 3/94)
Dr. Carolyn Huntoon, the new Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), appointed George W.S. Abbey as Deputy Director of JSC. He succeeded Paul J. "P.J." Weitz, who was to serve as Acting Associate Director during transition of the new Center management team and who had been the Center's Deputy Director since 1987 and Acting Director since August 1993. (NASA Release 94-26; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced the award of a supplemental agreement to Martin Marietta Astro Space of the Martin Marietta Corporation East Windsor, New Jersey. The agreement provided for two additional advanced meteorological satellite spacecraft through the Televisision Infrared Observation Satellite project contract at the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-mm)
At a press briefing at the Kennedy Space Center, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Jeremiah Pearson said NASA was currently undertaking a review to gauge the Shuttle program's health after budget cutbacks and to identify possible additional savings. The review was scheduled to be completed in early January. Bryan O'Connor, Shuttle program director at NASA Headquarters, said 13 teams at NASA field centers across the country were examining jobs, procedures, and requirements to improve efficiency. However, he indicated that much of 1994's $141 million cut in the Shuttle program's operating budget could be made up with expected reimbursements and reassignment of funds. For example, Congress had suggested that the program use a $22 million reimbursement from Japan for Shuttle flights to that end. (Fla Today, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94; AvWk, Oct 17/94; AP, Oct 24/94)
Vice President Al Gore addressed a group of NASA employees in Washington and commended the work of NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). He indicated that in the past few years the KSC shuttle team had cut the cost of each shuttle flight by $43 million and assembled shuttles and moved them to the launchpad 40 percent faster and with one-third as much labor. (Fla Today, Jun 16/94)
Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers mapped the previously unseen face of Titan, Saturn's largest moon, and discovered a surface feature that was the size of Australia. Peter Smith of the University of Arizona presented the findings of his team at the annual meeting of the Division of Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society. (NY Times, Nov 8/94; O Sen Star, Nov 27/94)
NASA and Russian Space Shuttle mission managers met at Johnson Space Center and announced that they were targeting a launch date between June 8 and June 10 for Shuttle Atlantis and its five-astronaut, two-cosmonaut crew. This represented a postponement of the original blast-off date of May 24 and resulted from a delay from February to May 1995 in the launch of a Russian Spektr science module. The launch of Atlantis was scheduled to be followed three days later by a docking with Russian Space Station Mir. (Fla Today, Dec 15/94; H Chron, Dec 17/94)
A 20-month long Justice Department sting operation centered on NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston resulted in criminal fraud and bribery charges against nine men and one contractor. Two other contractors, General Electric Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, which had employed two of those charged, agreed to pay the government $1 million to cover cost of the undercover operation, code named Operation Lightning Strike. The two firms cooperated with the probe and might continue to do business with the government. Among the charged were Astro International Corporation of League City, Texas, and two NASA employees. The sting, conducted by the FBI, NASA's Office of Inspector General, and the Defense Criminal Investigative Service, particularly targeted NASA's Space and Life Sciences Division in Houston. In October 1993 NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin told Congress that NASA had some 400 criminal fraud investigations underway. (Reuters, Feb 22/94; UP, Feb 22/94; W Post, Feb 23/94; W Times, Feb 23/94; USA Today, Feb 23/94; NY Times, Feb 23/94; B Sun, Feb 23/94; WSJ, Feb 23/94; AP, Feb 23/94; C Trib, Feb 23/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)
Johnson Space Center denied one of its largest prime contractors, Martin Marietta Services of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, an "award fee" or profit on its contract for the six-month period ending March 31, 1994. The action resulted from a much more stringent contract compliance policy by NASA and the fact that the contractor did not control its labor costs under the terms of the contract. (H Chron, Dec 3/94)
SETI Institute President Frank Drake announced that the organization in Mountain View, California, will work with private backing, despite cancellation by NASA due to a funding cut by Congress. SETI--the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence--was to continue as the new Project Phoenix, with some NASA scientists doing the latter half of the former NASA project, which had been a sky survey by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and a targeted search by NASA's Ames Research Center. They planned to target areas around 1,000 nearby sun-like stars. The NASA project was begun as a $100-million, ten-year project on October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in the Americas, but was stopped less than one year into its planned ten-year life. Observations were now planned to last into the next century. Major donors included Arthur C. Clarke through the British Interplanetary Society (BIS) and the founders of Hewlett-Packard, Intel, and Microsoft. It was announced that $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the next year had been raised. (Reuters, Jan 12/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
NASA announced that astronaut Richard O. Covey would leave NASA as of July 11 and would retire from the Air Force on August 1. He was scheduled to become Director of Business Development at Calspan Services Contracts Division, a part of Space Industries, Inc. (NASA Release 94-110)
GOES-8, a sophisticated weather satellite, was the first of five advanced GOES-NEXT satellites scheduled to be deployed by 2003. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration managed the GOES program but engineers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center oversaw development of the spacecraft. These engineers redesigned weather instruments used by polar-orbiting weather satellites that flew 500 miles high to operate instead at 22,300 miles high. The system had vast potential benefit for firefighters, farmers, marine and aviation navigators, and others through improving the accuracy of weather forecasting. (W Post, Mar 28/94)
Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)
NASA announced that the U.S. component of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) program, the Wind and Polar spacecraft, would experience launch delays to give NASA a chance to examine the materials and process used to build two power subsystem electronic boxes on each spacecraft similar in design to those determined to be the cause of the NOAA-13 spacecraft failure in 1993. The decision followed a GGS technical review at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. Instead of launches occurring in April and June 1994, they probably would occur in the next fiscal year. (NASA Release 94-30; Defense Daily, Mar 1/94)
An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)
Diane Farrar of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, stated that NASA, the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, and the National Science Foundation were conducting an eight-month airborne study of the Antarctic ozone hole and its possible effects. The study, which was to use high-altitude ER-2 NASA aircraft, was to be based in Hawaii and New Zealand. This was the first NASA-sponsored airborne study of the southern polar region since the 1987 campaign that confirmed chlorofluorocarbons were the primary cause of ozone destruction. (UP, Mar 16/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
Jeffrey E. Carr, a spokesman at NASA's Johnson Space Center, confirmed that NASA had ordered a safety investigation of a medical experiment scheduled for spaceflight in 1995 after an astronaut collapsed and required emergency treatment during a test of a chemical used in the research. It was later revealed that the incident occurred to Bonnie J. Dunbar, while in Houston for training in October; a review board was to examine the incident. (AP, Nov 3/94; H Post, Nov 4/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94)
In a speech to the American Geophysical Union, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin challenged scientists to establish an ambitious new goal for space science that would unite competing research disciplines and resurrect public excitement. As a possible goal, Goldin suggested that NASA commit itself to finding habitable planets outside the solar system. (SP News, May 30-Jun 12/94)
NASA announced that as a result of a 10-year joint NASA-Army research program (the UH-60 Airloads Program) at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on helicopter rotor vibration, noise, motion, and airflows, future helicopters would be quieter and more efficient. (NASA Release 94-21; UPI, Feb 9/94)
Kevin Zahnle, a research scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, was quoted concerning the large amount of information gathered by spacecraft Galileo about Jupiter that would be lost because of the crippling of Galileo's communications capabilities. Nevertheless, much remained to be learned from the data already transmitted, as was seen at the recent meeting of the Planetary Sciences Division of the American Astronomical Society held in Bethesda, Maryland. (Contra Costa Times, Nov 20/94)
Flight tests of the X-31 at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base were featured. Dryden director Kenneth J. Szalai noted that the X-31 had completed more flights than any other experimental aircraft, demonstrating methods of enhancing fighter maneuverability. Gary Trippensee was NASA project manager and director of the International Test Organization that included the Department of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Navy, Air Force, Rockwell Aerospace, the German government, and Deutsche Aerospace. The program focused on technology transfer--industrial use of data gathered during government research projects. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/94; Bakersfield Californian, Apr 21/94)
McDonnell Douglas awarded Computer Sciences Corp (CSC), with EER Systems and CTA, Inc., a five-year, $49 million subcontract to support NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The Systems Engineering, Integration and Management Support Services contract would support several space observation missions. (Def Daily, 12 Jan/94)
NASA and Carnegie Mellon University scientists gave a preliminary test to an eight-legged robot name Dante II. They sent it down a gravel quarry to test the $1.8 million robot's satellite and fiber-optics links and software. On July 22 or soon thereafter they planned to send it down Mount Spurr, an active volcano, 80 miles west of Anchorage. Such robots would be useful in extreme terrains and climates. On July 28 a NASA scientist, Butler Hine, said that a communications problem resulting from a poor satellite link with the robot was delaying the robot's mission into the volcano. The robot took its first steps on July 29 and was scheduled to walk 12 hours a day. By late on July 31, the robot was about 150 feet from its goal, a field of volcanic vents on the bottom of the crater. As of August 2, the robot was sending back valuable scientific data from inside the crater, despite being hit by a falling rock. On August 3, Dante II began its steep walk out of the crater. The climb halted on August 4 because of a faulty power unit on the crater rim. Scientists fixed the electrical problem but on August 6 the robot fell on its side. Possible methods for retrieving the robot were under consideration. An attempt to airlift the robot by helicopter on August 9 failed when the cable snapped, dropping Dante II further down the crater. On August 13 two experienced climbers climbed into the crater and manually wrapped a sling around the robot and attached it to a line from the helicopter, which then pulled Dante II up. (AP, Jul 21/94; AP, Jul 26/94; USA Today, Jul 27/94; Reuters, Jul 28/94; NY Times, Jul 30/94; AP, Jul 30/94; W Times, Jul 31/94; C Trib, Jul 31/94; NY Times, Aug 2/94; Reuters, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 2/94; AP, Aug 3/94; AP, Aug 4/94; Reuters, Aug 4/94; USA Today, Aug 5/94; Reuters, Aug 6/94; USA Today, Aug 8/94; NY Times, Aug 9/94; USA Today, Aug 9/94; AP, Aug 9/94; Reuters, Aug 9/94; B Sun, Aug 10/94; W Post, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 10/94; Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug 10/94; AP, Aug 13/94; Reuters, Aug 14/94; W Post, Aug 15/94; NY Times, Aug 15/94; USA Today, Aug 15/94; CSM, Aug 15/94; Time, Aug 15/94; AvWk, Aug 15/94; Chemical and Engineering News, Aug 15/94; AP, Aug 22/94; LA Times, Aug 28/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
As a result of an investigation by NASA's Inspector General, Omniplan Corporation, with offices near the Johnson Space Center, four related companies, and five employees, together with the Chief Executive Officer Ralph Montijo Jr. and his wife, Guillermina, were named in a federal grand jury indictment. They were charged with conspiracy to present false claims to NASA, embezzling from an employee benefits plan, money laundering, and making false statements to NASA, the Internal Revenue Service, the Small Business Administration, and the Defense Contract Audit Agency. The company had been previously indicted for allegedly swindling $4 million from NASA and its own employees. Omniplan subcontracted through Rockwell Space Operations Company to write flight plan documentation for the Space Shuttle. The government filed a lawsuit to try to recover $3.75 million. (H Post, May 28/94)
Two American scientists, Clark Chapman and David Morrison, wrote in Nature magazine that society might want to decide whether to pay for a sky survey to track comets and asteroids that could crash into the Earth with catastrophic results, so that governments could use nuclear arms to smash or divert them. NASA proposed a Spaceguard Survey to map all asteroids large enough to cause global catastrophe. It would cost $50 million to set up and $10 million in annual operating costs. (Reuters, Jan 5/94)
A ceremony held at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility marked its return to its former status as an independent NASA center. For 13 years it was administered by NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, and designated a facility. Kenneth J. Szalai, formerly deputy director of Ames Research Center for Dryden, was named Dryden director. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 1/94)
Bernadette Cardenas, an aerospace engineer at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, filed a civil suit against astronaut Lt. Col. Charles (Sam) Gemar and his wife Charlene, also a NASA employee. The suit claimed the Gemars had harassed her mentally and physically; Mrs. Cardenas wanted to force Col. Gemar to submit to blood tests to establish paternity for her two-year-old son. NASA said the lawsuit would not prevent Gemar's participation in the forthcoming shuttle mission. (AP, Feb 24/94; NY Times, Feb 25/94; B Sun, Feb 25/94; USA Today, Feb 25/94)
NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the New York Medical College (NYMC) in Valhalla, New York, were using satellite remote sensing and computer technology to predict the risk of Lyme disease transmission. The NASA team, working with Dr. Durland Fish of NYMC and Westchester County Health Department investigators, found that the higher the proportion of vegetated residential area next to woods within a municipality, the higher the transmission risk. (NASA Release 94-123)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
A feature article described ways in which Pittsburgh was becoming "Robot City, USA." One of the reasons was NASA's $2.5 million grant in May 1994 to Carnegie Mellon University's Robotics Institute to establish an engineering consortium that would transfer robotics technology to U.S. industry. Other robotic firms also came to Pittsburgh recently. Other than industrial uses for robots, NASA wants to use robots to explore Mars and get instruments on the planet's surface. David Pahnos, director of the new NASA-CMU consortium, saw an opportunity for Pittsburgh to become a technical center that pushed technology forward. (CSM, Jun 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin gave an impassioned defense of NASA to a group of aerospace executives attending an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference in suburban Washington. He described the budget fight as part of Congress's continuing effort to turn the space program into a "debating society" and said it was time for the talk to stop. He deplored the fact that NASA was not given enough money to create a space program that American youth could dream about. Jim Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin, who sat next to Goldin, in contrast spoke of "a fatally flawed space station program" on which space dollars should not be risked. (O Sen Star, May 5/94; Space News, May 9/94)
A retrospective article looked at the role that NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California had played in the past, beginning with its establishment in 1947. It asserted that although now Dryden was used only for Space Shuttle landings when bad weather prevented the Shuttle from landing in Florida, it still managed to keep some 1,000 government and civilian employees busy. (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 30/94)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes in the Office of Space Flight (OSF) at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. These included the appointment of Bryan O'Connor, currently OSF Deputy Associate Administrator, to assume the post of Space Shuttle Program Director. O'Connor's position was to be assumed by Richard Wisniewski, who retired from NASA in 1990 after 35 years of government service. (NASA Release 94-66; WP, May 20/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the appointment of Christopher C. Kraft, former Director of the Johnson Space Center, to form and lead an external independent team to review data from the Space Shuttle Functional Workforce Review and make recommendation to Goldin for implementation. Kraft's team would be charged with evaluating the current process and procedures for Space Shuttle operations at the Johnson, Kennedy, Marshall, and Stennis Space Centers and related contractor activities in order to recommend a better operating structure. Initial efforts would focus on Kennedy operations. In addition to the Space Shuttle program, the team would review related Space Station activities. (NASA Release 94-197; SP News, Dec 5-11/94)
NASA plans to show "Destiny in Space" on the 25th anniversary of the historic Apollo 11 launch, July 16, according to Eddie Harrison, chief of the media services branch at Kennedy Space Center. The IMAZ film to be shown at Spaceport USA includes photos of the Hubble Telescope repair mission. (Fla Today, May 8/94)
NASA announced the development by the Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program of a training course that taught pilots steps to be used against fatigue. The first workshop was to be held at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, on May 18-19. (NASA Release 94-64)
NASA faced tough opposition over Russian participation in the International Space Station during hearings of the House Subcommittee on Space. Both committee chairman Ralph Hall, Democrat from Texas, and James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking Republican member, believed strongly that it should be an American Station. (O Sen Star, Apr 21/94)
U.S. astronauts Norman Thagard and Bonnie Dunbar, who are training in Russia, returned to Johnson Space Center with the four Russian cosmonauts with whom they will fly in March 1995. The six were in Houston for three weeks to learn about U.S. science experiments planned for their flights. (H Post, May 17/94)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
On April 9-10, radio astronomy experts from Stanford University and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena sent a signal from the Clementine spacecraft, which was engaged in a moon-mapping mission for the Pentagon, into a huge crater on the lunar South Pole. NASA's Deep Space Network picked up the reflection of the signal, and the Pentagon was scheduled to undertake a preliminary review of the data to determine whether the moon contained ice. (AP, Apr 16/94)
The projected testing of the SAFER (Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue) device during an Extravehicular Activity (EVA) by the astronauts in the September Discovery flight was discussed at some length. SAFER was developed by engineers at NASA's Johnson Space Center and was designed to stabilize an astronaut, allowing the astronaut to fly back to safety should the astronaut drift too far from a structure during an untethered EVA. The 83-pound SAFER was intended to be attached to the bottom of an astronaut's spacesuit. Other objectives of the Discovery flight were to orbit the Langley Research Center's LITE (Lidar In-space Technology Experiment) payload, a laser-observation of the Earth, and to release and retrieve the Goddard Space Flight Center's Spartan 201 solar-wind research satellite. (AvWk, Sep 5/94; H Post, Sep 5/94; H Chron, Sep 6/94)
NASA Space Shuttle Director Tom Utsman announced NASA's intent to accomplish all major modification work on the Space Shuttle fleet at Rockwell International's facility in Palmdale, California. The decision resulted from expanding requirements associated with the Russian cooperative effort, the ability to support future operations of the International Space Station, and the desire to continue to prelaunch process the Shuttle orbiters for flight at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 94-44; Antelope Valley Daily News, Mar 16/94; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 16/94; Fla Today, Mar 19/94; AvWk, Mar 21/94)
The astronauts who made a nearly flawless repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope said they owed much of their success to the extraordinary training that went into the high-profile mission. The seven-member crew was picked earlier and trained longer--nearly two years--than any previous Shuttle crew, including 400 hours rehearsing in deep water tanks. However, at their first post-flight news conference they cautioned that future Shuttle missions would not get the same kind of support from the space agency's money managers. The mission commander, Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, said that clearly the NASA budget was not a limitless amount of money.
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) since 1987 had cooperated to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning System (FEWS). NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, were the principal data providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms. Using daily data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellites, scientists measured the density of green vegetation every 10 days. When drought conditions were detected, an AID-FEWS team could begin to coordinate relief efforts, if needed. The same data also were used for locust control purposes. (Black Media News, Apr 94)
The House Appropriations Committee approved a NASA budget of $14 billion, $240 million less than the Administration's request. The approved budget included full funding, $2.1 billion, for the Space Station. However, opponents threatened a major fight once the budget came to the House floor. Following receipt of assurances "protecting the American taxpayers from any unforeseen failure in the U.S.-Russian space partnership" in a letter from President Clinton the evening of June 22, the ranking Republican on the House subcommittee on space, James Sensenbrenner from Wisconsin, said he would support the Space Station. (AP, Jun 22/94; Reuters, Jun 22/94; W Times, Jun 23/94; W Post, Jun 23/94; H Post, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 23/94; H Chron, Jun 24/94; USA Today, Jun 28/94; W Times, Jun 28/94 )
NASA announced that the fifth annual technology conference and exposition, Technology 2004, would be held November 8-10 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-184)
A feature article described three women engineers who worked at the Kennedy Space Center and were among the 120 finalists being interviewed by NASA's astronaut selection board for assignment as astronaut candidates. (Fla Today, Oct 7/94)
An independent safety review panel said NASA's Space Shuttle fleet urgently needed a safer fuel pump and feared that continued job cuts at Kennedy Space Center would endanger astronauts. The panel also advocated the need for more specific plans to avoid crashing into orbiting "space junk" as well as the need to finalize a quick-escape system for Space Station astronauts. (H Post, Mar 24/94)
Findings about the moon resulting from the 71-day rendezvous of the military probe Clementine were reported at the recent American Geophysical Union meeting. It developed, according to geophysicist Maria Zuber of Johns Hopkins University and NASA's Goddard Spaceflight Center, that "Now we know that we don't understand the moon as well as we thought we did." Instead of no activity on the moon in the preceding 3 million years, there was volcanic activity as recent as 1 billion years ago. The crust was very variable and the moon had a crater large enough to span the continental United States as well as another fresh-looking crater created by an impact recorded by 12th century monks. (LA Times, Dec 15/94)
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
NASA officials said that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) had not been home to any secret radiation tests on humans, and no workers were unknowingly exposed to any harmful materials. "We do not do anything like that here," KSC spokeswoman Lisa Malone said. Life science research underway at the space center mostly involves growing plants and food in an environmentally controlled chamber at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station as well as some muscle fatigue research in long-term bedrest studies to simulate weightlessness. The Johnson Space Center in Houston and the Ames Research Center near San Francisco are the facilities where most medical research on humans is conducted.
Charles Bigot, chairman of Arianespace, told a news conference that the company hoped to resume launches of Ariane missiles in two months' time. Following the failure of the December 1 launch, which sent an American PanAmsat-3 communications satellite to the bottom of the Atlantic, 21 corrective measures had been taken. French-based Arianespace had captured more that 60 percent of the world's satellite launch market and had orders to launch 37 satellites. (Reuters, Dec 22/94)
NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)
Retired Air Force Colonel Ken Munechika, former chief of Onizuka Air Force Base's Satellite Test Center, was designated the new chief of NASA's Ames Research Center (ARC). (Sunnyvale Sun, Jan 12/94)
NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)
More than 700 Space Shuttle support personnel at NASA's Kennedy Space Center had been on strike for 15 weeks in a labor dispute with contractor EG&G Corporation. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers, the labor union representing the striking workers, said negotiations were deadlocked over an EG&G demand to limit health insurance benefits for its employees. NASA denied charges that safety had been compromised during the three Shuttle flights launched since the strike began July 5. On October 21 negotiators reached a tentative agreement in their meeting at the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service headquarters in Washington, D.C. The contract proposal covered health insurance, wages, and pensions. The contract remained to be approved by three EG&G subcontractors and then ratified by the striking union members. (Defense Daily, Oct 14/94; AP, Oct 21/94)
Stu Grissom, manager for project development of hardware at NASA's Johnson Space Center, said NASA was evaluating mechanical difficulties with a Russian-made docking device critical to plans for a first linking of a Space Shuttle to the Mir Space Station in mid-1995. NASA was surprised to learn earlier that the Mir side of the docking device had explosive charges on only the active hooks whereas the Shuttle side had charges on both the active and passive mechanisms. The second problem was the failure of a laboratory version of the Shuttle/Mir docking mechanism to fully pass two of five cold temperature runs in June at NPO Energia (a subcontractor to Rockwell International) facilities in Russia. The failure, which was being investigated, might be the result of the quality of lubricant used. (H Chron, Jul 2/94; H Post, Jul 2/94; AvWk, Jul 4/94)
Some of U.S. astronaut Norman Thagard's equipment would not reach Russian Space Station Mir until May even though he himself was scheduled to reach Mir on March 14. The equipment was all to have preceded him but Russia had experienced problems with some of its space cargo flights. The result would be that there would be fewer blood, saliva, and urine samples returned to Earth and some work would be started later because of lack of test equipment. Jim Nise, NASA manager of Mir-Space Shuttle programs at Johnson Space Center, was doing his best to expedite matters and Thagard was philosophical about the situation. In November NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told the American Astronautical Society of the delay, indicating there was a problem getting Thagard's gear for experiments through Russian customs. (H Post, Oct 20/94; NY Times, Nov 29/94; Birmingham Post-Herald, Nov 30/94)
NASA announced that together with the American Geophysical Union it was honoring pioneer space scientist James A. Van Allen on his 80th birthday. Dr. Van Allen, Professor Emeritus at the University of Iowa, over a 50-year period studied planetary magnetospheres and cosmic rays. He discovered the belt of radiation around the Earth that bears his name. (NASA Release 94-81; Fla Today, May 25/94)
An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)
Johnson Space Center Director Carolyn Huntoon announced some organizational changes, including the closing of offices connected with integrating programs with the Russian Space Station Agency and the New Initiatives Office. (Fla Today, Feb 6/94)
The digital data representing the first direct image of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 slamming into Jupiter reached Earth from Galileo. The impact of the explosions was presumed to have created waves in the atmosphere, and these were being sought by the Infrared Telescope Facility that NASA operated atop Mauna Kea mountain in Hawaii. The explosions sent substantial amounts of helium hundreds of miles above the top of Jupiter, which was a surprise and which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite detected. (NY Times, Aug 16/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin made a state-of-the-agency address to all staff members in which he stressed that NASA intended to become less costly and quicker during the next four years, ending with as many as 4,000 fewer workers. Kennedy Space Center Deputy Director Gene Thomas, who answered questions after the televised address, said it would be a year of "significant change." (O Sen Star, Dec 9/94)
NASA announced that it had assumed the satellite-development contract for Landsat 7 from the Department of Defense. NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was to manage the contract with Martin Marietta Astro Space, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. Landsat 7 was to provide essential land remote-sensing data critical to understanding environmental change. (NASA Release 94-78)
Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA staff at the Kennedy Space Center began moving into a new $72 million building where all U.S., European, Japanese, and Canadian station hardware were to be prepared for launch. The modern computers and equipment in the new control rooms were commended particularly in the media. (Fla Today, May 13/94; B Sun, Jun 2/94; W Post, Jun 2/94; O Sen Star, Jun 2/94; CSM, Jun 3/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Space Communications, Headquarters, Washington, D.C., was initiating an opportunity for private industry to conduct experiments of future telecommunications technologies via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS). Called the Mobile Satcom TDRSS (MOST) Experiment Program, it was designed to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the global satellite telecommunications area. (NASA Release 94-43)
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and Chairman of the independent investigative board studying the Mars Observer failure, delivered the report on the Mars mission to NASA. The spacecraft, the first U.S. mission to study Mars since the Viking missions 18 years ago, fell silent three days before entering orbit around Mars. Despite lack of any communication with the craft, the board found that the probable cause of the loss of communication was a rupture of the fuel (monomethyl hydrazine - MMH) pressurization side of the spacecraft's propulsion system. This would have caused an unsymmetrical pressurized leak of helium gas and liquid MMH, resulting in a net spin rate, which in turn would have caused the craft to enter a contingency mode. Tests conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at Pasadena, California, yielded several possible failures. The board discussed a number of other concerns of a procedural nature. (NASA Release 94-1; USA Today, Jan 6/94; NY Times, Jan 6/94; B Sun, Jan 6/94; WSJ, Jan 6/94; W Post, Jan 6/94; LA Times, Jan 6/94; W Times, Jan 6/94)
NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, announced the award of a contract for information and communications support services for Ames to I-Net, Inc., Bethesda, Maryland. (NASA Release C94-bb (sic); duplicates number on contract announcement of August 3)
NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, selected Pioneer Contract Services for a five-year, $42 million cost-plus-award-fee contract for logistics support, such as all handling of property, warehouse, and bondroom operations. (NASA Release C94f)
A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced the signing of an agreement between NASA and the Multiple Sclerosis Association of America (MSAA) to collaborate to advance the application of cool suit technology for multiple sclerosis (MS) patients. More than 300,000 Americans suffer from MS, for which there is no known cure. About 1,000 MS patients use the current cool suit, used as a space suit undergarment for cooling astronauts on the surface of the moon or during space walks, for systematic relief. Members of NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, and Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were to work with MSAA staff to improve the performance of cool suits. (NASA Release 94-80)
NASA announced the development and testing of a new integrated flight and propulsion control system to help pilots land under difficult conditions. Aerospace engineers at NASA's Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California, were developing the digital fly-by-wire control system to reduce a pilot's workload and help stabilize landing aircraft. NASA was testing the new system in the Vertical/Short Takeoff and Landing (V/STOL) Systems Research Aircraft (VSRA) to improve takeoff and landing capabilities for V/STOL aircraft in reduced visibility. The VSRA was a modified version of the U.S. Marine Corps' AV-8B Harrier jet fighter, which could take off and land vertically. (NASA Release 94-209)
NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham at Kennedy Space Center said the tether launched by the Space Shuttle was working well. It could be used to move satellites around in different orbits in space. Originally about 12 miles long, atomic oxygen and tiny meteorites ate it so that it was now only about five miles long. (O Sen Star, Apr 7/94)
A lengthy review of the four-hour TBS documentary film "Moon Shot," described the extraordinary footage obtained from NASA, primarily from the Johnson Space Center, and the story behind the U.S. 10-year race to beat the Soviet Union to the moon. (TV Times, Jul 10-16/94)
A leak of toxic rocket propellant on an Air Force Titan 4 rocket forced the postponement of the rocket's launch to December 20. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, Inc. held a legislative conference in Washington, D.C., at which NASA had the largest government career recruiting exhibit of any agency. NASA's Associate Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, Yvonne B. Freeman, said that NASA was now aggressively recruiting future black scientists as early as elementary school and paying for their training. Of the $740 million NASA spent on education each year, $70 million now went to historically black colleges and universities, up from $6 million two years previously. Representative Louis Stokes, Democrat from Ohio, who formerly criticized NASA for doing little to hire blacks or enter into contracts with black companies, said NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin had really made a difference in NASA's programs. Stokes's appropriations subcommittee was responsible for NASA funding. (Plain Dealer, Sep 16/94)
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)
