NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
A team of astronomers announced at the American Astronomical Society convention that they had discovered ordinary vinegar in a stellar cloud 25,000 light-years away from Earth. The presence of an organic molecule, which may have played a role in the formation of life, excited scientists. “Acetic acid could have been one of the first steps toward the chemicals of life,” explained Lewis E. Snyder, a member of the research team that made the discovery. Scientists had discovered complex molecules in space before, but formic acid, discovered in 1975, was the only other basic molecule detected before the discovery of the vinegar.(John Noble Wilford, “Whiff of Organic Stuff Found Between Stars,” New York Times, 11 June 1996; Associated Press, “Vinegar Found in Far Away Space,” 11 June 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
Henry McDonald became Director of Ames Research Center (ARC) in Mountain View, California. NASA had selected McDonald for the position in January 1996 after the selection of former Director Ken K. Munechika as NASA’s first Director of Moffett Federal Airfield. A former professor of mechanical engineering at Pennsylvania State University, McDonald brought to NASA both industrial and academic experience.(NASA, “McDonald Named Director of Ames Research Center,” news release 96-8, 19 January 1996. 37 Associated Press, “Campus Takes Control of Shuttle Experiment,” 5 March 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
In its annual contest, Popular Science magazine honored NASA’s experimental flight-control system as one of the best technological developments of 1996. NASA had installed the system, developed for the use of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, in a remotely piloted aircraft called LoFLYTE (Low Observable Flight Test Experiment). On board the aircraft, the system used techniques involving neural networks to “learn” to fly, actually acquiring flight skills by mimicking the actions of the pilot controlling the plane from the ground. Neural networks are systems that learn skills by doing them. Scientists hoped the technology might eventually have an impact on commercial and military aviation.(NASA, “Aircraft Flight-Control System Wins ‘Best of What’s New’,” news release 96-233, 12 November 1996. 155 David Colker, “Pilotless Test Plane Blown Up After It Veers Off Course,” Los Angeles Times, 13 November 1996; Jim Skeen, “Pilotless Aircraft Crashes at Edwards,” Antelope Valley News (Palmdale, CA), 13 November 1996.)
DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASA’s Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award,” 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide “fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.”31 NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.
Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission,” 7 December 1996.)
NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earth’s orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earth’s slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planet’s population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earth’s limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earth’s surface had actually helped speed up the Earth’s orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earth’s Orbit, Expert Says,” New York Times, 3 March 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, “Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
At a conference of the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, Texas, a team of U.S. astronomers announced the discovery of two new stars with the characteristics to sustain life within their solar systems. The astronomers identified the bodies, both visible to the naked eye, as star 70 Virginis in the constellation Virgo and a star orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris in the Big Dipper. Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, researchers affiliated with the University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco State University, spent nine years monitoring 120 Sun-like stars in order to discover the two stars.
NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASA’s development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASA’s earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiment’s significance: “If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time.” Scientists were using KSC’s Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, “NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System,” news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, “Engen To Head Air and Space,” Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germany’s ROSAT (Röntgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays “a thrilling moment.” The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, “First X-rays from a Comet Discovered,” new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet,” New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, “Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB,” news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 July 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California’s Mojave Desert. The nine-day mission nearly came to an abrupt halt when Atlantis’s crew had difficulty opening the Shuttle’s cargo bay doors during descent. After considering an emergency landing, NASA controllers directed Atlantis’s crew to open the doors manually. The crew successfully performed this necessary maneuver only to confront dangerous weather that prevented their landing at Kennedy Space Center.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back Safely After Mir Mission,” 1 April 1996. 13)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing “increasing budget pressures.” Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one year’s time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, “Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters,” news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Speeds Up Downsizing,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, “NASA To Lighten Pay Load,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, “NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster,” Space News, 22−28 April 1996, 4−5.)
For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that “strongly suggested” that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundation’s Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the team’s report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, “It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.”113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars,” 924–930; NASA, “Meteorite Yields Evidence”; Sawyer, “NASA Releases Images.”)
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements,” 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, “Ancient Spacecraft,” 1 October 1996.)
Scientists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States’ Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplane’s wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, “Laminar Flow Tests Successful,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, “The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert ‘Right Stuff’,” news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, “Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission,” 16 October 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
Astronomer and Pulitzer Prize winner Carl Sagan died after a long fight against a bone marrow disease; he was 62 years old. Since 1971, Sagan had directed Cornell University’s Laboratory for Planetary Atmospheres and Surfaces, where he forged his reputation as an expert in exobiology. Sagan helped plan the Mariner, Viking, and Voyager missions, receiving NASA’s Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement in 1972. Sagan also helped popularize modern science with his widely viewed television series Cosmos. Sagan described the television series as an endeavor “to show that science is a delight and to end people’s artificial alienation from it.” Sagan’s The Dragons of Eden (1977) won the Pulitzer Prize. Throughout his work, Sagan had also argued for the possibility of extraterrestrial life.(Cornell University, “Carl Sagan, Cornell Astronomer, Dies Today (Dec. 20) in Seattle,” news release, 20 December 1996; United Press International, “Astronomer Carl Sagan Has Died,” 20 December 1996.)
NASA launched its Fast Auroral Snapshot (FAST) Explorer from a test range near Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Engineers had designed the FAST vehicle to travel about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers) above Earth, measuring energetic particles, and magnetic and electric fields, at high altitudes where auroras form, to explore the “physical processes that produce aurora borealis and aurora australis.” NASA’s Small Explorer Project, tasked with providing frequent and low-cost research missions for astrophysics investigations, had carried out the FAST mission as the second in a series of five missions.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “FAST Status Report #1: Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release, 21 August 1996; Bruce Smith, “Fast Launched Successfully,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 71.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force unveiled to the public an “intelligent” aircraft, using a computerized system to “learn as it flies.” Researchers had engineered the hypersonic aircraft to take inventory of flight maneuvers performed while operating under remote control, eventually using its acquired knowledge to develop the capability to fly itself. According to the flight researchers, the aircraft’s control system would create a continually altering set of “control laws,” to optimize flight performance. After the aircraft had perfected its system, it could assist pilots in performing such tasks as landing partially damaged planes. The intelligent aircraft could also enable flight at speeds and altitudes that human pilots could hardly ever achieve, while still maintaining adequate control of an aircraft.(NASA, “Intelligent Test Aircraft Unveiled in Wisconsin Today,” news release 96-154, 2 August 1996.)
Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. O’Neil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileo’s continuous study of Jupiter’s magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASA’s string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earth’s surface.(Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data,” Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, “Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter,” 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
Reuters News Service published an internal NASA memorandum written by an independent safety commission, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, cautioning NASA against cutting the budget for the Shuttle program too quickly. According to the panel’s analysis, NASA’s attempts to reduce costs by conducting fewer Shuttle safety inspections and by transferring responsibility for day-to-day operations of the Shuttle program to United Space Alliance had demoralized NASA’s workforce at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The memo made clear the opinion of the safety inspectors: “Overall, it was the clear consensus of the team that a cooling off period is absolutely necessary if KSC operations are to continue safely . . . without this hiatus the safety risk is likely unacceptable.”(Reuters, “Warning Light for NASA’s Shuttle Program—Memo,” 4 July 1996.)
A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
At the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the American Astronomical Society, astronomers working with NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) spacecraft announced the discovery of the fastest vibrations ever recorded in a star system. The vibrations occur when massive neutron stars begin to die out, expelling the outer layers of their solid crusts and creating powerful x-rays. The astronomers working with the RXTE recorded x-rays flickering at up to 1,130 times per second. Scientists were unsure why this process occurred. According to NASA, “the possibility that the RXTE has detected actual waves in neutron stars or a very fast rotation period of one such star is of great scientific interest.”(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Discovers Fastest Stellar Vibrations Yet,” news release 96-81, 30 April 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Instrument Detects Fastest Vibrations Yet Seen in Universe,” 30 April 1996.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
NASA marked the 50-year anniversary of the Bell X-1 aircraft’s first flight, which took place at the site of Edwards Air Force Base, home of NASA’s DFRC. According to Jay Miller, the author of The X-Planes: X-1 to X-33, the X-1 had given flight researchers and engineers their first full- scale tool to study transonic aerodynamics. The Bell Aircraft Corporation, the U.S. Army Air Forces (predecessor of the U.S. Air Force), and NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, had collaborated to get the first test plane off the ground. The X-1 test not only provided aeronautical data, but also pioneered the test methods later adopted by DFRC flight researchers.
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houston’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
NASA announced its 1996 astronaut candidate class, which included the first set of identical twins ever selected⎯Mark E. Kelly and Scott J. Kelly. The sibling U.S. Navy pilots joined 33 other astronauts in the class. NASA selected 10 pilots and 25 mission specialists from an applicant pool of more than 2,400 candidates, including members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy. Six members of the class held PhDs in their respective fields, and one was an MD. NASA selected the astronaut class, the largest in nearly 20 years, from 16 different states; in addition, one astronaut candidate had been born in Argentina and another in the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Selects Astronaut Class of 1996,” news release 96-84, 1 May 1996; Marcia Dunn, “In NASA First Identical Twins Selected for Astronaut Corps,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 May 1996.)
George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbey’s distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, “George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management.” Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbey’s superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, “Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center,” news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
Astronomers at California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of what they believed to be the most distant galaxy ever glimpsed from the Earth. The team of scientists, including Thomas A. Barlow, Limin Liu, Wallace L. W. Sargent, and Donna S. Womble, had stumbled across the unnamed galaxy while studying a quasar silhouetted by the galaxy’s light. The team used the W. M. Keck Observatory atop the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii. In comparison to other documented galaxies, their find was a relatively young galaxy⎯probably formed less than 1 billion years after the Big Bang. The galaxy resides near the constellation Virgo. Ironically, since the galaxy lies 14 billion light-years away from Earth, the scientists had no way of knowing whether their discovery still actually existed. The scientists hoped that their discovery would offer new understanding of the period when stars began to congregate into galaxies.(California Institute of Technology, “Astronomers Discover the Most Distant Galaxy,” news release, 31 January 1996; Reuters, “Scientists Discover Farthest Galaxy Yet,” 1 February 1996; John Noble Wilford, “New Galaxy May Shed Light on Universe,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
