The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nation’s science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report “a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies.” The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, “Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry,” New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, “NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights,” 13 May 1997.)
An international team of astronomers announced the discovery of three black holes in three nondescript galaxies, suggesting that nearly all galaxies may in fact have massive black holes. Using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the researchers took a census of 27 galaxies to find a series of black holes massive enough to consume millions of Sun-like stars. The findings, which the scientists presented in full at the 189th meeting of the American Astronomical Society, provided insight into the origin and evolution of galaxies, as well as clarifying the role of quasars in the galaxy. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of Michigan, who led the research team, stated that two of the black holes had “weighed in” at 50 million and 100 million solar masses, respectively. Scientists remained divided on why black holes exist so abundantly in space. One theory suggested was that, at the center of most or all galaxies, supermassive black holes exist, where gases ignite to the hottest temperatures known, sending nearby stars spiraling in new directions. Ralph Narayan of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics called the black holes “the ultimate victory of gravity.(Paul Recer, “Astronomers Find Stronger Evidence of Massive Black Holes,” Huntsville Times (AL), 14 January 1997; NASA, “Massive Black Holes Dwell in Most Galaxies, According to Hubble Census,” news release 97-9, 12 January 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: “What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data.” NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, “X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab,” Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, “Putting the Universe into Focus,” Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
After widespread speculation concerning the possibility of an indefinite delay of the Cassini Mission to Saturn, NASA announced that it would be able to repair a fuel leak in the spacecraft in time to meet an October 1997 launch date. NASA had enlisted U.S. Air Force engineers to make the repairs. The spacecraft’s need for repairs increased the tension surrounding the ambitious and expensive mission. Lieutenant Ken Hoffman of the U.S. Air Force, who supervised the repairs, attempted to reassure the public that the problem was “a correctable condition.” Nevertheless, opponents of the mission⎯particularly those opposed to the spacecraft’s use of radioactive plutonium⎯worried that the rocket’s launch might release hazardous materials. Michio Kaku, a City University of New York physics professor, said that, despite NASA’s announcement that it could quickly correct the problem, the leak was “just one more indication that NASA does not have things under control.”(Robyn Suriano, “Cassini Won’t Be Delayed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 August 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mather’s work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, “Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences,” news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, “Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons,” news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, “Hubble-Look Back,” 9 May 1997.)
As the 50th anniversary of the alleged alien sighting neared, the U. S. Air Force released a 231- page report entitled The Roswell Report: Case Closed. The report explained that the U.S. Air Force had recovered test dummies from the Roswell, New Mexico, crash site in 1947, rather than the bodies of aliens. The U.S. Air Force had issued a report on the Roswell matter in 1994, in which researchers argued that the presumed spacecraft that had crashed in 1947 was actually an Air Force balloon used in a top-secret program called Project Mogul. When officials discovered evidence that the tests had used parachute dummies, however, the U.S. Air Force compiled an additional report with the new information. Military officials hoped that the Air Force’s explanation for the supposed UFO reported in 1994, as well as for the supposed bodies of aliens discovered in the crash, would temper the controversy surrounding the issue. U.S. Air Force Colonel John Haynes, presiding over the Pentagon news conference at the release of the report, showed reporters footage of a NASA test craft that, indeed, resembled a flying saucer. Colonel Haynes explained that during testing in the 1950s, Air Force balloons had transported dummies to altitudes of 98,000 feet (29,900 meters), releasing them to fall to the ground. Since the testing was secret, the sight of falling dummies “easily could have been mistaken for something they were not.”(U. S. Air Force Headquarters, The Roswell Report: Case Closed (Washington, DC, 1997); Associated Press, “Air Force Says Dummies Used in Parachute Tests Were Mistaken for Aliens,” 24 June 1997; Richard Leiby, “Alien Autopsy,” Washington Post, 25 June 1997.)
NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid known⎯only three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogel’s large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the material’s extreme insulating capability⎯a 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel “a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.”(NASA, “NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows,” news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, “Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns,” New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs,” 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, “Fear of Martians,” Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
At a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, scientists unveiled evidence of another cause, besides the Sun, of “killer electrons,” which travel at high velocity. When electrons travel from Jupiter’s massive magnetic field, their speed approaches the speed of light. Showers of high- velocity electrons cause many problems, including blackouts on Earth and damage to orbiting satellites and global positioning systems. Scientists had previously been unable to determine the source of the electrons causing the damage. Presenting the new information on the phenomenon of high-velocity electrons, the researchers declared that the ability to forecast “space weather,” including the patterns of high-velocity electrons, would become increasingly important during the coming age of the ISS.(Tim Friend, “Mystery Solved: Jupiter Is Source of Killer Electrons,” USA Today, 9 December 1997.)
Johnson Space Center (JSC) awarded BRSP Inc. a US$128 million, five-year contract to provide base-operation support services, including plant maintenance and operations, logistics support, and security services for JSC’s Houston, Texas, facility. BRSP, a joint venture of Brown and Root Services and Pioneer Contract Services, had formed to bid for the JSC contract.(NASA, “BRSP Chosen for JSC Base Operation Contract,” news release C97-b, 16 January 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, “We’re Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
The Los Angeles Times reported that the students of Glassell Park Elementary School had sold an astonishing 32,000 candy bars, to pay the way for all 115 of its fifth graders to attend the U.S. Space Camp at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. Most of the school’s 951 students participated in selling candy to send their older classmates to the educational camp. Principal Beatrice LaPisto said proudly of her students, “This is a poor neighborhood. Most children here, for example, are on the free lunch program. But these are the brightest, best, most motivated students you’ll find anywhere.” This year was the first in which the nonprofit U.S. Space Camp Foundation had expanded its operations to the California site.(Bob Pool, “Space Race,” Los Angeles Times, 4 June 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges “the right person to take KSC into the next century.” As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridges’s appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridges’s appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASA’s Flight Space Medal.(NASA, “Roy Bridges Selected as KSC’s New Center Director,” news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a “reusable space plane.” The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clinton’s line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, “Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items,” New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, “Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
The Rasmussen Research Group reported that seven out of 10 Americans had seen at least one image of Mars obtained through the Mars Pathfinder Mission, denoting a remarkable level of public awareness of NASA’s mission to the Red Planet. The researchers also reported that nearly half of all Americans believed that an American would land on Mars within 10 years. Despite the widespread interest and optimism regarding the project, only 41 percent of those polled saw merit in the mission.(Mark Carreau, “Mars Trip a Monster Summer Hit,” Houston Chronicle, 2 August 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
NASA reported receiving 265 million hits on its Web site during the four days following Mars Pathfinder’s landing. In response to what some observers called the “biggest event in computer network history,” NASA buttressed its own computers with donated equipment from corporate sponsors, so that the government site could handle the high volume of viewers. The Internet statistics validated the widespread popularity of the mission to Mars. The CNN network dedicated nearly half of its programming to the Pathfinder story on the day of the Mars landing, doubling its network ratings. Entrepreneurs sold a variety of Mars- and Pathfinder-themed products, and visitors jammed the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC. USA Today summed up the success of the Mars Pathfinder Mission: “NASA’s successful landing on the Red Planet has set off a Marsfest on the blue one.”(NASA, “Pathfinder Gets Hit Hard on the Internet,” news release I97-8, 9 July 1997; Martha T. Moore, “Mars Mania Invades Earth,” USA Today, 9 July 1997; Associated Press, “‘Mars Live’ Draws Millions to Web Site,” 9 July 1997; United Press International, “Mars Tops Internet Hit List,” 8 July 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttle’s fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASA’s continued use of Boeing’s private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASA’s previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be “mothballed” for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics’ reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, “Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility,” news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, “Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging,” news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, “NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe,” USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin addressed the Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in convention, outlining NASA’s vision to “revitalize general aviation.” Goldin boldly predicted that the U.S. aviation industry would be able to deliver 10,000 aircraft annually within 10 years, and 20,000 annually within 20 years. The fly-in convention, featuring flyovers by NASA’s SR- 71, had the theme, “Boomers Turn 50,” celebrating both the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Air Force and that of the first breaking of the sound barrier. The Association announced the winner of the National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a competition encouraging university engineering students to focus on the aviation industry. The conference also featured the unveiling of the new FAA flight- training curricula, as well as a national aviation safety initiative.(NASA, “NASA To Showcase New Activities at Upcoming Aircraft Fly-In Convention,” news release N97-51, 25 July 1997.)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force Space Command announced an agreement to collaborate on several projects of mutual interest. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained that the agreement was part of NASA’s ongoing mission to become a more efficient and cost-effective agency, and that sharing information would lead to “greater efficiencies in our respective missions.” Goldin and U.S. Air Force Space Commander General Howell M. Estes III signed the pact, establishing seven teams to explore areas of potential cooperation. The areas of research included the feasibility of launching defense satellites from the Shuttle; the use of the Shuttle for U.S. Air Force technology payloads; and development of a plan to meet the dual space needs of NASA and the U.S. Air Force. The two agencies also planned to examine ways they might share their common infrastructure and facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Space Command Announce Cooperative Efforts,” news release 97-68, 16 April 1997.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
The Pentagon announced that it had successfully tested its Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The laser, constructed under President Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, generated a beam that traveled more than 260 miles (418 kilometers) from Earth, hitting an orbiting satellite. According to Pentagon representative U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Robert Potter, if turned to its highest setting, MIRACL would have destroyed the satellite target. The test, which took place two years after the expiration of a 1985 congressional ban on tests of this type, was the first time the United States had tested a laser aimed at an orbiting satellite. Representatives of defense-related industries and scientists around the world debated the acceptability of such a test and the ethics of deploying the instrument. However, whether or not the test was justifiable, the successful hit had demonstrated the vulnerability of satellites to Earth-based weapons.(Associated Press, “Laser Test-Fired into Space Strikes Orbiting U.S. Satellite,” 21 October 1997.)
Representatives of NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services signed an agreement to enlist NASA technologies in the fight against breast cancer and other women’s illnesses, creating a cooperative framework for the exchange of research information between the two agencies. According to Carolyn A. Krebs of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the technology allowing HST to map distant galaxies also had the potential to scan human tissue for malignant masses.(NASA, “NASA/Heath and Human Services To Join Forces To Fight Women’s Illnesses,” news release N97-74, 20 October 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
NASA announced that the construction schedule for the International Space Station (ISS) remained on target to begin delivery launches in December 1998. All 15 nations participating in the building of the ISS had traveled to Johnson Space Center (JSC) to finalize the station’s construction sequence and compare progress updates. The international consortium agreed on a 45-flight sequence for delivering the already-assembled portions of the station from Earth to their orbiting home. To assemble the colossal station completely, NASA and its partners planned five years of steady launch-and-construct missions, expecting to send the U.S.-constructed Node 1 into space sometime during June 1998.(NASA, “Control Board Reports International Space Station Launch on Target, Finalizes Assembly Sequence,” news release 97-222, 1 October 1997.)
The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrence’s name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrence’s status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrence’s name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, “Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut,” 8 December 1997.)
Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: “It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.”
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report on the threat of space debris to the planned International Space Station (ISS). According to the report, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan, NASA’s surveillance capabilities, relying on the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) network of radar and optical sensors for information about possible collisions, had not provided enough information to prevent collisions in space. GAO surmised that DOD had focused most of its attention on military objects, missing many of the smaller pieces of debris that could have caused significant damage to NASA’s Shuttles or the ISS. GAO recommended that NASA, DOD, and the CIA collaborate to upgrade the space surveillance system. According to estimates, more than 110,000 pieces of debris, most measuring about 0.5 inches (1.3 centimeters) in diameter, were floating in space. With a closing velocity of 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour, even such a small object would do significant damage to the ISS, when the station was in a prograde orbit. GAO’s report noted that the fully completed ISS would be 10 times larger than any Shuttle flying in space, and that it would be in orbit for at least 10 years, increasing the chance of a collision occurring. Although they acknowledged the possibility of a collision, NASA scientists argued that the odds favored the ISS’s avoiding such an occurrence. As NASA’s expert, Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris, Nicholas L. Johnson, explained, “The odds are certainly in your favor that nothing will happen at all in those 10 years [of planned space station operation].”(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan” (report no. NSIAD 98-42, Washington, DC, 1 December 1997); Sean Holton, “Worries Rise over Junk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 December 1997.)
In celebration of the 50th anniversary of his most historic achievement, Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager broke the speed of sound once again, flying an F-15 fighter jet in California’s Mojave Desert. NASA aired the recreation on NASA TV as part of its celebration at Edwards Air Force Base. Some historians call Yeager’s 1947 feat “the greatest achievement since the first successful flight of the Wright Brothers.” The U.S. Postal Service observed the anniversary by unveiling a commemorative stamp, the “50th Anniversary of Supersonic Flight.” The ceremonial jaunt was the 74-year old Yeager’s last official U.S. Air Force flight.(Jay Levine, “Yeager Bids Farewell to 800,000-Plus,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997; NASA, “Breaking the Sound Barrier Reenactment on NASA TV,” news release N97-72, 9 October 1997.)
NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
Edward M. Purcell, 1952 Nobel Prize winner in physics and long-time researcher at Harvard University, died. Purcell discovered a means to detect the extremely weak magnetism of the atomic nucleus, making it possible to “listen to the whisperings of hydrogen through the universe.” Purcell had served as President of the American Physical Society. In 1967 Purcell had won the Oersted Medal of the American Association of Physics Teachers, and in 1979 he had won the National Medal of Science. At Harvard, Purcell held the position of Gerhard Gade University Professor, retiring from the university in 1977. Of his Nobel Prize–winning research Purcell commented, “We are dealing not merely with a new tool but with a new subject, a subject I have called simply nuclear magnetism.”
Fred C. Adams and Gregory P. Laughlin, astrophysicists at the University of Michigan, presented their theory of a “Dying Universe,” at the American Astronomic Society conference. Adams and Laughlin had projected the future of the universe based upon quantitative theory, concluding that the Earth would die out with a whimper. According to their theory, the Sun will eventually die out, and the light of all stars will vanish. The projection was so far off in the distance (10,000 trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion years from now) that it drew a mixture of criticism, amusement, and intrigue from the scientific community. Adams and Laughlin insisted that recently acquired insights into cosmic evolution had allowed them to draw conclusions about the end of the universe, albeit in broad terms. Previously, scientists had lacked even the basic data and theoretical framework necessary to undertake the task. The two researchers emphasized that they made no claim to foresee when the universe would end, but rather offered the first long-term, science-based deduction on how the universe would evolve through four periods of expansion⎯the star-filled era (the present), the degenerate era, the black- hole era, and the dark era. The ultimate result of such a progression was too difficult to estimate, according to the scholars.(John Noble Wilford, “At Other End of ‘Big Bang’, Finale May Be Big Whimper,” New York Times, 16 January 1997; Tim Friend, “We’ve Got 100 Trillion Years Until ‘Lights Out’ in Universe,” USA Today, 16 January 1997; Associated Press, “End of It All,” 16 January 1996.)
