Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch,” 29 April 1999.)
Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States’ strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the mission’s duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite,” news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, “Delta Rocket Soars into Space,” Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASA’s first African American center director, for his “exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development.” Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, “Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year,” news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a “mission failure.” A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its “third costly space failure in nine months.”(Reuters, “U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss,” 4 May 1999.)
GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASA’s first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collins’s crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experiments⎯the Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttle’s earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttle’s three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command,” 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, “Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems,” 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, “After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space,” New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) announced the findings of a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) investigation into NASA’s computer security. Thompson had requested the study, which found that government specialists were able to penetrate several mission-critical systems and could have stolen, modified, or destroyed system software and data. GAO had found that 135 of the 155 mission-critical systems reviewed did not meet all of NASA’s requirements for risk assessment. Specifically, NASA had not conducted an Agency-wide review of information-technology security since 1991; 60 percent of reviewed systems had not been independently audited for security or weaknesses; NASA had no security training program; and NASA field centers did not report security incidents to a central location. GAO had also found that NASA had no policy for determining what type of information its staff could post on public Web sites, rendering it vulnerable to Internet attacks. NASA also had no policy for protecting mission-critical systems from well-known Internet threats.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Thompson Says NASA Must Tighten Computer Security,” government news release, 20 May 1999; U.S. General Accounting Office, “Information Security: Many NASA Mission-Critical Systems Face Serious Risks” (report no. GAO/AIMD-99-47, Washington, DC, May 1999), http://www.gao.gov /archive/1999/ai99047.pdf (accessed 7 February 2008).)
AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
SPACEHAB Inc., the first company to “commercially develop, own, and operate habitable modules that provide laboratory facilities and logistics re-supply aboard NASA’s Space Shuttles,” and leading global provider of commercial payload-processing services, participated in a Brazilian industry conference. Brazsat, a Brazilian commercial space company, hosted the Third Commercial Space Workshop, in Rio de Janeiro on 23 and 24 August. North American, South American, and European industry and government leaders attended the workshop, where SPACEHAB’s Chief Executive Officer Shelley A. Harrison delivered one of two keynote addresses. Participants at the workshop, which had the theme “Commercial Space Technologies and its Benefits in the New Millenium,” presented “state-of-the-art space technologies, research spin-offs and applications in areas of microgravity research, remote sensing, telecommunications satellites, distance learning, telemedicine and other disciplines” of human spaceflight.(SPACEHAB Inc., “SPACEHAB Participates in Key Brazilian Industry Conference: SPACEHAB CEO Addresses Industry Officials on Essential Space Initiatives,” news release, 31 August 1999, http://www.spacehab. com/news/1999/99_08_31.htm (accessed 3 March 2008).)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASA’s 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earth’s atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASA’s JPL had built. ACRIM III’s data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Item 1⎯ACRIMSAT Launch⎯HQ,” NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space,” 21 December 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Force’s Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, “collecting data on the Earth’s global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs,” as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmark’s Orsted and South Africa’s SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries’ space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earth’s magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, “Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit,” 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
Space.com, an Internet site devoted to covering the news and science of space, appointed Sally K. Ride as its President. Lou Dobbs had begun Space.com in July 1999, after resigning as president of CNN’s Financial News. Ride, the first American woman in space, had worked closely with Dobbs as he launched the site. The position was her “first foray into the cyberspace after a long career in space research, policy, and education.(Andrea Orr for Reuters, “Space.com Names Space Woman as Company President,” 21 September 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed “the U.S. launch industry’s worst string of accidents in more than a decade,” including “three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets” launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, “Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earth’s landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments’ measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earth’s radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, “NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission,” 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, “Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
Analyzing data from NASA’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must “grow considerably above the freezing level” to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were “making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanity’s impacts on global precipitation.”(NASA, “Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall,” news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that it had postponed indefinitely Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck’s departure from his command of the 45th Space Wing, with responsibility for all military and commercial launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Air Force spokesperson did not state the reasons for the change. Starbuck was to report on 3 June as Director of the Expeditionary Forces Management Team at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. His replacement, Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton, a former Space Shuttle Commander, was to report on 3 June to Patrick Air Force Base, to replace Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing.(Robyn Suriano, “Starbuck Staying Put at Helm of 45th Space Wing,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 May 1999. 711 NASA, “Nobel Prize Winner To Lead NASA Astrobiology Institute,” news release 99-61, 18 May 1999; Warren E. Leary, “Search for Life Beyond Earth Gets a Leader,” New York Times, 19 May 1999.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Ball and Aerojet—General Picked To Study New Weather Sensor,” news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
A team of astrophysicists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only “seen” the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or “the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole.” However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a “strange feature” buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an “astronomical Doppler effect,” because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretched⎯redshifted⎯moving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, “Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory,” Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
Vladimir Petrovsky, a member of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, condemned the United States’ 2 October testing of its proposed missile defense system, noting that testing could “aggravate relations not only between the United States and the Asian-Pacific region, but also between Japan⎯a U.S. ally in the development of the system⎯and other countries.” Russia had refused to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which would have permitted the United States to develop a full-fledged missile defense system. Preventing either country from developing missile defense systems, the Cold War–era treaty acted as a deterrent by keeping both the Soviet Union and the United States vulnerable to attack. Officials in Washington, DC, stated that DOD was testing a missile defense system intended to destroy lone missiles launched by rogue states or terrorists, not a system meant to protect against a multi-missile attack from a major nuclear power.(Associated Press, “Missile Test.”)
After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
NASA announced the discovery of a “mysterious class of ‘middleweight’ black holes.” Two teams of astronomers studying x-ray light at NASA and Carnegie Mellon University had independently found evidence of this new class of black hole. Astronomers did not know what process had formed the newly discovered black holes, 100 to 10,000 times as massive as the Sun and located in spiral-shaped galaxies throughout the universe. Before this discovery, astronomers had known of only two types of black holes: 1) stellar black holes, formed from the “remains of dead stars several times heavier than the Sun” and compressed to a “diameter of a few miles or less”; and 2) supermassive black holes, which have masses equal to 1 million to 1 billion Suns and likely formed in the “early universe from giant gas clouds or from the collapse of clusters of immense numbers of stars.” Edward H. Colbert and Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had observed hints of the black holes while studying x-rays from 39 nearby galaxies. Andrew Ptak and Richard Griffiths of Carnegie Mellon University had studied x-ray light in galaxy M82, which was not one of the set of galaxies that the Goddard team had studied. Both teams had identified unique x-ray light indicative of a class of black holes that was neither stellar nor supermassive.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover ‘Middleweight’ Black Holes,” news release 99-51, 13 April 1999.)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous day’s launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessor’s demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, “Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the company’s spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried “a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade.” Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the craft’s enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earth’s surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earth’s surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, “New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.’s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, “Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, “Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash,” 14 July 1999.)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the “holy grail” of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, “Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time,” news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
At the American Geophysical Union’s fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecraft’s close flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on 25 November, showing “a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater.” Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASA’s Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL’s) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileo’s 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPL’s Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: “JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.”(NASA, “Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io,” news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, “NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft,” news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) published a report critical of the X-33 program jointly sponsored by NASA and Lockheed Martin, concluding that the program was unlikely to meet its original cost, schedule, and performance goals because of increased costs, delayed testing, and revised objectives. However, NASA and Lockheed Martin responded that they expected the program to “achieve technical requirements, such as demonstrating the feasibility of building large liquid hydrogen fuel tanks made of graphite composite material.” The purpose of the X-33 Program was to develop and demonstrate advanced technologies for use on future reusable launch vehicles, such as the company’s VentureStarTM.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Status of the X-33 Reusable Launch Vehicle Program” (report no. NIASD-99-176, Washington, DC, 11 August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99176.pdf (accessed 4 March 2008).)
NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a “virtual organization” comprising NASA’s centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of “the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe.” The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumberg’s appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institute’s headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with “providing the ‘intellectual underpinnings’ for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.”
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, “Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation.” The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASA’s successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, “NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference,” news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
At a scheduled 13 December ribbon-cutting ceremony, NASA announced the opening of FutureFlight Central (FFC) at Ames Research Center’s Moffett Field in Mountain View, California. NASA had designed the two-story facility⎯the world’s first full-scale, virtual, airport control tower⎯to test methods of solving, under realistic conditions and configurations, potential air and ground traffic problems at commercial airports. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration had jointly funded the US$10 million project. The design of FFC permitted “integration of tomorrow’s technologies in a risk-free simulation of any airport, airfield, and tower-cab environment.”(NASA, “NASA Opens New, Virtual Airport Control Tower at Ames,” news release 99-143, 10 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-143.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haigneré of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, “U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961⎯September 30, 2000,” in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, “Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes,” 4 October 1999.)
NASA released its newest and most accurate map of the continent of Antarctica, created from data that the Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) RADARSAT-1 satellite had collected over an 18-day period during the spring of 1997. Vexel Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had developed software to generate a mosaic of the continent from “many small images made from different angles and orientations of the satellite.” Project officials and scientists remarked that the most important discoveries resulting from the radar images concerned the network of ice streams; the new satellite data revealed that the streams traveled “enormous distances at speeds up to 3,000 feet (914 meters) per year⎯100 times faster than the flow of surrounding ice.” The CSA had begun planning RADARSAT in 1980, because of Canada’s interest in using a high- resolution radar satellite to monitor shipping channels in the Arctic. NASA’s negotiations with the CSA had resulted in an agreement: NASA would launch the satellite and provide software and data analysis in exchange for access to some of the data the satellite produced. Additionally, the CSA would make at least two imaging scans of Antarctica. RADARSAT had launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on 4 November 1995, but, until 1997, Canadian controllers had not completed a difficult rotation of the satellite, necessary to place Antarctica in full view. Once correctly oriented, RADARSAT had been able to complete the imaging in 18 days because it could collect data anytime of the day or night and in any weather. The last satellite map of Antarctica had used images from five different satellites, spanning the years 1980 to 1994.(NASA, “NASA Unveils New, Most Accurate Map of Antarctic Continent,” news release 99-122, 18 October 1999; Malcolm W. Browne, “Under Antarctica, Clues to an Icecap’s Fate: Radar Uncovers a Network of Ice Streams Larger and Faster than Expected, and More Ominous,” New York Times, 26 October 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force “officially declared dead” its US$800 million Milstar communications satellite. Launched atop a Titan IV rocket on 30 April and placed in the wrong orbit, the Milstar would “never reach its intended 22,300-mile-high [35,900-kilometer-high] orbit.” U.S. Air Force representative Aaron Renenger stated that the useless satellite “could remain in orbit for hundreds of years,” but posed no threat to other spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999.)
The salvage team lifted astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom’s Mercury capsule to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean just one day before the 38th anniversary of the astronaut’s historic suborbital flight. The second American in space, Grissom had flown in his Liberty Bell 7 Mercury capsule on 21 July 1961. After its ocean landing, the capsule’s hatch had blown open prematurely, nearly drowning him. Both the location of the capsule and the cause of the accident had remained a mystery until 1 May 1999, when a salvage team led by Curt Newport and funded by the Discovery Channel had discovered the spacecraft 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the ocean. Even after the team had retrieved the capsule, the cause of the accident remained a mystery. The salvage team had yet to locate the capsule’s hatch, which Newport believed had the greatest potential for determining what had caused the malfunction at the end of Grissom’s flight.(Los Angeles Times, “Grissom’s Mercury Capsule Recovered,” 21 July 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Expedition Begins To Recover Mercury Capsule from Ocean,” 2 July 1999.)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeing’s Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, “Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures,” 9 June 1999.)
NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASA’s new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the “development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year.” Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASA’s purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of “low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry,” to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a “remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award,” news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home,” Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross released a report estimating that NASA had “spent [US]$3 million in ‘excessive costs’” on its Houston-to-Moscow air-charter program. The investigators criticized the program, saying it was more expensive than commercial travel. An investigation had revealed that the flights, which typically used Boeing 727s seating 143 travelers, sometimes carried as few as nine people. The charter flights originated in Houston and usually stopped in Huntsville, Alabama, and Washington, DC, before continuing on to Moscow. A few weeks before the release of the report, NASA’s Office of Space Flight had rejected a recommendation from the Inspector General to terminate the service, arguing that the program “provided ‘tangible and intangible’ benefits to workers on the International Space Station [ISS].” NASA had developed the program as a cost-saving measure and as an alternative to contracting with the U.S. Department of Defense to transport employees involved with the multibillion- dollar space station program. The Inspector General found that the chartered flights averaged around 50 people; NASA had estimated a 90-passenger threshold for the program to realize savings. In response to the demand of U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) that NASA “halt this waste immediately,” Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would terminate the program “as soon as practical.”
